INT: --1996. We are interviewing Harry. CREW: Sound is not--  INT: October 2, 1996. We are interviewing Harry Evan-Stein. The interviewer's name is Bonnie Gurewitsch. We are in New York, New York, in the United States, and we'll be speaking English. October 2, 1996. I'm Bonnie Gurewitsch. And I'm interviewing Harry Evan-Stein. We are in New York, New York, in the United States. And we're speaking English. Harry, can you tell us when you were born? HES: I was born on February 8 in 1924 in Vienna, Austria.  INT: And what was your mother's name? HES: My mother's name was Paula, and my father's name was Jacob.  INT: And where did you live in Vienna? HES: We lived in the inner part of the town, five minutes walk from the cathedral, not the Jewish neighborhoods.  INT: Which Bezirk was it? HES: It was the first Bezirk, 1st Bezirk, Erste Bezirk.  INT: And what did your father do? HES: My father was a salesman for an importer of Swiss watches.  INT: And did he make a comfortable living? HES: He made a reasonably comfortable living. But we always had a feeling that we had to be very careful with our expenditures.  INT: Can you describe your home? HES: The home was in an historic old building, on the fourth floor, with no elevator. And [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] there wasn't even a water loo, a WC, separate for our apartment. There were three neighbors on our floor, and we shared one WC amongst the three of us. The heating was very primitive also. Only later did they afford-- could they afford and bought a, a stove that could be operated on a 24-hour basis. But I remember as a child, the only thing we, we had was a kerosene stove. So it was not a comfortable life. And I only much later discovered how primitive it was, because I grew up in it. [LAUGHS] 
INT: Did you have brothers and sisters? HES: I had a brother, four years younger. And we were very close together. And we spent a lot of our free time in the public parks, playing on the playgrounds with other children. But he was always by my side.  INT: Who were your friends? HES: My friends were basically school friends. One of them, the son of a rather wealthy industrialist, and we have a link till this very day. At his home, I discovered a different world. He had a private English tutor who lived in. And whenever I visited, we spoke rudimentary English to him. And this gave me a head start with English, which later was to become my main working language.  INT: What's the name of this friend? HES: Thomas Haimowitz. And he is now a, a professor emeritus at the Salzburg University in Austria.  INT: Was yours a religious home? HES: Religious is perhaps overstating. We were a traditional home. We had all the festivities, of course Shabbat and the kiddush. We used to go to shul, regularly, every Friday night and on the holidays. And I have a very fond memory of these traditions. And in a way, I'm still inspired in many ways by them, such as a festive Seder, which I always like to have in our house with many people around us.  INT: What is it about the family Seder that you particularly remember? HES: There was a funny way of seeing the Haggadah. 
INT: Do you want to sing that for us? HES: [HEBREW SINGING] and so on. It went even faster from verse to verse. [LAUGHS]  INT: Who attended the Seder? HES: Usually we were the core family, the four of us, but very often also jointly with my father's brother, who lived in Vienna, also, and his two daughters.  INT: What was his name? HES: His name was Elias or [? Eliahu. ?] And he was an old-- elder brother, who was fortunate in that his daughter, just before the annexation of Austria, graduated with a doctor's degree, which was rare for women in those days. And she emigrated to the United States. And she brought her whole family over in time. And we still have a very close link with-- she's no longer alive, but with her family in the States.  INT: And what was her name? HES: Her name was Rose. And I have very fond memories, both as a, a young man who admired her-- in fact, in some ways she inspired my choice to become a chemical engineer, because she was a chemical-- she was a chemist. And also, when we spent some times, sometime later in the '60s, in the United States, in the service of the Israeli government, we had a very close link with her family. And my children also are part of that.  INT: Tell me about your experience in school. Which school did you attend? HES: After primary school in the immediate neighborhood-- 
INT: Oh, which primary school was it? HES: It was a primary school in the Erste Bezirk, in a little street called Johannesgasse, which no longer exists. But it had a, a fairly high level. The Austrian system determined the future of a child at a very early stage. After the fourth grade, the-- [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] they were submitted to an exam, and those who passed the exam were admitted to high school. Those who didn't pass were not admitted to high school and had to go to some kind of vocational school. So I was very early motivated to make it in school, to be admitted, because I had a very strong motivation, somewhat inspired by my mother. Herself never had formal studies. But she was a, a very progressive person, very interested in many subjects. And she gave me the impulse to seek excellence in studies. After primary school, we-- I went on to a very well-known high school, the Akademisches Gymnasium, where admission was not easy. But after two years, I decided that my real interest lay in the sciences, whereas this was a school specialized in the humanities and arts. And so after two years of that high school, I switched to another high class, high school, the Realgymnasium Number One and spent there the next two years, advancing in the sciences and math and language, modern languages. But I kept up with Latin, despite everything, till the end of high school.  INT: What were-- what was your goal, what was your ambition at that point? HES: In the [BACKGROUND NOISE] professional field, at about the age of 13 or 14, I became highly interested in chemistry. And I thought I would make this my field. The intellectual reason behind that desire was that, at the time, I felt that chemistry really went to the true secrets of nature. That was before physics became the science. [LAUGHS] And also because I realized that chemistry held the key for many future advances, which, in fact, did take place. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] At the same time, I was interested in literature. I read a great deal. I was interested in theater. At a young age, I was taken to theater performances. I became interested in classical music. I remember my first concert in the Konzerthaussaal, the famous orchestra of Vienna. Of course, all I could afford was a standing ticket. But it made me highly aware of the beauty of classical music. And also, my mother, who was an opera fan, I remember the preparations for her occasional visits to the Vienna Opera. They were so elaborate that the whole household came to a standstill. [LAUGHS] 
INT: Could you tell me about that? How did she prepare? HES: Well, special dresses, seeing to every little detail. Everything had to be perfect. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] Very often we skipped the dinner. And the, the main thing was to be in time and in the proper shape. And that gave me an anticipation, which later, when I first did attend an opera, I was fully met by the reality. And the opera, to me, a good classical opera-- Italian or a Mozart opera-- is one of the greatest esthetical experiences I know.  INT: How about antisemitism? Did you experience any antisemitism as a child? HES: Certainly. First of all, I lived in a non-Jewish neighborhood. Antisemitism took an institutionalized form at one point. When the Austrian democracy was abolished, well before the Anschluss, by the Catholic-oriented regime of Chancellor Dollfuss in, I believe, '34 or '35, after some street fights, they installed a one-party regime. And one of the first steps that party regime undertook was to segregate Jewish students in high schools, from the non-Jewish students, whenever their number allowed to set, set up separate classes. And in my school, that did take place. In a way, it was a sign of segregation, of antisemitism. To me personally, it had no negative impact. Most of my friends were Jewish. The level of the Jewish classes was definitely higher than the parallel classes. And my whole education, which was based on Jewish awareness, identity, and also lessons of Hebrew, of Talmud, and the active participation in, in a Hebrew Scout movement in Vienna, all this prepared me, emotionally, for a future in what was then called Palestine, now is Israel. Even had Hitler not invaded and come to power and invaded Austria and caused World War II, I believe, eventually I, I would have made my way to this new Jewish country. But at the time, when the signs of antisemitism began to be more outspoken, I, for one, was not shocked. But I remember some of my close friends, Austrian Jews, they were deeply shocked. How can Austria do this to us? The mother of my closest friend even said, I think that I cannot survive this, when her son was put into a Jewish class. It was such extreme shock that was caused. Of course, there were also the street fights in the park. Sometimes non-Jewish children would attack Jewish children, hitting, spitting, the likes of it. But I took good care, and I was always ready to defend myself, if I had to. But it never came to any serious incidents. 
INT: Were your parents Zionists? HES: My mother had a long upbringing in a Zionist background, in her native Poland. She was originally from Cracow. And she migrated as a young girl to Belgium with her parents. And she became very much involved in Zionist movements. And during World War I, when, as Austrian citizens, they had to escape Belgium and went to neutral Holland, in The Hague, at the time, was the headquarters of the Keren Kayemet, the Jewish National Fund. And she became the personal secretary of the director of the Keren Kayemet and was on the staff for three, four years, till the end of the war. And when the headquarters were about to be moved to Jerusalem in the early '20s, she was offered the job to be moved together with the rest of her colleagues. But at this precise time, she met my father. And the decision then was either to get married and settle in Vienna or go off to Palestine. She opted for marriage, because she had attained the ripe old age of 26 or 27. [LAUGHS]  INT: Who was the secretary of the Keren Kayemet at that point? HES: His name was Granovsky, later called Granott.  INT: OK. Tell me some more about the instruction that you received in Jewish studies, in addition to the formal schooling that you had. HES: I learned Bible.  INT: Was that at home? HES: At home, private lessons. I learned Gemara. And I learned, of course, modern Hebrew. 
INT: What was the language that the tutor instructed you in? HES: German, of course. Some of them were students at universities in Vienna, who had come from Poland, mostly, and had brought with them the knowledge of Hebrew and religious studies and did this as a sideline for their living. I even remember that one of them very deeply influenced me. And many years later, when I came to Haifa, in 1945, I met him. And he had become the chief engineer of one of the largest construction companies in, in Israel, Solel Boneh. [LAUGHS]  INT: And who-- what was his name? HES: His name was Dr. [? Spaeth. ?]  INT: So at the eve-- as the Anschluss approaches what are you doing? HES: We lead a normal life. In fact, I remember, in February 1938, I was attending my first ski class outing, with my fellow pupils, in the Austrian Alps, when we heard that our chancellor, the head of the Austrian state, Dollfuss, had been invited or summoned to meet the Führer at a nearby place across the border in Berchtesgaden. That, of course, was the sign of impending Anschluss. Because at that point, Dollfuss came back with a clear warning that unless he did exactly what-- as he was asked to by Hitler, the Germans would invade.  INT: How did you react to that? HES: Well, one did not really take this as an absolute issue, because there is always hope. When you have this kind of threat over you, you always look for hope. And one of the things that my parents talked about was that the Germans would never be allowed to annex Austria, because Mussolini, the Italian, wouldn't let him. And in fact, later, I learned there was some kind of contention. But when Mussolini finally decided to support Hitler and form the Axis, he handed over Austria. And in fact, only two months after I had been to this mountain resort, the Anschluss took place. 
INT: Until that point, had anyone from your family experienced personally any attack or antisemitic incident? HES: No, because my father was working for a company that was owned and operated by Jews. My mother was not professionally active. And most of her social circle were-- was Jewish. So we lived in a kind of isolated, segregated world. But to me, as a child, that, that seemed a normal thing. Little did I realize that it was a sign of an outcast society.  INT: Did you feel threatened at that point? HES: Now, as long as I did not face the reality of a German invasion, I was not really threatened by it, although we knew what was going on in Germany. I remember the fearful moment when, just a day or two before the Anschluss, the Germans made a demonstration by sending planes to circle over Vienna at low altitude. And we were sitting in our house, and the windows were rattling with the noise of these bombers. Of course, they didn't attack. They just wanted to frighten. And they achieved that purpose, because there was no military resistance by the Austrians, even had the political picture enabled it.  INT: At that point, you were 14. HES: 14.  INT: 14, yeah. HES: Yes.  INT: How much did you know about what was happening to Jews in Germany? HES: At the time, the sources of information to us were rather limited. We didn't own a radio. That was considered a luxury. We didn't have a subscription to a newspaper. I always heard about these things secondhand. But of course, things that happened that close by in Germany did trickle down. And we knew that this was a very threatening regime. And of course, there were the, the Austrian Nazis. Although they were not officially allowed to display their attachment to Nazidom, because there was a one-party system, we knew there were many people with Nazi leanings, including people living nearby around us. 
INT: Is there anyone in, in particular whom you remember? HES: I remember, in particular, our next door neighbors. He was a piano teacher. And at one point, my mother decided I should learn, take piano lessons. We didn't own a piano, so, after the lessons, I was supposed to exercise. And they agreed to me doing it in their place, since we were next-door neighbors. The day after the Anschluss, I was shocked to see him in a brand new, fully fitted SS uniform. Of course, from that day on, I was no longer allowed to go into their apartment, nor would he have admitted me.  INT: Could you describe the uniform? What color? HES: It was-- it was black with silver rimmings and the SS sign on them. And of course, we knew what the SS stood for, even though it had not yet reached the stage of the Final Solution. But we knew about concentration camps. We knew about their way of handling prisoners. And the fact that this next-door neighbor and, and teacher and near friend was one of them, to me came as a complete shock.  INT: And can you describe what you remember of the day of the Anschluss? HES: The most vivid memory is, of course, this aerial display, 24 hours before they actually marched in. But I remember in the weeks before the Anschluss, something happened amongst the Austrian population which is not widely remembered today. There were huge demonstrations, in the main streets of Vienna, [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] to affirm our Austrian independence, Austrian identity. I remember the Kaertner Strasse, not far from where I lived, people by the thousands and thousands were walking with Austrian flags. And I joined them. But for the first time in my life, I felt proud to be an Austrian. Of course, it didn't last much-- long, because, only a few weeks after this, the Anschluss did take place. And the same streets were then full of people cheering Hitler, who came to visit. 
INT: What did you see? HES: At that point, I didn't go. I hid myself at home. I would not go out in the streets when these things took place.  INT: Was that your initiative or did your parents tell you to stay home? HES: My parents told me. But I could feel it very well myself. Of course, there were many stories about Jewish people in the street being taken by-- roughed up and then forced to clean the signs left over by the Austrian government. And they had also Austrian symbols painted all over, and the Jews were forced to clean these things from the streets and the walls. So people were afraid to go in-- to the main streets. I remember when I had to reach a certain destination, I looked for side ways, passing through little streets, narrow little streets rather than the main roads, where you were apt to be stopped and, and roughed up. It never happened to me.  INT: Did you continue going to school? HES: Not for very long. We were-- all those Jewish-- the Jewish classes in that school were told, about four, six weeks after it happened, that we would be moved to a different school. And we were assigned to a school that was entirely converted to a Jewish school in the second Bezirk, which is the Jewish neighborhood in-- at that time, in Vienna. But it was such a overcrowded, low-level, with unpleasant teachers, ill-qualified teachers, that I didn't stay there for very long. And my parents made me move to the HIAS Gymnasium, which was an excellent, private, Jewish high school, unfortunately, in a very, from us, remote Bezirk, so the travel issue was not a simple one. But at least there I enjoyed a very good education for the remaining months of the year '38, until the end of the school year. 
INT: Did your father continue working? HES: My father was summarily dismissed when they appointed an non-Jewish executive director, [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] practically taking the company away from its Jewish owners. My father was summarily dismissed with no regular income. And everything around us seemed to collapse-- no income, no future, no school. There was only one thing one could look for is to emigrate, and the faster the better.  INT: How did your parents pay the tuition at the HIAS Gymnasium? HES: I suppose they had some savings. And they did spend the money in view of the situation, but it was only for a short period of time, of course. [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] And much of our time and effort was spent applying for permits to various countries to emigrate. One of our objectives was to go to the United States, which was considered the secure haven for refugees, 'the land of the free.' And we applied, filled in the forms, and I still have one of these forms. And we were told that there is a, a system of quotas. And since my parents were born in the Austrian Empire, but, by that time, it had become Poland, and the Polish quota was largely filled, our chances were minimal.  INT: OK, we'll stop here, and we'll start again at the new tape. HES: Good.  INT: Stein October 2, 1996. So you were saying that you were making efforts to emigrate. And what sort of preparations were you making at home for this endeavor? HES: The preparations at home were basically packing all our belongings. At that time, you were allowed to take with you even your furniture, but no money-- 10 marks per person. My mother had always had a knack for putting her savings into transportable items of value, in particular jewelry, perhaps because of her early experience in World War I when they had to flee Belgium to Holland and all they could take with them was mobile goods. But the question was where to. So even though we were getting ready to move, there was no immediate prospect in sight. Now, another destination, of course, would have been Palestine, then under British mandatory rule. My grandparents on my mother's side had emigrated to Palestine, were living in Tel Aviv. My grandmother, meanwhile, had died, but my grandfather was still there. And he made efforts to persuade us to come there. But it was not so easy, because the permits were extremely limited. Under the British rule, there were-- were tight quotas. And the policy of appeasing the Arabs of the British government made it almost impossible to go beyond a limited number. The option that the children-- that is, myself and my younger brother-- could have been sent to the grandfather [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] was also proposed, but we didn't feel we wanted to be separated from our parents, nor did our parents want us to go. 
INT: Were you consulted? HES: We discussed these matters. It was not a real consultation. They didn't say, you want to go? But they said, well, grandfather Insists you should come. Eventually, the solution that my mother pursued with much determination [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] was to try to get us into Belgium, where she had come from, and where she had a large and prosperous family. I remember another fact that remained in my memory at the time. That-- that was the conference convened by the Western powers in a city near the lake of Geneva called Evian to deal with the issue of the Jews in Germany and Austria and the great disappointment that neither of them would make a real effort and open the doors to what was, after all, a very valuable human resource group.  INT: How were you aware of that conference? HES: There was news in-- on the radio, and also in the papers. Because at the time, although the press was, of course, controlled by the Germans, the idea of emigration was very much promoted by the Germans. The Jews should emigrate. Here's a conference convened to enable them to do that, and what the hell are they doing? That came out very clearly in the-- in the newspapers. By the summer of '38, after the school year my mother decided not to waste much more time on getting a permit here or there, but find out underground ways to smuggle us across the borders. And first of all, she said, the children must go. And so in I believe it was July or August '38, we were handed over to a professional smuggler who took us across all of Austria and Germany to a place near the Dutch border which was less guarded, apparently, than the Belgian border. Of course, the Dutch didn't care. 
INT: What was the name of the smuggler, and what was the name of the place? HES: I couldn't say.  INT: Do-- who was this person? HES: He was a middle-aged man, spoke very little, told us how to behave, what to do, what not to do.  INT: What did he tell you? HES: Not to make noises, not to run around, stay together, and so on. We had, of course, official papers and approvals to emigrate. We had to stand in line for many hours before we got it all.  INT: Do you mean Austrian exit visas? HES: It's German Austrian. It was now a German passport at this time. Had a big J stamped on it. And we reached the German border there. We were checked out, allowed to pass. And from that moment, we did it illegally-- that is, waiting for the Dutch border guards to go away, moving to the fields into the Netherlands. Once we were there, we took a train straight to Belgium-- no control really between the two borders, the two countries.  INT: It's not clear to me how you got through-- were there border controls between Germany and Austria-- Austria and Germany? HES: No, no longer. Was part of the Third Reich.  INT: OK. How did-- how did you travel? HES: By-- by train, by train.  INT: So what happened when you got to the border town-- the border checkpoint in Germany on-- on the German-Dutch border? HES: Yeah, we were examined by border guards on the German side. 
INT: What does that-- what does that mean? HES: That means they wanted to see our papers, whether we had the exit permit.  INT: Who was holding the papers? HES: Each of us had a passport [INAUDIBLE].  INT: So you-- you held your own papers? HES: Yeah, I held my own papers.  INT: And your brother? HES: And my brother had his. And once we had been checked through the German border guard, we were told, now you can go on. We went on, but not all the way-- maybe there was a-- a gap of half a mile between the two border posts. And well, we left the train there. We went to a road border guard-- not-- not on the train itself, not on the train station. And there was just open country, flat country with villages, and wide open spaces, and little roads with border posts. And this is, of course, the choice and the expertise of the [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] smugglers, who knew exactly where to go, when to go, and how to do it. This is what they were paid for. And so we made it safely into Belgium with our German passports.  INT: Were you frightened? HES: At one point, yes. But once we reached the Netherlands, I felt a big relief.  INT: What was frightening? HES: Frightening that you might be caught and-- and sent back. That was our fear.  INT: And what was the scary part? Which was-- HES: The scary part is maybe somebody sees us, maybe somebody watches us. We have to walk for a mile or so in open countryside, although it was nearly nighttime. 
INT: Were you carrying anything? HES: We had small personal luggage, just carrying bags, not much.  INT: How about your brother? Did he keep up? HES: He kept up. We-- in fact, I took most of the load onto myself. But he-- he had a little bag himself. And most of our stuff stayed behind to be shipped when our parents would leave the country. We just took [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] light things.  INT: And where did the smuggler take you? HES: Now, he took us first to the train station in the Netherlands. He had tickets which he had bought, because we had no money. And he came with us all the way to Antwerp in Belgium and presented us at the address of a cousin of my mother's that she had given him. And he confirmed in writing that we had arrived and everything was all right. And I think upon this confirmation, he was entitled to the rest of the payment.  INT: What was the cousin's name? HES: Ritterman. He was a diamond trader, some importance. He had two sons. One was about my age-- Henek. At that point, we were separated. I stayed with the Rittermans, but they had only a small apartment, no spare room. In fact, I slept on the set of dining chairs that were put together for the night and a mattress on top. That was the only accommodation they could offer. My brother was sent to some other relative. I forget exactly who it was. But the important thing is that I was taken by my-- the son of my mother's cousin to attend a Jewish youth movement. [PAUSES FOR 6 SECONDS] And that proved to be my real social background for the years to come in Belgium. I discovered a whole new world-- to me new-- of Yiddish-speaking Jews, because in Belgium this was to the first generation of Jewish immigrants from Eastern Europe. And Yiddish was still the common language. And the youth movement, although Zionist, was largely conducted in-- in Yiddish. I discovered the beauty and versatility of this language which I had not really-- I may have heard a joke from time to time, but not really heard the language per se, because we were living in a German-speaking environment. 
INT: Which youth movement was it? HES: It was a center right wing party. It was not the revisionists. It was a group of revisionists which split off from the revisionists when they left the Zionist world organization and stayed within the organization. It was called-- in Austria, it was called the [NON-ENGLISH]-- The Party for the Establishment of a Jewish State.  INT: And in Belgium, did it have the same name? HES: And it was the [NON-ENGLISH] they called it-- [NON-ENGLISH]. So it was a very strong [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] nationalistic attitude with some criticism of the more left-leaning movement, such as Hashomer Hatzair and others, but still part of the broader Zionist movement.  INT: What was the difference between this group and the Jewish scouts that you had belonged to in Vienna? HES: The Jewish scouts were much more moderate in terms of political orientation. When I say moderate, I mean their attitude towards the cooperation between the Jewish Agency and the-- and the Zionist organization, and the British colonial government. Because the whole Zionist activity was based on British presence and the agreement on the Balfour Declaration, all this, whereas the more right leaning were highly critical of that. And the revisionist, of course, went as far as to break loose from the Zionist organization altogether on that-- on that background, and claiming that the Zionists had no right to give up Transjordan.  INT: How long did it take for your parents to arrive in Belgium? HES: Several months-- very tense months, because we were living in permanent fear. What is going to happen to them? How will they get out? Will they be able to make it? It was a very tense, fearful period for us. 
INT: Was there any communication with them? HES: There were letters occasionally. But of course, they were censored so we had to be very careful what you said. But then the great news came, they're on their way.  INT: How did they come? HES: And they came much in the same way as we had come. Couldn't get a permit, so they had to smuggle across. But for them, it was less-- there were more risks involved than for children. The German guards just let us pass once they had seen our papers. In the case of my parents, they were searched bodily. And my mother was taken to a separate little room. They brought a woman from the nearby village-- a German woman-- to search her bodily because they had no female border guards. And my mother had hidden away some of her jewelry on her body. And she tells the story, she says, this woman discovered it and she started crying and saying, this is a personal memory of my dead mother. I carry it with me for good luck. Please don't denounce me. Miracle number one, the woman did not denounce her or she might have ended up in a concentration camp. And she passed. So we were reunited again, although we did not live together because they were living in very sparse quarters, rented. My brother stayed with them, but I went on with the family that had taken me in. Now the big question arose, summer is ending. School year's beginning. Is he going to go to school, or shouldn't we put him in as an apprentice to some diamond polishing business and make him earn a living? And of course, as refugees, we had no real right to work, nor did my parents. We got a small location from a refugee fund. But thanks to my mother's family, who were very prominent in the diamond industry, my father inofficially started to work as diamond broker, [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] earning a little at the beginning, but gradually more and more. And so my family said, why-- why shouldn't the boy learn the trade? And then he can maybe make a fortune. Once he knows the works and he knows the techniques, he can become a dealer in his own right in due time. And my master-- mother said, no. He was a good pupil, he should go back to school. And I was happy to go back to school. So I entered the Royal Athenaeum, as it's called, in Antwerp. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] I was 14, 14 and a half, and I was admitted straight to my class. And the language was Flemish, Dutch. There was a parallel French class, but foreigners were not admitted to that. 
INT: How did you manage with the language? HES: Now, I had no previous knowledge of it. I knew that my mother spoke it because she had been living in-- in Belgium and in Holland. I knew a few jokes and songs, but the language is, of course, related to-- to German. But phonetically, and also in the sense of the-- the words, it's very different. And I concentrated on learning two new languages in parallel-- at school Dutch, in my social life Yiddish, both related to German, but it was very different. And it was quite an experience, and I discovered an ability to penetrate into new languages, which later was to help me great deal in my future [INAUDIBLE]. But that was my first, first exposure. But of course, it takes a little time. Now, I was in a science class, and we were progressing very fast in algebra and trigonometry. And when you miss out even on only a few weeks, you miss out on the whole year because can't catch up. And I simply couldn't make it at the end of the first year in math. And I thought I was just incapable. But my mother again took a private teacher during the holidays, and he started teaching me from the beginning all I had missed. I said, this is so simple. How come I didn't understand? Well, I didn't understand because I didn't understand the language. Until I learned the language, it was too late. So within a few weeks I caught up, I passed the second test at the end of the summer vacation. And from then, math was never a problem for me. So there are problems involved, of course, when you have to adapt to a new culture, a new language. But I had great sympathy for the Flemish. They were, at that time in Belgium, kind of underdogs compared to the French speaking. And they fought for the recognition of Flemish as a full national language. Of course, today the situation is reversed. In those days, was still very much that kind of attitude. And I sympathized with them because I felt it's a little like the Jews not being recognized in their own identity, and-- and language, and-- and culture. So I went even to meetings of some nationalistic Flemish organizations. Of course, later on they turned out to be collaborators with the Germans. But I admitted of their right to be equal and fully recognized in their own culture and language. 
INT: Did you feel any discrimination, either as a Jew or as a refugee? HES: Not at the social level-- at the official level, yes, because we were barred from holding jobs, we were barred from actually residing in Belgium. On our identity card, there was a stamp saying, not allowed to reside in the kingdom. Must leave as soon as possible. So we were barely tolerated. Whereas refugees traditionally are grant-- granted asylum, we were never given the right of asylum in Belgium. We were tolerated on a temporary basis.  INT: Was there a procedure to request asylum? HES: I don't know about the legalities-- at least, at that time, I didn't know. Later, of course, I realized had we not shown our German passports with the big J on it and declared ourselves as being stateless, we might have been able to get some kind of stateless asylum status. But nobody thought of that. Now, that was to become a major issue 2 and 1/2 years later when Germany invaded Belgium, and we were treated as enemy aliens.  INT: When was that? HES: 10th of May, 1940. But before I go into this, let me tell you a little about what my parents achieved. After only a year, year and a half-- came there in the summer of '38. By the summer of '39 or the fall of '39, my father and my mother both were working very hard, had made enough money to rent a high class apartment in a high rise building, the likes of which we never known in Vienna. And I remember the first Shabbos evening when we moved into the place, newly furnished-- part of the furniture we had brought from Vienna-- very comfortable. And my father looked around with great satisfaction. And he said, well, see what we've achieved? And they wanted us to go to Palestine. Well, less than a year later, he was in a train, herded together with many other Jews from Germany and Austria and being shipped off to a prisoners' camp by the Allies. Why? Because we were bearers of a German passport. And no matter that it had a big J stamped in it, that we were refugees from the-- from the Third Reich, and certainly not enemy aliens. But that's-- that's the simple mindedness, I must say, of the Belgian authorities. And not only the Belgian authorities, same thing happened in Britain later, I heard, of not making a distinction between a political or racial refugee and the aggressor. On the 10th of May, Germany invaded Belgium and Holland after an extended period of-- [PAUSES FOR 5 SECONDS] they called it the [NON-ENGLISH], a funny kind of war. War broke out, as we remember, in September '39 after the Germans annexed Danzig and invaded Poland. And [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] we were in an odd situation. The west was waiting for a real war operation to begin, but it never happened. Both parties sat quietly for nine months, and it was a terrible tension. 
INT: While you-- during this period, was your family still making attempts to get to the United States? HES: Yes.  INT: Could you tell-- HES: In fact, we had asked for our file to be transferred to the American consulate or embassy in-- in Antwerp-- consulate-- from Vienna, and we applied again. And there was again a question of getting a proper affidavit by an American citizen or resident. At that time, my father's brother, of course, was still in Europe, and his daughter was mainly engaged in getting him over. So my father tried other contacts. In fact, we got someone to give us an affidavit. But again, situation was such that despite the looming war and the immediate danger we were in, the administration simply would not budge.  INT: Did you experience any antisemitism in Belgium? HES: No, but again, I was not exposed to much contact with non-Jews. Antwerp had a large Jewish population, both economically, socially, and of course, with the youth movements for youngsters. We were living in a segregated world.  INT: Was there any question of going-- of you going to Israel-- to Palestine-- with your Zionist group illegally? HES: It would have been possible, but my parents did not consider this option despite pressure from my grandfather. And my life had become normal again. Of course, looking back at it, one cannot help wondering, how was it possible, living at the edge of an aggressive enemy such as Nazi Germany after what had happened at Munich and then later in Poland, that you could still believe it wouldn't touch us? My parents operated on that belief. I was only 15, 16. I didn't have a broader judgment of a worldwide situation. It's only later that I began to wonder, how come that they did not really take any option to get out of Europe? 
INT: So what happened when Germany invaded Belgium? HES: Well, first of all, all males above the age of 18 were arrested as enemy civil prisoners, they called it, and deported to camps in southern France.  INT: Do you remember your father being arrested? HES: Yes.  INT: Did you see that? HES: Yes. In fact, well, he had-- he was-- they were given orders to present themselves with a suitcase at a given time at the police post to a railway station, and he conformed. He did not try to counteract that.  INT: How did these orders come? How did-- HES: They came via the-- the radio, the papers, notices, notice boards in public places with dire warnings that those who will not will be punished, and so on. And my father was a law-abiding citizen-- or even a non-citizen.  INT: How-- how was this interpreted, this letter? HES: Well, it was interpreted as being the normal procedure in the case of war. You arrest civilians who are citizens of the enemy country. This is not unusual. The unusual part was to be a citizen at the same time as outcast. But from a strictly legal viewpoint, we bore German citizenship. Our Belgian papers under the rubric citizenship said German. That was perhaps our mistake. We should have denied our [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] Austrian background, which now had become German, and said that we are stateless or something. That would solve that.  INT: OK, we have to stop now, and we'll start again in another minute. 
INT: October 2, 1996. How did you react to your father's leaving? HES: It was a shock, and we were-- we were fearful. But we had very little time to concentrate on this, because we ourselves were packing our belongings and fleeing for what we considered our lives.  INT: Why? HES: Because the Germans were breaking through all the defence lines, and practically the whole Belgian population, not just Jews, everyone, took to the roads, took to the railways. I remember my mother packed an unbelievable number of suitcases and packages, and somehow we got a cab to the railway station. And there was a train that was so overcrowded we couldn't get even a seat. But we had to stand in one of the passageways sitting only on our suitcases. And as time passed, eventually the train began to move. Moved for half an hour, stopped for two hours in the middle of nowhere. You could hear the German airplanes above us bombing here and there. 17 days and nights we traveled, if you can call it traveling, hoping to reach the French border.  INT: What did you do for food? HES: We had taken with us whatever we could. But of course, that didn't last forever. So whenever the train stopped near a village, people would run out and try to buy something in the nearby villages, or, or even in, in individual farms. But overcharged. Even water you had to buy. But somehow we managed. Our real fear, besides the bombings, was the occasional checks against German spies that the Belgian police carried out. And whenever we were checked, and it said 'German' on our identity papers, luckily my mother spoke very fluent Flemish. And she explained that we're not Germans, we're refugees, and so she'd persuade them to leave us on the train rather to arrest us. At the end, end of these 70 days and nights, we eventually made it to the French border near the town of Dunkirk. But again, our papers barred us from being admitted, so we were sent back and settled down in a little seaside resort on the Belgian side, called La Panne, where we spent the next 10 days while the Germans were gradually breaking through the Allied lines. In our sector, the British Expeditionary Corps were concentrating. A fleet of ships were standing offshore trying to evacuate them back to Britain. 
INT: Did you see that? HES: I saw them. And I even dared to go to one of the British Army chaplains, explaining that we were-- in my broken English-- that my father is absent. I'm here with my mother and a little brother, [? and ?] a brother. And we were in the danger because we were Jews. Would you please allow us to board the ship and go to Britain. And he was very understanding. He said, I'll see what I can do. Come back tomorrow morning at the same spot. I'll meet you. That night was the most awful night I can remember, because the Germans were zooming in on that particular area with their Stuka bombers-- the dive bombers. And we could hear bombs exploding all around us. We were huddling in a little makeshift cellar in a-- in a one-story house hoping the bomb wouldn't hit us. It didn't. Next morning we got out. There was dead silent. There were-- there were dead British soldiers around. Not a single ship in sight anymore. That was the final night of the evacuation. Britain had left the continent, and France was near collapse within a few weeks. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] Then the first German soldiers and officers came in. And their orders were simple-- get everyone back to their home place as fast as possible. I even had the chutzpah to ask for help with transport on the grounds that my father was a German war prisoner. [LAUGHS] At that time, they didn't ask for papers, or there was no Jew stamped on the-- on the Belgian papers anywhere, just German. So they give us every help, assistance, to get us back to Antwerp to our place. But then the real difficulty started. 
INT: So what date are we talking about now? HES: We're talking about June 1940. The Germans are consolidating their grip on all of Western Europe. France collapses. And they are preparing the invasion of Britain, first the Blitz. And we are sitting right underneath the path of the aircrafts from-- on their way from Germany to Britain and back. But in Antwerp, life apparently returned to normal. My mother started working again.  INT: What did she do? HES: She had a little business of selling house-to-house. But since my father was away now, she was also allowed to dabble a bit in brokerage of diamonds. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] I went back to school. So did my brother. And as the year passes on, the threat of the invasion of Britain and the final collapse of the Allied forces-- at the time United States were not yet in the war-- [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] loomed larger and larger. Coventry, the destruction of the, of the London city, all this we could see and hear.  INT: Were you-- were you in touch with your father? Did you hear from him? HES: At the beginning there was no contact. We knew he was in a internment camp in a place called Gurs in southern France near the Spanish border. Then we heard from Belgian relatives of my mother who had made it also into southern France that they had taken up contact with my father. So we knew he was well and alive. And then one day we got the good news that they had arranged for him to get out of the camp and join them in their village where they were assigned to live, a small place called Nissan, [PAUSES FOR 5 SECONDS] near a town called Béziers in southern France. And the only direct correspondence we could get from that point on was via relatives or friends in Switzerland. They could write to Switzerland, and they could, from Switzerland, they could write to German-occupied Europe. Not directly, because that was non-occupied territory. But at least we knew he was there. And he said, come and join me. I can get you a place to stay with the family. But again, there was no immediate threat and somehow the impression I got that my mother had settled into this temporary separation without attempting any act of risk taking by trying to cross borders and reach that remote place in southern France, and join my father. [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] Until one day the German commandments in that part of Belgium issued an order that all foreign Jews had to be removed from the coastal zone. Why? Because the coastal zone was considered to be military territory in preparation for the invasion of Britain. And of course, Antwerp was one of the main army bases for that purpose. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] And suddenly we get an order to present ourselves in four or five days from the date of the order with one piece of luggage per person, to be resettled in-- inland. That was the official title. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] I was 16 at the time. And somehow I had a strong instinctive feeling that if we accepted that resettlement order, it would be the end of us. It will be internment. It will be a camp. Although there was no Final Solution at the [INAUDIBLE] [? inside-- ?] we are talking about end of '40, '41-- [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] I had a very strong feeling we could not follow that order. And for the first time, my mother, a strong and determined person, who had really done everything to get us out of Austria and settled in Belgium, for the first time I saw her raise her hands in despair and said, I don't know what to do. So I said to her, well, I think I know what we can do. Let's go to France. How? I had heard that the order of evacuation applied only to the coastal zone, not to inland Belgium. Jews in Brussels were not concerned. So I said, I have a friend with family in Brussels. I'm going to Brussels. I'll do something. For the first time in my life I went to Brussels. 
INT: Did you need a travel permit? HES: No, that was inside the same territory. You needed a travel permit to cross into France, and from the occupied French zone into the Vichy zone. But not within Belgium. I had got a paper saying we had rented a room in their house. I got my address and that of my mother and my brother changed in the identity papers to say that we had become residents of Brussels. So the, the order wouldn't affect us.  INT: How did you get those papers? HES: From the Belgian authorities on the strength of a virtual lease from my friend-- fictitious, of course. But then somebody told me, wait a minute. Any resident of Brussel can apply to the Germans for a permit to visit Paris. And they normally give it. I said, yes. I stay another day [INAUDIBLE]. I go to the German kommandtur. I say I'm a German citizen. My father's been arrested as an enemy, and we want to go to, to Paris and maybe join him. 'Where is your address?' Here. 'OK, come pick up the paper in the afternoon.' [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] The day after, three years after I left, I returned to Antwerp. And I say to my mother, let's pack. We're leaving tomorrow for Paris-- the last day in this lovely apartment. Pack a few suitcases. We leave the key in the hand of the house attendant, the concierge, and telling him to take care of it. We hope to be back soon. And the next morning, at 6 o'clock, they knock at the door. 'Police! You should have come yesterday for the evacuation order. We're going to arrest you.' So again, we start arguing. We say we no longer live here. We just came to pick up a few things. Here's our new address. These are the official papers. We even have a German visa permit to visit Paris. We're on our way to Paris. Somehow we sway the policeman on the condition that the house supervisor signed the papers saying we had already left. So he was covered. 
INT: What kind of a policeman was that? HES: Belgium.  INT: Belgian? HES: Belgium. The Germans worked all over with the local police, who cooperated fully. But--  INT: The German in Brussels who gave you the permit to travel to Paris-- HES: Yeah.  INT: --did he raise the question of whether you were Jewish? HES: No, because I only showed in Belgian papers. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] So it was not-- he didn't ask many questions. He had instructions to let people travel to Paris. It was all the same occupation zone.  INT: So you traveled to Paris. HES: So we make our way to Paris in February '41. And we are now attempting to get the permits to cross into the non-occupied Vichy zone. And that was a very complex thing, because the-- there the Germans really put their foot down. They didn't let just anyone cross. And I remember the long lines. We stood in the ice-cold streets at 6 o'clock in the morning until we could get admission inside. This went on for several weeks, and we never got a permit. Well, finally my mother said, enough of that. We'll find a way to do it again illegally. I remember she found someone who, against payment, passes people into the non-occupied zone, took a train near-- from Paris to a place near Bordeaux. Yeah, we left the train, and we started to walk for quite a distance until we came to a little village. There we were told to spend a night in a-- in a farmhouse. And about 4 or 5 o'clock in the morning, before sunrise, we were guided by the passeur across the demarcation line, as it was called. 
INT: And where did you cross? HES: We crossed at that particular point not far from the city of Bordeaux.  INT: Do you remember the-- HES: Exact?  INT: --specific town? HES: The-- no, I don't. I know it was a very small place. I remember there was a, a nice girl who accompanied us across the border. She must have been about my age, maybe a year older. And she impressed me. [LAUGHS] And they told us now the guards, the German guards and their dogs, have just passed. So we are out of sight. Now is the, the time to go. And that was going on on a large scale, I imagine. We were not the only ones.  INT: What time of day was it? HES: That was in the early or morning hours-- very early morning hours-- actually before sunrise.  INT: And how much luggage did you have with you? HES: Very little. A suitcase per person, and a, a, a backpack.  INT: And what was in that luggage? HES: Basically basic clothing and a little food, and some of the valuable items that my mother had smuggled with her all the way.  INT: Can you give me, like, what kind of items were they? HES: Like gold rings. And she had sets of beautiful silver cutlery, which she had taken with her, and a few diamonds which she had bought in the [? pier ?] when she was working after my father was away. During these six or eight months she was working in the diamond trades. And she bought a number of valuable stones with all the money she could save, because she knew that we would have to leave sooner or later. And so she was preparing for that. She put them inside a cake or a piece of bread or something. And that was our travel food, so to speak. 
INT: How about klay kodesh? HES: How about?  INT: Klay kodesh. HES: Klay kodesh, I took my tefillin with me. And that was about it.  INT: How did that [NON-ENGLISH]? HES: [NON-ENGLISH] stayed behind with all our furniture and belongings in the house in Belgium. They then moved it out of the apartment into a cellar.  INT: Who did that? HES: The super. And there it was locked till the end of the war.  INT: And how do-- how was it retrieved? HES: And then we arranged for it to be shipped to Israel. By that time we were already in Israel.  INT: Ah. And did your mother have candlesticks or-- also? HES: Candelsticks-- lovely, yeah, silver candlesticks.  INT: And they also remained in Belgium? HES: They all remained in Belgium. These were heavy pieces. And a whole library-- German mostly. And of course, also prayer books and things like that. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] And these things were really retrieved after years from that cellar. And I remember my parents made it a rule that every season, when the oranges became ripe in Israel, they would send a crate of oranges to Belgium to this family as a sign of recognition. Those were the days when Europe was still in the post-war situation, with things scarce, fresh food not so easy to get. And I think till her last day she kept up that tradition of sending all kinds of goodies to that family. 
INT: What's the name of those people, the, the concierge in, in Belgium? HES: I have tried to identify it from the papers, and I, I couldn't. I couldn't. I should have asked my mother.  INT: OK. So now you have crossed into France? HES: So now we are into--  INT: In Vichy. HES: --Vichy France. There we take a train. We eventually make it into this village, Nissan, on-- not far from the Mediterranean coast, about 15 miles inland. There we found an old village house in which the whole of my mother's family, her aunts and cousins and their families, had settled. And my father was there too. And we were also given a little corner somewhere on the floor to put a mattress up, and, and sleep. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] To me it was the discoverer-- the discovery of a world I could not have imagined exists in the 20th century. Can you imagine a little town you might almost call this, of 2,000 inhabitants, a village center, with not a single water-flushed toilet, except one at the community center hall. No running water. Uh-uh. I don't even remember whether there was electricity. And we're talking about a Western country in the mid-20th century. France's rural areas were really something that you could not have seen neither in Austria, nor in Belgium, in any of these Western countries. They were really a hundred years behind. And there we were, glad to be together, glad to be safe, or so it seemed. And now my problem is, I want to go to school. Now, the nearest town, Béziers, is about 12 miles away. No means of transportation. [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] But although it's already February, and in the midst of the school year, I am admitted to the school. I brought with me my papers from the school in Antwerp. They gave me a brief test. I said, yes. And they even moved me up after a few weeks to the senior class. That is, where you pass your final exams at the end of your secondary education. 
INT: But what about the language? HES: That was a real issue. My French was very rudimentary. And although they made some allowance for refugees, [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] I still had to meet a very high standard. In fact, the standard of the French baccalauréat, as it's called, was so stringent that only about 11% or 12% of the total eligible young population ever made it in those days. And all I had was five months to catch up. But the physical conditions were almost impossible. I had to run on a bicycle 12 miles in the morning, 12 miles in the afternoon. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] Very little food. I was hungry all the time. The country produced only vineyards. Only-- the only food I could really live on was glucose extracted from, from grape juice-- grape juice sugar. That was the only energy source that I could have freely, because bread was rationed, very small rations. Everything was rationed. And since the local countryside produced very little, you depended entirely on your rations.  INT: As-- were you legal or illegal there? HES: We were legal. We were refugees. But as foreign refugees we were under the obligation to live in-- and-- what is called an assigned residence. You couldn't pick up and move to the town. That you would not be permitted to do.  INT: So you did have ration cards. HES: So we had ration cards. And we did-- I was admitted officially to school, and-- with identity papers given out by the village where my family-- mother's family had settled. 
INT: Did your brother attend school as well? HES: Not at this point. I think not. The village school was not, not suitable, no. And he couldn't do this traveling back and forth. So he lost a few months. Now, I insisted. I said, I'm not giving up. And I must say, I had a very supporting-- supportive group of teachers, [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] and also some of my schoolmates became very good friends. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] I found that the level of teaching in most subjects other than, of course, French literature and language, I was in advance [? of ?] everybody else. The level in this royal college in Antwerp was very high. So I had no worries. Plus, I could take German as a foreign language in addition to English, and of course, get high marks. Anyway, I spent five months completely absorbed with this one dream of mine, to make it to the exam. Now, these exams in a little town such as Béziers, 150,000 people, is a major social event. It's published in the local press agency as the results come in from the nearby university, because it's the university oversees these tests. And I remember as I was standing there, and they were putting the names on, on the, the board. And all of a sudden, in the seventh place out of, well, maybe 80 or 90 candidates, I appear with a special mention of distinction. I nearly collapsed. I couldn't believe my eyes. Needless to say, I became a kind of sensation. This boy here who barely spoke French has made it. The principal of my school intervened with the local authorities saying we must help this family. And we were given the permit to move to town, take up an apartment in town-- 
INT: To Béziers? HES: --to leave the village-- to Béziers. It turned out that this was, again, one of those miracles that saved our lives, because barely 10 months after this, the big Aktion in 1942, where all foreign Jews were arrested and deported, everybody in the village was caught. You can't hide in a village. But in the town there are possibilities. And so that saved us.  INT: OK. We'll continue at the next tape. HES: Yep.  INT: Harry Evan-Stein, October 2nd, 1996. So your family has moved to Béziers due to your achievements. And how-- how does the family support itself? HES: At that time, the Jewish community in the United States had established a supporting network for Jews in those parts of Europe that could be reached-- in particular, in non-occupied France. They had established a committee for helping, based in Switzerland, in Geneva, and distributing funds through the-- I think the Joint. Anyway, to the Jewish communities--  INT: In France. HES: In France. So each of these refugees, including my family, were given a monthly allowance.  INT: What was the name of this committee that was distributing the funds through the local communities? HES: The original committee in-- in Switzerland, I believe, was called in Hebrew, [? Vaad Hatzalah, ?] the Committee for Saving Jews. And the local Jewish communities, which were now given official status under the discriminatory Vichy laws against Jews, but the Jews were given also the right to organize and recognize the communities in Béziers-- which had no Jewish community before, but now all of a sudden, thousands of Jews were in and around the city-- had one of these communities. 
INT: Was that the [? Vaad Hatzalah ?] that the Sternbuchs were involved with? HES: I am not definitely informed about this, but I don't think there was more than [? Vaad Hatzalah. ?]  INT: OK. All right, did you become involved in any Jewish activities in Béziers? HES: Very much so. The community had a youth organization called the Jewish Scouts of France.  INT: Can you tell us the name in French? HES: [FRENCH]. I became very actively involved in this and even participated in summer camps as a-- a group leader and came to know some parts of France that otherwise would have been inaccessible, in the center of France, and in the mountains of Auvergne, where we spent one or two summer camps. And I made some connections there with the local farmers.  INT: How did this come about, that you went to the mountains? HES: The mountains in Auvergne were one of the areas in southern France where food was abundant-- unlike the area where we lived. So the leadership of the scout movement decided that they wanted to take Jewish youngsters and children for summer camps into an area where they could be properly fed-- that was one of the main considerations.  INT: And were there Jewish connections in-- in the Auvergne region? HES: By that time, there were Jews practically in every little town in southern France who had managed to escape from German-occupied territory. So even in this town called Rodez, where later, I was spending time in a prison, [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] there was a small Jewish community. [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] But coming back to Béziers, the second year after this exam is a special preparation for university training, called [? classe ?] [? des ?] [? mathematiques-- ?] there are two branches, one is mathematics, and the other is philosophy. I chose mathematics. And you have an intensive program, which prepares you for admission to university, at the end of which you get another exam called the [? baccalaureate ?] number two. [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] During that time, I made an extensive social integration not only within the Jewish community, but with French classmates and their families. I was so totally involved in French culture and language, that within a year, a year and a half from my arrival, I spoke French without a foreign accent. I was absolutely conversant with every habit and custom. And I was adopted by at least two of my classmates' families, who invited me quite often to their homes. One of them was a very exclusive senior officer in the army. 
INT: The French army? HES: French army. And the other was from a working class background, but very outspoken anti-Vichy, and in favor of de Gaulle. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] And that proved to be a saving grace. Because in July, 1942, the French Vichy government, under Laval, agreed to arrest and deliver to the Germans all foreign Jews in Southern France who were not protected by a consular representative-- such as ourselves, and many others, Polish citizens, or any citizens who did not have consular protection, not Romanians who had consular protection. But most of the Jews were open to be deported. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] Just towards the end of the school year, one of my teachers calls me aside and said, listen, I have some information of importance for you. Through friends in the government, I can tell you-- keep it to yourself-- that a big aktion is being prepared against foreign Jews, and you and your family are on the list to be deported. Take it from me. [PAUSES FOR 5 SECONDS] What do you do? [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] I spoke to my school friends, amongst them a girl called Jacqueline, daughter of this low middle class family who had been very warm to us, and told about this-- this-- this risk. So she spoke to her parents, and she said, fine. We own a summer home on the coast, not far away from the town of Béziers. The summer is just about over. You move into the house. It was August, end of August. And you stay there-- nobody will touch you. They don't know where you are. You just keep there until it's over. 
INT: What's the name of this town? HES: The-- the little seaside town is called Valras-- V-A-L-R-A-S. [PAUSES FOR 5 SECONDS] I had been there on the beach occasionally over weekends. So I told my parents, pack, leave the things that you don't need. But I said, I, myself, am going back to that mountain area where we had been camping two summers. I know people who own a big farm there, and they told me, anytime you want to come and work with us on the farm, you're welcome. So I'm going to join them, and you stay here in Valras. It'll blow over in a few weeks. We'll get in touch. Little did I imagine that in a small place, a village, small town, where everybody knows everyone, you are too visible as a foreigner. This is what happened to my mother's family who had remained [? Nice, ?] who were arrested, all those who didn't have Belgian citizenship, and were not protected. And it happened to me. Because one day, the police came, say, your papers? All I had was a student's card-- didn't say where I was. So they said, OK, we have to find out where you're from. And they took me to the prison in Rodez. [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] That was a shock which I shall never forget in my life. It was something out of a medieval inferno-- 17, 18 people in one cell, some of them on the floor, no water, no toilets-- just a big bucket, hardly any food, some of them drunk, some of them drugged, some of them part insane-- nobody to communicate. And I was kept there, a boy of 19, just freshly out of school. And I was brought occasionally to the interrogating judge, tried to find out who I was. I kept them sort of wondering-- not revealing too much about myself for three weeks. By that time, they eventually found out that I was on the list of people to be deported from Béziers. They said, OK, we'll release you from prison. But they released me between two gendarmes, who took me between them on the train through the whole of southern France, through the-- through the border-- near the border of Spain, where there was the big deportation center-- a camp called Rivesaltes, which had been established to house refugees from the Spanish war, but now had been converted to a deportation center for foreign Jews. 
INT: During that period, when you were in prison, were you in contact with anyone from the outside? HES: There was a small community in Rodez of Jews, who discovered that a Jewish boy was in trouble in their prison. So they arranged to know when I would be brought before the-- the-- the judge. And they waited outside of the office of the judge and gave me some encouragement, a little package of food-- which is-- it was confiscated by the prison guards. And they said, we'll inform your family, and so on. They sort of kept in-- in touch, once or twice, as I was being brought for interrogation.  INT: Did they inform your family? HES: Yes, they did. My family knew what was going on, although with some delay. But more important, the French family that were housing them knew what was going on and were following it. So there I am in the Rivesaltes camp, a special isolated section surrounded by barbed wires and watchtowers, where the Jews to be deported were concentrated-- the so-called K Island.  INT: Do you know what the K stands for? HES: No, it was just probably an alphabetic sound-- it must have been A, B, C, D-- up to-- There were other sections of the same camp-- it was a huge camp-- which was still inhabited by people without houses, refugees who hadn't found their place. But the conditions inside the K sector were the most harrowing. 
INT: Could you describe that? HES: Barracks, very little food, and twice a week, several hundred are conducted to a train inside the camp, loaded on a train, and sent off to an unknown destination.  INT: What sort of a train was it? HES: It was a person train, not a cattle train. But it went only as far as the Drancy camp in the German-occupied zone, where people were then transferred to cattle trains for Eastern Europe.  INT: How did you find that out? HES: At the time, we didn't know yet, although we knew that the Final Solution was underway, because we were listening, illegally, to broadcasts from the BBC, which we could hear in Béziers. We had a radio there, with a shortwave band, and we heard the news from de Gaulle, we heard news from the British. And we knew, at least to some extent-- not in detail-- that something terrible was happening. People were being deported and killed wholesale. We didn't know the names of the camps, nor anything of this kind. But we knew we were in deadly danger.  INT: And when is this? HES: We're talking now about [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] September 1942-- it started in July in Southern France. And there I am in this barrack, exhausted after three weeks in prison, hungry, dirty. Then I get out to find out what is the procedure. I'm told, well, you're going to be brought before a committee, headed by chief of French police, who decides who is to be deported and who is not to be deported, depending on some criteria. But I also heard that the official Jewish committee, or council, had a social affairs office in the camp. So I set out for that little office. And as I enter, I see a person whom I know very well, Andree Salomon, a Jewish French woman who was very active in the community work, whom I had met in the course of my work with the-- the Jewish scout movement. And when she sees me, she opens eyes. And she says, what on earth are you doing here? She had assumed all the time I was French-- French citizen. So I explained I wasn't. So she said, OK, don't worry. We have an agreement with the Vichy government that our staff is not to be deported. You are on our staff, in the youth department. So when you get before the screening committee, you tell them. [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] I say, can you give me a paper? All she had was a little slip with a stamp. I still have this little 2 by 1 and 1/2 inch paper, which saved my life. When I came, two days later, before the screening committee, presented that thing, he said, that's not an official document. I said, I know, but I was arrested in the street. Now, give me a week time-- week's time, I will get you an official document. And I did. 
INT: Now, this interrogation took place within the K Island? HES: Within the K Island. And so, he gave the order to delay my deportation for a-- a-- a week, until I could bring the paper. Then I brought the paper. He said, OK, we'll-- we'll consider it. For the time being, you remain in the camp.  INT: Which paper did you bring? HES: A letter saying that I was-- by-- from the Jewish council, saying that I was on the list of their staff in the youth department. [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] A week or two pass, and I see people being shipped off to the trains. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] And then one morning, one of the camp guards comes into the barrack where I am housed, calls out my name, and says to me, come to the camp commander's office. It was a frightening thing. He was God Almighty on Earth. He decided on the life and death of thousands of people-- camp commander, a Frenchman.  INT: Do you know his name? HES: No. So I come into the building, and I'm shown to the office, a huge office. A man with thick eyeglasses gets up from behind the office, big smile, stretches out his hand, shakes my hand like I was a long-lost friend. Sit down, please, I'm so pleased to meet you. I hear you are the fiancee of Jacqueline, the niece of my dear friend, the admiral-- and he mentions the name of a high-ranking officer in the French Navy, who was politically active in Vichy, a rightist, the brother of this left-leaning man, whose family were housing my family, the father of Jacqueline. The two brothers were not on speaking terms. But when Jacqueline heard I was in the camp and about to be deported, she went to her uncle and said, you must save my fiancee. So he picks up the phone. He knew the camp commander. All this I discovered indirectly, as I was speaking about my being the fiancee. And I sit here, and I can't believe my-- my ears and my eyes. He said, listen, I want to make your life easier, but I can't completely let you go. I don't have a legal basis for this. But at least you can move out today from the K Island. I give you proper quarters in one of the outlying areas. And besides, you are free to come and go on one condition-- you give me your word of honor as a gentleman, so as not to get me into trouble, that you will not try to escape. I was dazed. I got up, I shook his hand warmly. And I was taken by the gendarme to a very nice, well-furnished barrack outside the K Island. I was entitled to go in and out as I wanted, and even go to the nearby town of Perpignan. [PAUSES FOR 6 SECONDS] A few days pass, and I'm called to the visitors' office of the camp. [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] I go in, and I meet, again, the father of another school friend of mine, Francoise-- lovely girl-- who was a senior officer in the French army, Vichy. Had just been appointed military attache in the French Vichy embassy in Madrid. [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] So as we sit down, he says, let's go out and walk. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] I didn't understand why. But obviously, later I discovered he was afraid of some listening devices. And as soon as we were outside, he said, I talk to you frankly. You know I'm a career officer in the Vichy government. But I work for de Gaulle. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] And I have come specially to get reports about what's going on in this camp. Now, I pass nearby here on my way to Béziers from Madrid-- because the family had remained in Béziers, he was living alone in Madrid-- and I'll stop off twice a month. And you give me a detailed report of every information you can gather, who amongst the French officers are responsible for what, how many people have been deported, who is taking the decisions, everything that's going on. And I can you assure you that, within 48 hours, it'll be in the hands of our government in London-- de Gaulle. [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] That's quite an assignment. And I said, I'll very seriously think about it. But that was not the only thing. Most of my fellow inmates discovered that I had all of a sudden the freedom to come and go. So whenever I went into the K Island, in the barrack where I had been arrested, people were begging me with tears in their eyes, help us. Bring us some food, pass on some messages. Here's money, here's this. Whatever you want, just help us. Can you refuse? Started smuggling things in and out. But the worst thing happened when one of my former friends from Béziers came into the camp, in a terrible physical shape. He had been mistreated and begged me to help him out. 
INT: Which part of the camp was he in? HES: In K. Now, I was traveling regularly, once a week, to Perpignan, where there was a Jewish committee also, to get help for people, or transport messages, and so on. In other words, I took messages from people in the K Island and transmitted it to the Jewish community in Perpignan for them to pass it on.  INT: Could you explain something else about the-- about the structure of the camp? Who were the prisoners in the part of the camp that was not K Island? HES: They were mostly non-Jews.  INT: And what-- HES: They were not really prisoners. They were-- it was called a home center, sort of, [FRENCH] in French. Like it was a--  INT: Internment? HES: Even less than internment, it means a shelter. [FRENCH] means to shelter. There were people who had been-- since the time of the Spanish Civil War-- Gypsies. There were quite a number of Gypsies, other homeless people. They were not really under the severe control, but they wouldn't leave anyway. They had nowhere to go.  INT: And were they allowed to go into Perpignan as well? HES: I'm not sure. But they probably found ways if they tried to. It was not a closely guarded periphery.  INT: And how about food, for example, food distribution in the-- the other part of the camp, the freer part of the camp? HES: We were given the individual rations. 
INT: What-- what did they consist of? HES: Bread, soup, potatoes, and vegetables-- plenty of vegetables. Because that's a vegetable-growing area.  INT: Was it adequate rations? HES: Yes, I must say that outside of the [? Ilot ?] K, I did not-- I don't remember having been hungry, although, I had the-- the option of buying food in Perpignan, a well, and-- and taking it with me.  INT: Did you have money? HES: I had money, yes. I had money.  INT: Where did-- where did that come from? HES: I got some help from the Jewish Committee. And the people who wanted me to buy food gave me, very often, money.  INT: That was people from the K Island? HES: Yeah. So I bought food, and a little, I-- I kept for myself.  INT: Is-- is there anyone in particular who remains in your memory from the K Island? HES: I must say it has become a bit obliterated. It was such a high-pressure situation. Except for Andree Salomon, the person who ran the office, I don't have a recollection of a-- a specific persons. Of course, the-- the chap who came from Béziers, I have his name marked somewhere. But he was eventually deported.  INT: Could you estimate how many Jewish prisoners there were in the K Island? HES: At a given time when I was there, I estimate there must have been about 3,000, 4,000, something like that. On the whole, I have seen some statistics about Jews being deported from Rivesaltes in the order of 10,000, 12,000. Most of them never came back. Now, I have [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] talked about this situation-- of course, through the-- I was in contact with my-- with my family, also, through several tracks. And they knew that I was now safe. And I knew that they were still hiding there, although they had meanwhile left the seaside, the resort house, because it became completely empty. We are now already in October. And the family taking them into their town apartment, which was small. But at least there was no immediate danger. And then, towards the end of October, the colonel, Malaise was his name, tells me that this is his last visit. And don't ask questions. Now, he said, I offer you the opportunity to get out of here. I am here with a diplomatic car. Nobody controls me. I cross freely the border. I can smuggle you easily into [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] Spain. 
INT: Spain. HES: Once we're in Spain, I send you to Portugal. Within 48 hours, you will be in London. And you continue the struggle from there. These were his words. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] Here, I'm in a camp, seeing people deported, in danger myself-- although, for the time being, seemed safe, and being offered to escape from Europe. What can there be more tempting? And yet, I knew deep inside me, that although I wasn't a prisoner, I was not free. The survival of my family in the last resort would depend on me. I had this firm conviction, although I could not anticipate events. So after some reflection, I tell-- told him, colonel, I thank you. But for these reasons, I feel that I should not leave. He said, I respect your decision. And he left. Another 10 days pass, and then one morning, I get up in the camp, and I go over to the K Island. And I hear everybody's talking excitement, have you heard? Do you know? What-- what's the news? You haven't heard? The Allies have landed in North Africa under a general named Eisenhower. The first phase of liberation has begun.  INT: OK, we'll stop here. And we'll continue on the next tape.  INT: October 3, 1996. Were you in touch with the Boy Scouts, with the Jewish scout movement in Perpignan during this time when you were going in and out of the Rivesaltes camp? HES: No, my only purpose was to transmit information and assistance from inmates of the camp. That was my only concern. And my time was very limited. 
INT: And how were you in touch with your family? HES: Either through Andree Salomon in the office in the camp or via the occasional visits of Colonel Malaise, who went from Madrid to Béziers, back and forth. So he also provided me a-- a means of communication that I could send notes with him and so on and also receive.  INT: And what sort of messages were you getting from your family? HES: Very basic information, where they were and that they were all alive. Nothing beyond this. And that was the main issue also, for them to know that I was alive. And they probably got some more details verbally through the colonel and his daughter, Francoise.  INT: So after you decided to remain where you were-- HES: Yes.  INT: --how long after that did things began to change? HES: Approximately 10 days. I don't remember the precise dates. But this is about the extent that I recall. All of a sudden the reason for his disappearance were clear. He knew in advance that the Allied forces were about to land, that this would mean the collapse of the whole Vichy regime, as it did, and therefore that he couldn't come back. At that point, I suppose he had openly joined the de Gaulle forces or stayed on in-- in Madrid without returning to his home base. But for me, the meaning of this change was that the Germans would be here within a very short period of time, take over the camp, and any of us who were still there would be condemned to deportation. At that point, I decided that I had no other choice but to try my luck again with the camp commander, although he had not been very happy with what I had done to help the refugees, and once or twice I had been in trouble. [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] I approached him. I said, within a few days, you yourself will no longer be the commander here, and the Germans are taking over. Please let me go. So he called in his assistant, gave the order to give me official discharge papers on the grounds that I am on-- on the staff of the Jewish council. And I was given back all my belongings that had been confiscated and let free to go. Took the train back to Béziers. 
INT: Your perception of the meaning of the Allied landing in North Africa was that it had negative implications for yourself. HES: For those under German control, but not on the whole war situation.  INT: OK. Was this similar to the way this event was perceived by the other Jewish prisoners in the [? Cay ?] Island? HES: They all saw the immediate danger to themselves. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] I don't know to what extent they were looking beyond this. I had the-- a feeling of gratitude, of relief that finally the Allies had moved, because the idea of a landing in western Europe had been in the air for quite some time. But if it wasn't in-- in eastern-- in western Europe, at least it could be North Africa and possibly in southern Europe. So it was a first step in the-- the process for liberation and victory.  INT: During those 10 days, did people in the [? Cay ?] Island ask you to do things for them that were different or new? HES: They asked me if-- what I knew, what I've heard, because they were cut off. They wanted information. The trains stopped. There were no more deportations during those 10 days, because obviously the-- the Vichy government had lost its control. And nobody was sure what was going to happen. Then came the news that the French fleet had blown itself up in front of the Port of Toulon rather than surrender to the British. So everything was coming apart for Vichy, for the whole regime that had collaborated with the Germans. And we didn't know what would happen. It was a feeling of uncertainty. 
INT: OK. So what did you do? HES: So I used this open door and got my release and went back to Béziers, and I found, of course, that the people who had sheltered my parents were now themselves in a-- in a state of shock and said we can't keep them anymore because the Germans will be here any moment now. They are on their way. [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] Again, my parents were in a state where they could take no decisions. They had been shut off from the outside world. Their only link with the outside world was my younger brother, who could walk around and buy foodstuffs and provide them with things. They didn't-- they can't go out.  INT: Why did they not go out? HES: Because if they were stopped and examined by a policeman or anyone, they would immediately be discovered as foreign Jews, and therefore deported. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] A boy of 15, OK, can pass. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] So now that our hosts were also in a state of shock, quick action had to be taken. But what to do? Again, the decision fell upon me. Well, essentially there were two options. One was to try and reach Spain across the border. Spain was not in the war, but Franco was a fascist. Although later we knew-- we learned that he had not collaborated with the-- the Germans and not handed any Jews over. We were not sure of this. How could we know? But then listening to the radio, I heard another fact, that the Italians had also formally declared war on France at this late stage, and as a reward, they had been allocated a slice of French territory along the Alps and the Riviera, the Cote d'Azur. And they were taking over there. And somehow, I said to myself, the only place to go is where there are no Germans. I didn't know much about the Italian fascists either. But I said, at least no Germans. There was a town in that zone that I had heard about because it has a famous technological institute, Grenoble, which has the equivalent of the MIT in France, the Institut Polytechnique de Grenoble. And I toyed with the idea, in better times, maybe I'll be a student there one day. So I knew about the city. And I said to my parents, what shall we do? What shall we-- I said we're going to Grenoble. Grenoble, where is that? Don't worry. We'll get there. Why Grenoble? I said because it's under Italian occupation. How should we get there? I said, don't worry. I went to the apartment, which was sealed off by the police. 
INT: Which apartment? HES: Where we had lived before we went into hiding in Béziers.  INT: In Béziers. HES: And I broke the police seal. I said, the hell with them. I took out all the essentials in a few suitcases. And I said to my parents, we'll go to the railway station, for every station is controlled by the police. Not now. They're in complete disarray. They themselves are being invaded now. And correct-- there was no one to control us at the railway station. And we boarded the train. And within seven hours we made it to Grenoble. That turned out to be the best possible decision in this situation. Arriving in Grenoble, where there was a Jewish community, [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] we discovered an unexpected thing, that the Italian fascists were not cooperating with the Germans or the French regime-- regime in matters pertaining to Jews. They even told the leaders of the Jewish community, don't you worry. We will not allow anyone to be deported from our zone. So this became the one safe haven outside of Switzerland in all of Western Europe. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] And as a result, tens of thousands of Jews, whoever could make it, not only from France, from Belgium, from all over, whoever make it, came to that area, in every little town and sometimes village, all of a sudden, Jews. And of course, places such as Grenoble, Nice, and so on, big Jewish communities sprang up in addition to the original [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] small communities. Now, I went and registered at the local university, not the polytechnical, because you'd need a special exam, just to have a paper. What I am doing, in case somebody asks. And then I went and rented a small apartment. And when we went to the local office to register, I did the talking. And when we were asked the critical questions, religion, I said we are Protestants. My father was shocked, lying to an official. I said we should not help them persecute us. And we settled down in relative safety. 
INT: Did you use your real names? HES: For the time being, still real names. But then I said, I am no longer to go and wait passively for things to change for the worse. We have a respite. Let's use it to the best. I met a number of young people from the young Zionist movements, students mostly. Some of them I had known before from Belgium, some were even from Austria. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] And we decided we were going to set up an underground organization for self-defense, which later became the OJC, the Organisation Juive de Combat, the Jewish fighting organization. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] Our first job was to provide identity papers so that people could not be identified as Jews. We're now early '43, late '42, early '43. A number of crucial events are going around [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] us. One is that the Germans are being heavily bombed and need labor so they agree with the Vichy government that they will send young Frenchmen to do labor in German factories. And for each youngster, they will free one of the prisoners of war, so they promised. So the Vichy government orders that any Frenchman of service age is to serve in Germany. The result-- mass defections and the creation of a real resistance movement in France, which hitherto had not been existing, [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] especially in this region of the Alps, where it is easy to organize, and you are out of reach of the big roads. 
INT: Who was defecting? HES: The young French people who were being recruited for service in Germany, the 20s or so. This is the real beginning of a mass French resistance. [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] Now, many of the French officials sympathized and cooperated and helped these youngsters. So I took up contacts, presenting myself as a Frenchman, [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] to say I have to protect some friends. I need papers. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] You could do this for people in the proper age group. But you can't do it for older people or for women. Well, I had, first of all, to protect myself. So one day, I was told now you have to pick a name. And I went to relax an afternoon at the movie, and amongst the credits I saw a name I liked. And this is how I became Henry Francois Perrin. My birthplace was in Algiers. Why? Because that was, by now, occupied by the Allies, so you couldn't check on my false birth certificate. That was a fake. But you couldn't check on that. But on the basis of that fake birth certificate, I've got a whole series of ID papers, which were perfectly legal and registered, issued by authorities because I told them I have to hide from military service.  INT: And who gave you the false birth-- birth certificate? HES: We worked with local printers. And we either stole stamps from local authorities-- I myself had one or two-- and-- or we counterfeited. We begin-- we began to get organized. We took up contact with the [NON-ENGLISH] in Geneva. We were given financial help and directives. 
INT: How did you make that contact? HES: That was the responsibility of the leaders of the group. I was not directly involved in this. There were some senior people involved in this. And it became not just a local operation in Grenoble, but it became country-wide in Lyon, in Marseille, even in regions occupied by the Germans but also the Italian zone. There was a whole network. Now, I was not involved in this. Another operation that came into existence was to smuggle certain groups of people into Switzerland. We are now at the end of '42. The fortunes of war are changing-- Stalingrad, the first real defeat of the German army and possibly collapse. That influenced the Swiss, although they never admitted that that was a factor, to somewhat [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] open up, because they had systematically sent back anyone who made it into Switzerland. I've seen people in the camp deported, who were in Switzerland and sent back by the Swiss into German hands. Now they became a little more flexible. They said, OK, there are certain groups of people for humanitarian reasons we leave if they make it into a Switzerland-- children up to the age of 16, old people over the age of 60 or 65, and pregnant women. So we started organizing, smuggling systematically, across the French-Swiss border, [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] individuals who belong-- who fitted those criteria, amongst them, my own brother. When we separated, I said to him-- he didn't want to go, but I said, you better go. At least one member of our family will stay alive for sure. We don't know what will happen to us. And he went. 
INT: Did you go along? Did you accompany him to a certain extent? HES: No, that was not my job. My job was different. We had a division of tasks. I handed him over to those who were in charge of the passeurs. They had the contacts with the local people who know the ways across the borders, against payment. There was an exhibition in a little town near Geneva on the French side of the border commemorating these activities last year. I went to see it.  INT: Were there particular crossing points that were used consistently? HES: They were mostly in the region surrounding Geneva, which is flat land.  INT: Uh huh. HES: Although the French side was controlled by the Germans, despite the fact that the region per se was under Italian control. But they left to themselves the privilege of controlling the borders.  INT: So which French towns were on that border that were used as passing points? HES: There is-- the little town-- the name escapes me at this point. I would have to look it up. Just across the-- there's a little village called [NON-ENGLISH] just across the border of-- [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] Annemasse is the town, the larger town in this area. And it's near Annemasse that this exhibition took place also. And several French resistance groups were involved in this too.  INT: Besides your own group? HES: Yeah.  INT: Mm-hmm. HES: Especially in the actual crossing. 
INT: OK. HES: Plus some humanitarian groups on the Swiss side. And of course, by that time, most of the Jewish community had become a bit more active in Switzerland.  INT: You mentioned before when you were talking about the false papers-- HES: Mm-hmm.  INT: --that you couldn't provide false papers for women. HES: Not by claiming that we want to protect Frenchmen. To get papers for women, we would have to come out with the truth. We're protecting Jews. But you can't do this offhand unless you know who you're dealing with, because otherwise you're giving yourself away. Eventually, as my field of contacts broadened, I had contacts with people whom I could trust and say I need papers for Jewish women. This is how I got a lovely or two identity card for my mother.  INT: And-- HES: Became Mrs. [NON-ENGLISH]. But I couldn't do it for my father. My father spoke hardly any French. She spoke fluent French with a German accent. So I made her into an Alsatian from a little town in Alsace. That explains the German accent. I couldn't do it for him.  INT: Were there any women in your group-- HES: Yes.  INT: --in your scout group? HES: Yes. We were actually a mixed movement. There were girls and there were boys, men in their 20s. And there were very tense social life. I mean, we had a respite of nearly a year, when we could freely meet and have weekend camps and meetings and so under Italian regime. There was even one non-Jewish French woman, girl at the time, became involved with us, who helped us a great deal, who then decided at the end of the war to emigrate to Palestine, became Jewish and a member of a kibbutz. 
INT: What is her name? HES: Maybe I'm aging, but I don't recall it offhand. Although, I've lost contact for over 20 years with her.  INT: Was there a kind of a division of labor between the men and the women in this group? HES: It's not so much on the basis of men and women as sort of the sort of initiatives and contacts and abilities you displayed. If you were someone who could establish contact with officials and talk them into things, whether you be a man or a woman, you would be assigned a task to provide papers. That was my job. Others would attempt to find safe places for children, children whose parents had disappeared or whatever, small children. Others, again, were trying to find hiding places in isolated spots for older people who could not be hidden as-- as French, like my father, for instance. So there was a variety of tasks.  INT: How did you assure your father's safety? HES: During the Italian occupation, he just lived under his real name, with no particular attempts to find a permanent solution. Nor did he want to risk himself to get into Switzerland, although at his age-- no he was only in the 50s. He was not yet of an age where they would have let him stay. But then [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] the Allied troops who had landed and-- and conquered North Africa had landed in Sicily and were fighting their way up-- we're talking now [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] late '43, early '44-- [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] from southern Italy towards Rome, very fierce, long battle. But gradually, they were coming closer. And then, the big political tremor that shook up the fascist regime in Italy-- Mussolini was deposed, and Marshal Badoglio took over. And the Germans invaded northern Italy, freed Mussolini, but they also took over the French occupation area that the Italians had controlled. 
INT: And when was that? HES: And that was, as I recall, in November '40-- no it was early '44.  INT: Are you sure? HES: No, it's November '43, late '43. I would have to look up the exact timetable.  INT: OK. HES: It was late '43. [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] At this point, we knew we were in crisis. The safety extended to us by the Italians was gone. The Italian commander called in, before leaving Grenoble, called in the heads of the Jewish community, and offered them safe conduct with the Italian army, going first to the south towards Nice and from there to Italy. He said, we are still the masters in Italy.  INT: How do you know that? HES: Because that was the rumor spread. That is what we've been told. But through our contacts with the [NON-ENGLISH] in Geneva, we were told not to rely on it, because they who knew what the real picture was. They knew that the Germans were not going to let things happen in Italy. We didn't know that yet. So we were told not to encourage people to do this. But thousands of people did go with the Italians to Nice. This is as far as they got. Amongst them, my father. Why my father? When he told me he thought of going with the Italians, I told him, don't. We can't trust them. They are on the point of collapse. And he said, that's the only solution for me. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] There are times, he said, when nobody can do anything for anybody else. Everybody has to decide what things is best for him. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] He looked into my eyes, and he left. And my feeling was he did it to free us from his burden, because he knew that, not being hideable, he endangered all of us. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] I couldn't prevent it. He left. Well, it went on for another 10 days or a fortnight. 
INT: Your mother remained? HES: She remained. She had the paper as [NON-ENGLISH]. She felt safe. My brother was in Switzerland. I was, of course, safe, Henry Francois Perrin, good Frenchman. And then the bad news came. The Italians had collapsed, and the Germans are taking over even Nice and even northern Italy. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] First thing they did when they reached Nice-- because they knew there were thousands of Jews that just arrived still living in public places-- was to throw a huge barbed-wire fence all around the perimeter of the city. Nobody gets in. Nobody gets out. And they started, with the help of French fascists and collaborators, to pick up the Jews by the thousands and deport them. Well, my father was in there, but we had a network there too, so we had some communication with him. And I was informed that my father, for the time being, had not been arrested. He had found a refuge in the home of some friends who lived in Nice. But nobody could say for sure what is going to happen because they were also declared as Jews. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] So I said to myself, the hell with it. You only have one father. I'm going in and take him out. So everybody around me, including my mother, said are you out of your bloody mind? I said I have a plan. I did. I was outfitted with a beautiful uniform of the Chantiers de Jeunesse. That's a fascist youth movement of the Pétain, Chantiers de Jeunesse. Very impressive. And I was fitted out with a certificate saying that I am to do a social work by conducting out a post-operational patient who can't travel on his own. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] I took a bike. I boarded a train, not on the mainland, on a side railway line, Tunis. Stopped off one station before, got off the train in a little town the name of [NON-ENGLISH], I think, and took up a room in the local hotel and started asking people what's going on in Nice? They said, oh, the Germans-- terrible there. Said but one can't really get in? Oh, yes, want to get in? There is a path right here that leads into it. It's not controlled by the Germans. Really? Said, show me. OK. If you're interested, we'll show you. Took my bike. I crossed into the perimeter, through the fields, and made it to the center of town. I had an address. Eventually found the address. I was in Nice. I never saw the sea. And went up, knocked at the door. Nobody replies. They were afraid to open. I knock again. I knock again. And I say, it's me. It's Harry. There was a risk involved in that. I was in this beautiful uniform. Anyway, they opened up. There I saw at least a dozen of people sitting on the floors. 
INT: OK. We have to stop. We'll have to pick up right here.  INT: October 3, 1996. So they opened the door, the apartment in Nice. HES: Yeah. They see at least a dozen of people sitting on the floor. There were no chairs for everyone, my father amongst them. When he saw me come in, for the first and only time in my life, I saw him in tears. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] And he said, why did you come to die with me? [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] So I said, don't you worry. We're going to make it. I worked three days on him, just to make him confident enough. Meanwhile, I walked up to the main post office, guarded by German soldiers. I saluted them smartly because I was in uniform too. They saluted me back. Walked in, picked up a phone. Long distance dialing in those days wasn't so simple. Made it to a number in Grenoble, and gave them a coded message to tell them I had arrived and everything was OK, and out again. And eventually, I took my father out the same way I'd come in, not to the railway station, but to the sidelines, into this small town outside, and from there, the train back to Grenoble. Now meanwhile, I had prepared a place for him to hide, up in the mountains of Savoie, a little isolated farm, where I myself, when I first came to the Italian zone, had taken up residence for a few weeks because I was totally exhausted after my stay in the camp and everything I'd gone through. I needed food. I needed rest. And there, there was plenty of food. They have everything you could want. And against the payment, I stayed there as a young Frenchman. It was totally under my assumed name. And we became very close friends with these people. And I trusted them enough to tell them that there is an old Jewish gentleman-- didn't tell them it was my father. But I want to protect and I'm going to pay for him. And they agreed on condition that he never leave his room in daytime. And this is how he spent the remaining eight or nine months of the war, till our zone was liberated. 
INT: Do-- did you and your father resemble each other? HES: He was of a lighter build, dark. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] He had a great sense of humor. He loved to sing, tell jokes-- of course, in normal times. But he was totally unfit to these abnormal conditions. He simply couldn't cope with it. He just folded. He was willing to give up to despair. So from that angle, we did not resemble each other. I was born and maybe raised as a fighter. He was very successful in normal conditions. Even later in life, when we came to a new country, Israel, with nothing, he made a comeback. He didn't become rich, but comfortable. But under those extreme conditions, he simply couldn't cope. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] And so it was the safest thing for him to be separated, isolated, and not exposed. Now, as for myself, I decided also to leave Grenoble. And a little town called La Rochette, at the foot of the mountain where this farm was located--  INT: Wait. Where your father was hiding? HES: Yes. Since I'd been in the region for several weeks, I've been to the town. I've met some people there. And I've even been promised a job in a local factory because I said I am a graduate of chemistry and so on. Anyway, I found a small apartment, and I settled there with my mother under our assumed identities. And I must say, I became a very regular churchgoer. 
INT: How did you learn what to do? HES: First, simply by attending. But then I had the advantage of having studied Latin. So I could easily memorize all the prayers. And I loved the church music. I love it till this day.  INT: Which church was it? HES: Catholic.  INT: But you had said that you were Protestants. HES: That is when I was still Stein, my real name, and Austrians or Germans. I couldn't say anything but. But once I was a Frenchman, Perrin, I became a good Catholic.  INT: Did your mother go to church with you as well? HES: Not so much, no. Once or twice I kind of pushed her. But I myself did it quite regularly. I even went to confessions and so on. When I play a part, I play it totally. And--  INT: Did you continue your activities with the underground? HES: At that point, we had no longer contact. So for a period of about two, three months, I did nothing but settle into this little town, make up social contacts. Then I met a girl and fell in love with her. And it was my first love affair, real love affair. She turned out to be the daughter of the commander of the French underground movement in the region. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] Through her I made contact with the French underground. I said I am willing to join. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] They were not very active at that time, but they were mostly preparing arms-- some of them parachuted to them-- for future action. 
INT: And this is with your French identity, with your non-Jewish identity. HES: My French identity, of course. Of course. [PAUSES FOR 5 SECONDS] The one thing that I was careful about, not to display the fact that I was circumcised. I managed. [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] Then one morning-- [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] it was by now June-- we woke up, turned on the radio as we always did. And a great long-expected, long-awaited day had arrived-- the longest day, June the 6th, the landing in Normandy, the beginning of the end. That was the first time in all those years that I said to myself and to my mother, we shall survive. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] At that point, the orders from the French, Free French forces, came in for us to get mobilized. From little operations here and there, it had to become a strategic operation because the Germans, they were now attacked also from the south because the 7th American Army, I think under General Patton, had landed on the south coast of France several weeks after the operation in Normandy. And they were gradually moving up through the Rhone Valley towards Lyon. And of course, we were not too far away. At that point, our instructions were to try and stop the orderly German retreat, in particular, to prevent the heavy weapons from being moved back to the German border. That mean we had to sabotage railways, bridges, road bridges, the likes. Then it became an active operation. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] At that point, we had several successes. We had losses. We made German prisoners, not a big amount, but quite a number. So the commanding officer calls us in and said we have these prisoners to guard. We will put them into a little chateau at the top of a hill near La Rochette. But we need an officer in charge who can communicate with them. Who knows German? Dead silence, not a person. And there were several dozens of people there-- not a person. I am from Algiers, I mean. But I saw there was a real problem. They didn't know what to do with them. So eventually, I said, well, I don't really know German, but I understand it because my aunt on my mother's side is from Alsace, so I heard Alsatian being spoken. I did little at school and so on. But I don't know whether that's enough for this job. OK, you will be the commanding officer of the prisoner's camp. He gave me a few attendants. And there was this group of German prisoners huddled together in a terrible shape and absolutely frightened because they'd been brainwashed that we were all murderers and robbers. And all they could expect from us is to kill them and torture them. 
INT: How many people were there? HES: Must have been about 25, 30. So there I was, at the gate of this-- of the, the castle wall. So I said to the two fellows with me, I said that you take my gun. I'm going out with another other gun to meet them. You cover me in case they attack me. So I moved up. And as soon as I was out of earshot for my French compatriots, I addressed them in fluent German, telling them I want to speak to your senior officer. And there came-- a lieutenant came up, not a young man, and looked at me. And I say we are soldiers like you. If you obey our orders, your lives will be saved. If you disobey, we'll kill you all-- in German. I have never seen such an expression of relief and disbelief almost, whether he was hearing what he was hearing-- one of these French highway robbers, as we were defined, speaking in fluent German to him. I had the French FFI sign on me. So he called in these fellows and said, yes, we will do all that is required. And I said, OK, we are under control. At least I don't have to fear an uprising and, and, and kill people. Although I knew what the Germans were doing to us, I said, my job is to keep prisoners, not to kill people. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] About a week passes. The fighting goes on, comes closer to us. And then one day a number of our fellow fighters come into the camp, mad, angry, because they had been ambushed by the Germans, and some of their colleagues had been killed. So they wanted to take their revenge. And they said, we going to take two prisoners and shoot them. I said, I am the commander here. They aimed their rifles at me. I said, OK, you want to do this? OK, but I want to receive the order from our commanding officer. So let's take them down to the command post. OK. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] All went down to the command post in the nearby little town of La Rochette. And there is a whole crowd in front of the post, and the officer is standing there. And he says, well, why should they not be killed? I said, they are prisoners. And they're not even Germans. I can tell you by their accent-- all of a sudden, I know perfect German-- that they are Polacks who opted to be Volksdeutsches so as to be saved from the-- from the fate of expulsion by the Germans. 
INT: Was that, that-- HES: Yeah, one of them at least was a-- was a Pole, by his German accent. And the other fellows, of course, were mad. There was an argument. So we started interrogating them, through me. I have to interpret French-German, German-French. And all of a sudden, while this going on, from the far end of the village square, a huge noise, people shouting, big excitement. We all turn our eyes there, and what do we see? The first American Jeep rolling slowly-- an advance party-- into the city square, a young lieutenant and two enlisted men with [INAUDIBLE] rifle. And the drive up to us. They see military people standing there, salute smartly, gets off the, the vehicle, doesn't know a word of French, addresses us in American English. Now, my English at that time was far from being perfect. So-- but I say, I have to translate. And then they explained. They come here, and they're being followed by the army. And they want to coordinate and so on. And then they see these Germans there on their knees with their hands tied behind their backs. What's this? So we tell them. I said, well, under the agreement between de Gaulle and the American Government, the American Army takes over all prisoners. So that problem was finished. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] Well, for me it was the end of the war. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] Several weeks later we went back to Grenoble.  INT: Did you take-- did you reunite with your father? HES: Of course, that was the first thing. We took him out there. We went back to Grenoble. It was just in time for the High Holidays, Rosh Ha-Shana-- a makeshift synagogue. Amongst the people in the synagogue, American soldiers. So we invited one or two to our meager holiday feast. And gradually returned to normality. My brother is smuggled back from Switzerland. My mother becomes highly active in the Jewish community work as head of the local WIZO, Women's Zionist Organization. And I'm offered several options. First of all, I pass entrance exam to the local MIT, the Institute Polytechnic. And I was admitted-- first year, and start studying. I am also offered French citizenship and a, a grade of an officer, if I agree to volunteer to serve in the French Occupation Army in Germany for six months. They need people who know German. [PAUSES FOR 5 SECONDS] And then one day, in the local [? Havas ?] press office there is an exhibition of pictures taken by American military in the concentration camps, which were just liberated. For the first time we see the images, the visual effect, of which is hardly describable. And although I knew that, in the long run, once my [INAUDIBLE], I'll try to make it to Palestine and not to renew our life in Europe. My parents were tempted by offers from the Belgian government to go back and set up again the diamond industry, whatnot. My brother and I said, no longer Europe. We will not forget. And because of my underground service in the Resistance, I was also offered by the Jewish Agency the unusual privilege of immigration certificates, the few left over from the famous, or infamous, white book, [INAUDIBLE] white book. So we were offered legal immigration. We took up that offer, and we boarded the ship in Marseille in, I think, July '45. 
INT: What was the name of the ship? HES: The [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] And I remember, we stopped off on the way in Genova. Aboard in Genova came a group of youngsters saved from the concentration camps, still in the striped garments. It was a shocking sight. But I was with some other of my fellow Jewish fighters. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] And I shall never forget the evening when we reached the port of Haifa. It was too late to enter the port. We were anchored outside. And the next morning, I saw the sun rise over the Mount Carmel hill. I was hungry, thin. I weighed maybe 56 kilos, compared to the 70 I weigh now-- penniless. And I said, one day I will build my home on that mountain. I did. And that's the end of my story.  INT: Can you just tell us what you've done since you came to Israel? HES: I was admitted in the second year of-- to the Hebrew Institute of Technology, Israel Institute of Technology, the Technion. And I graduated-- well, not entirely graduated. I finished my studies in April of '48, before the end of the school year, when we were all drafted into the Israeli Army following declaration of independence and the invasion of the young state by six Arab armies. I was working in a special service, since I had done chemical engineering, to produce weapon materials, because we were actually barred from importing weapons by everyone. So what little raw materials we had, we had to make the best use out of. And a group of skilled scientists and students and graduates were working together in makeshift labs, not without risk. Some of us were maimed. Some of us were killed. But we produced. We produced all the time. And after this war was over, I then finally took my degrees and worked for over 10, 15 years in industry in the Haifa area, part of it for a big international corporation, the Shell Company. When the Shell Company bowed to the Arab boycott and sold its interests in Israel, I eventually terminated my career in this company and was then sent by the Israeli government, who had set up a special unit to promote foreign investments in the-- in industry-- Israeli industry. They were counting on people from industry, like myself, and who had language abilities. Of course, by that time I was fluent in English, having worked for 10 years for Shell. I was amongst a group of young engineers and managers recruited to staff the newly established offices in New York and Chicago and San Francisco and other centers and also in other parts of the world. To promote this was to be the beginning of the large takeoff of Israeli development in the '60s and '70s. I then went back after four years, worked again in industry. And in '67, when there was a big economic crisis in Israel and I was out of a job, I was offered a post in the United Nations specialized agency called the International Labor Organization, in Geneva, Switzerland. And I started a second career there as an industrial expert. Eventually, in the '70s, I became more and more aware of the environmental impact of chemical industries, petroleum industries, and the like. So I took part in the establishment of the new UN program for environmental activities, headquartered in Nairobi. I became the, the coordinator of the subject within my own organization. And I worked on it in-- on environmental issues, ever since, for the last 20, 25 years. I am now retired, of course. But I do still part-time consulting work, particularly in Third World countries. And I get a great satisfaction out of that work. 
INT: And how about your family life, your personal life? HES: In the Israeli Army, I married a fellow soldier, because Israel is a mixed army, in that particular scientific unit. And we had two children. We have two children. I had a happy life nearly for nearly 29 years, when she died, young, of cancer. I restarted my life. I'm remarried. I'm re-established in my home in-- on Mount Carmel in Haifa. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] My wife's children and grandchildren have become my family. My own children are now in various parts of the world. My daughter, who was partly educated in New York as a child, has come back to New York, married, is happily living here with a child. My son, who was largely brought up in Geneva, has married a Jewish girl in Geneva, is living there now. So I have to be mobile amongst three continents if I want to keep in touch with my own family. But it's a stimulating life.  INT: Thank you very much. HES: Thank you. This is an official letter by the Jewish Scout Movement in France, recognized by the Vichy Government as part of the official Jewish organization, confirming that Mr. Harry Stein, age 17, is a, a staff member of the Council in his capacity as chief scout of the city of Beziers, dated March '42. This is a census certificate issued to me under the name of Perrin, Henri Francois, born in Algiers, of French nationality, non-Jewish, in the city of Chambery in Savoie. And the date is 25 May, '44. This is an official document confirming that this is my identity. This is a certificate issued after the liberation, the end of '44, by the Zionist Youth Movement of France, which bears two symbols. One is the symbol with a Magen David of this movement. And the other is the Croix de Lorraine, which is the symbol of the French Resistance under de Gaulle, confirming that I served as an underground fighter during the period '43-'44 in the service providing false identity paper and defending Jews against persecution. Right beside me, my dear wife, Tseira; behind me, my daughter, Yael and my son-in-law Richard; and right here, my beloved Sammy, Yael's son, my grandson. 
INT: What is your message for the generations that you see and future generations, based on your experiences during the war? HES: On a human level, I would say never give up hope. And you have to be convinced you can overcome. On a collective viewpoint, I would say be proud to be Jewish. We have achieved a tremendous historical comeback within one generation. I think there are no other examples of this kind in all of human history. Thank you.  INT: Thank you very much.