INT: Today is October 4, 1996. I'm talking to Leopold Paul Lustig. I am Rosalie Franks. We are in Middletown, Rhode Island, the United States of America. We are speaking in English. Today is October 4, 1996. I'm talking to Leopold Paul Lustig. I'm Dr. Rosalie Franks, and we are in Middletown, Rhode Island, in the United States of America. We are speaking in English. CREW: Rolling.  INT: What is your name? LL: My name-- they call me Paul Lustig. But my official name is Leopold Paul Lustig.  INT: Would you spell your name, please? LL: L-U-S-T-I-G.  INT: And your first name? LL: L-E-O-P-O-L-D.  INT: And your middle name? LL: P-A-U-L.  INT: Was this your name at birth? LL: At birth, my name was Pinkas because my-- great-grandfather-- maternal side, his name was Pinkas.  INT: And how do you spell Pinkas? LL: P-I-N-K-A-S.  INT: When were you born? LL: I was born on December 8, 1923.  INT: How old are you? LL: I'm almost 73 in December.  INT: Where were you born? LL: I was born in Drohobycz, D-R-O-H-O-B-Y-C-Z. And today, it's the Ukraine. Before it was the Soviet Union. Before that it was Poland. And during World War I and before for a hundred years, it was a part of the Austro-Hungarian Empire. During World War II, it was, of course, occupied by the Germans. At that time, it was occupied by the different satellite troops like Hungarians and Romanians and-- and Slovaks et cetera, et cetera. So actually, I don't know what country I come from. And it is not important to me anymore. 
INT: When you were born, Paul, and you went to school-- LL: It was Poland.  INT: It was Poland. LL: Yes. My maternal language, so to say, is Polish.  INT: Did you speak Polish as a young child? LL: Well, [LAUGHS] as a young child, I spoke Polish. I spoke Yiddish. I spoke Ukrainian and some German too, because it was right after World War I. It was still-- the traces of the Austro-Hungarian influence was still there.  INT: Where is Drohobycz near? LL: Drohobycz is near Lemberg, which is today-- it was Lvov in Russian, Lwow in Polish, and Lviv in Ukrainian. So it's a small town, about 33,000 people, not far from the Dniester River. It was situated on the-- [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] how do you say-- not subsidiary-- [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] anyway, it was-- it was located on a smaller river. It was named [NON-ENGLISH]. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] Yes?  INT: When you say there were 33,000 people-- how many of those were Jews? Do you have any idea? LL: 18,000. 18,000 were Jews, and the rest was Ukrainians and Poles, and the Roman Catholics and Greek Catholics.  INT: Did the Jews live separate from the Poles? LL: No, the Jews were fairly anticipated-- [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] emancipated, not anticipated. And during the Austro-Hungarian Empire, they were-- [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] they had all the freedoms like everybody else. And then were the-- during the Polish regime, between 1918 and 1939, their freedoms and privileges were-- and rights were abridged. Yes. 
INT: Let's talk about when you were a child. What was your mother's name? LL: Otilia. We used to call her [? Tilka ?] in brief.  INT: How do you spell her first name? LL: O-T-I-L-I-A.  INT: Do you remember her maiden name? LL: Yes, of course, Grauman.  INT: Would you spell it? LL: G-R-A-U-M-A-N.  INT: And her last name? LL: That-- that was-- that was her maiden last name. Her married name was Lustig--  INT: Lustig. LL: --like myself.  INT: Tell me about your mother. What do you remember about your mother? LL: My mother was-- of course, every child thinks that his-- his mother is the most beautiful and wonderful woman. But I think my mother was a special person. She was very loving, very intelligent, very sensitive, musical-- she played the piano beautifully-- and very modest, too modest, [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] and self-sacrificing. [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] As a child, she invested a lot of time in educating me and trying to make an upright citizen out of me and-- what else can I tell you? Of course I remember all the trials and tribulations during the dark years during the Soviet occupation and during the Holocaust.  INT: How did she educate you? LL: Well, she spent a lot of time teaching me how to read and write. I was born in December of 1923. And in 1927, I knew how to read printed matter. And in 1928, I knew how to print. And this is-- 
INT: Now did she teach you Hebrew? Or did she teach-- what did-- when you say-- LL: Polish.  INT: --reading, she taught-- LL: Polish.  INT: --she taught you Polish. LL: Polish, yes.  INT: Now what-- LL: Yes.  INT: --language did you speak at home? LL: It depends with whom. We had a maid. She was a Ukrainian maid. So I spoke Ukrainian to her because she spoke Ukrainian to me. To my parents, I spoke Polish. To my maternal grandparents-- to my grandmother, I spoke Polish. But to my grandfather, I spoke Yiddish because that's all he spoke. To my great-grandparents on the maternal side, I spoke Yiddish. And then on the paternal side, my grandparents, I spoke Yiddish. And somehow in between them, aunts and uncle, whenever they spoke, they also spoke German. So I-- I spoke German at very, very early age.  INT: Tell me about your father. What was his name? LL: My father's name was Herman, H-E-R-M-A-N.  INT: Tell me about him. LL: He was a very, very kind person, he-- very charitable to the point of-- to the point of folly because we never had much. But he was always willing to share with less fortunate people. He-- he taught me charity. And he was-- he was a charitable person to the point of folly.  INT: Now what did he give to these people? LL: Anything-- money, [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] clothing. He didn't have much himself. We always had somebody-- there was a lot of poor people, a lot of beggars. There always somebody eating at our house. And also in his place of business, he gave them whatever he had of his wares on credit that he knew that he will never collect. He had a little-- little stand. It wasn't really a store in the true sense. It was like a stall. And he had flour and grains and sugar. And he used to call it colonial-- colonial wares because there was coffee also and cocoa from the colonies, you know, not Polish colonies [INAUDIBLE]. 
INT: So he had a stand, did you say? LL: Yes.  INT: And was the stand in the marketplace? LL: Yes. Yes, it was in the marketplace. And there were many, many stalls. They were paying rent to the municipality for it. And most of the merchants, almost all of the merchants were small Jewish merchants. They were all poor. But somehow they found money to pay tuition for their children's schooling.  INT: Now-- LL: I was--  INT: --we-- LL: I was the main investment, my parents' main investment.  INT: Were you an-- LL: I was the only child, yes.  INT: I was going to say, were you an only child? LL: Yes. Yeah.  INT: Tell me about your schooling. LL: The primary school [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] was, [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] to a large extent, parochial Catholic. But we had compulsory religion, compulsory Jewish religion. [INAUDIBLE] we had the-- in the primary school, we had the-- the teachers, the-- the-- they were not rabbis, not ordained rabbis. But they were Jewish history teachers. And in gymnasium, which was like the high school, but more so because if you graduate from a gymnasium, it was an equivalent of a junior college. But we had the rabbi. It was Rabbi Schreier. And he was teaching us Bible and Jewish history. And that was compulsory. It was--  INT: Was the gymnasium a Polish gymnasium? LL: It was-- the gymnasium I attended was this-- a government-- state gymnasium. We had also Jewish gymnasium, private gymnasium, which was also-- it had very, very high scholastic standards. But it was very expensive. No way could my parents afford-- afford the tuition. It was named after Professor Sternbach, Leon Sternbach, that's right. 
INT: What was the name of the gymnasium you attended? LL: It was named after the Polish King Wladislaw Jagiello. This is W-L-A-D-I-S-L-A-W, but you pronounce it 'Vladi-slov,' not 'Vladi-slow.' And Jagiello, J-A-G-I-E, double L with a line across, O, Jagiello.  INT: In addition to studying Jewish history, what else did you study at this state-run gymnasium? LL: We had the Polish literature. We had the-- the foreign language-- obligatory. You had to it-- it was elective, but you had the choice between French and German. And at that time, of course, Hitler was already in power. We boycotted the German. So I took up French. And we had Latin. We had four hours a week of intense Latin education for six years. This helped me later on tremendously by picking-- by picking up easily other Romance languages like Italian and-- in concentration camp later on, of course, I perfected my French. I was with French inmates together. And I picked up Spanish later on too, so-- [INAUDIBLE] was very, very strict, very difficult. And we had algebra, trigonometry, and calculus logarithms. And then, oh, no, [INAUDIBLE] and Polish history and world history we had. And it was a very well-rounded, and-- but it was a very tough curriculum, very difficult.  INT: When you went to school, how did you get along with the non-Jewish students? LL: Not very good, not very good. We had the-- 40 boys in the class. And about six were Jewish. The rest were Christians, mostly Roman Catholics. There were two evangelic cults. How do you say it? Evangela-- [LAUGHS] 
INT: Evangelicals? LL: Evangelical, that's right. They were of German ancestry. And later on, when the Germans came, of course, they-- and they-- they joined the SS. And then we had a-- also an equal contingent, a lot like the Jewish contingent of Ukrainian students. But-- and the rest were Poles. As far as getting along-- strangely enough, before 1939, before the war started, we-- with the Germans, I got along very well because I spoke German. And every Jew knew Yiddish somehow. He could fake the German too, you know. So [LAUGHS] it was a strange alliance. With Ukrainians, it was impossible. They were just-- most of them were bloodthirsty thugs. And I had to fight my way into-- into the class every day. And the Poles--  INT: When you say had to fight your way, would you explain that to me? LL: Well, there was--  INT: I mean, what would happen? LL: What would happen-- you see, most of the-- my Jewish friends, other students, they were [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] not as burly, so to say, as I was. I-- I was a very aggressive kid. I didn't take any guff from anybody, you know, and-- so we disliked one another. And I didn't shy away from any fights. But so they didn't pick so much on me as on the weaker Jews. So I was a protector. They didn't elect me. And they resented my protection. But I was a self-- [LAUGHS] self-professed protector. And I was in trouble as far as my conduct is concerned. I was-- I always had [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] from comportment, right-- I had usually a C if I was lucky, you know. So-- 
INT: Did they ever say anything antisemitic? LL: Yes. As a matter of fact, I was-- in 1939, in June, I-- had the war not started, I-- my education in Poland would have been finished because I had a run-in with a Polish Nazi co-student, Slawomir Jankowski, S-L-A-W-O-M-I-R. Jankowski is J-A-N-K-O-W-S-K-I. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] For some reason, I think it's an antisemitic name because the Polish priest Jankowski is very antisemitic right now. They [LAUGHS] might be related, who knows. Basically, what he told me as I was entered the-- entering the class, he tripped me. And then he said something not very complimentary about my mother. And I had enough. And I-- I hit him. And I had a universal wrench in my back pocket. It was always a weapon we carried. We had to fight, really. And I damaged his-- his eye. And there was a big hearing. Police was there. And, of course, the rabbi, Rabbi Schreier, the teacher, was appalled. There was a tribunal with the rabbi. And the priest-- we had Monsignor [? Gulcynski, ?] who was the religion teacher for the Polish student. And the-- presiding was the principal, Tadeusz Kaniowski. Tadeusz, T-A-D-E-U-S-Z, and the last name, Kaniowski, K-A-N-I-O-W-S-K-I. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] He was in the '20s a Polish Nazi senator in the Polish parliament. So you can imagine how objective the whole hearing was. And I got three bad grades, comportment and physics-- and physics was-- the teacher, his name was [? Smolnitski, ?] who was-- later on, during the German occupation, he was in charge of selecting Jews to concentration camps. He-- he was a collaborator. And then there was [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] the math teacher [? Kraftczezen, ?] the Ukrainian, who later on turned out to be also a big Nazi when the Germans came. So I was kicked off-- kicked out of all the schools in Poland. 
INT: You were kicked out of all the schools? LL: Yes, all the-- all the high schools, all the gymnasia, you know. But the thing is, three months later, Poland became history. The war started in September. The Russians came. The Soviets came. And--  INT: Now how old were you when they kicked you out? LL: Let me see. In 1939, [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] I was about 15, 16 years old. Yeah. Right.  INT: Had you come almost to the end of your education at that point? LL: No, no, no, there were two more years.  INT: It was two more years. LL: Two more years. And then we had the Soviets, and all was forgiven, you know. [LAUGHS]  INT: So you were able to go back to school? LL: Yes.  INT: I see. LL: Sure.  INT: Do you remember what the teacher said about your mother that provoked your response? LL: He said, your mother is a Jewish whore. There's a way of saying in Polish, it's very zippy, you know, [SPEAKING POLISH], you know. And it was the worst insult, you know, the worst [INAUDIBLE] you know.  INT: Tell me something about your Jewish practices at home. Did your mother keep a kosher home? LL: Up to a point until-- as I said, because it was-- keeping kosher was also-- [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] had a lot to do with economics. Because kosher meat was much, much more expensive than non-kosher meat. And we-- we really-- by the time they got through paying my tuition in the high school, gymnasium and et cetera, there was very little left. We had the maid. But the maid was making something like $2 a month, you know. It was necessary because my mother had to help my father sometimes in town. So there was really not much money left. Till 1935 we were kosher. [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] My grandparents were absolutely kosher. They were, but-- they were going to the services, especially my great-grandparents and my paternal grandparents. My maternal grandparents, they were less-- less religious. And finally around 1937, even they were not so strict kosher. But I-- I wasn't supposed to know about this. 
INT: Did your parents celebrate the holidays? LL: Yes, we celebrated all the-- not Sabbath, but the high-- high holidays. Passover and Yom Kippur and Rosh Hashanah, we went to the synagogue, yeah.  INT: Did they celebrate the Sabbath at all? Did they-- your mother light the candles? LL: Yes. Oh, yes. Even when we were not kosher, but lighting candles-- and there was always wine for the Kaddish and everything. It was strictly-- I remember when she started cooking non-kosher. It was a major blow, not-- it was a very tearful thing. It was not so much due to religion observance, but it was-- our pride was hurt that we were poor because we couldn't afford it. And so it was a major trauma, I would say.  INT: Now did you go to services on Sabbath? LL: No, I-- I was a rebel. I-- I didn't want to go to the cheder, to the Hebrew school, because it was-- I didn't like it. And very early in life, I had my doubts about religions and everything. I was politically aware since I was 12 years old, I would say, already 1935. That was the year when I went to the gymnasium-- I joined. The antisemitism was just starting because the Polish marshal, whom the Jews adored, Marshal Pilsudski, he died. And as I said, the situation for the Jews had changed dramatically. Anti-Jewish publications were on the rise and also the boycott of Jewish businesses. And-- 
INT: Was your father's business boycotted? LL: Yes, of course. They had-- they formed Nazi cooperatives. And they had slogans, you know, [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]. It means one goes to-- to his own for his own. That was the slogan, not to go to the Jew. That was the buzzword, [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]. And of course, it had tremendous economic consequences. We were poor. My father went bankrupt because of it in 1937. And for him to go bankrupt, this was the greatest humiliation because he was so, so painstakingly honest, so scrupulous about everything. And [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] we didn't have any money. And-- but there, there was a friend, Mr. Schwalbendorf, who prospered in a different business there. He was a-- a distributor of knitwear and other thing. And he set him up in business again, just on the handshake.  INT: And what was the business that he set-- LL: The business was knitwear and socks, very cheap, for peasants, you know, [INAUDIBLE]. But it was a good profit. He started bouncing back. And of course, the-- the war started.  INT: Now when you say-- LL: But in the same corner where he sold flour and [LAUGHS] everything-- the-- the flour and sugar and whatever, he was selling his socks.  INT: And who came to buy the socks? You said they-- LL: The peasants.  INT: --they came even though they were told not to-- LL: There was no competition. There was no competition-- in flour and all these things, yes. But the-- the Jews were very resourceful. They-- [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] all these mills and the-- and the shops, they were small, [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] small industries. They worked from their bedrooms, you know. They had looms, or whatever machines. And they were making those socks and knitwears on the small scale. And Mr. Schwalbendorf had the-- had the connections. And he was furnishing-- 
INT: Can you spell his name for me? LL: S-C-H-W-A-L-B-E-N-D-O-R-F.  INT: Now was he Polish or German? LL: He was Jewish.  INT: I mean, he was Jewish, but the name-- LL: He was Jewish. No, the name-- our names in Eastern Galicia-- that was Eastern Galicia. That, [? you know, ?] was where I was born, you know, southeastern Poland or Western Ukraine--  INT: Mm-hmm. LL: --or northern this or southern--  INT: Right. LL: --this, this was still the same place. And my-- while I was there, I was a citizen of-- and my parents [INAUDIBLE] they were citizens in their life [INAUDIBLE] four countries. Because-- they didn't--  INT: Mm-hmm. LL: --change the address, but [LAUGHS] the borders were changing. And troops were coming back and forth. So--  INT: Let me ask-- LL: [INAUDIBLE] so everybody, because for over a century we were under the Austrian imperial occupation, most Jews had German names. And we had this friend [? Josef, ?] he was relatively benign. And we had representation, a Jewish senator in-- in the Austrian parliament in Vienna. And we had even a Jewish field marshal, von Kornhaber. His name was Kornhaber. And then they got the fund from-- because he converted, he got the fund from the emperor. And he was a field marshal. He died in 1937 in Budapest.  INT: Let's just stop for one minute. I just wanted-- one more question. LL: Hmm?  INT: You said your father was set up in business with the knit business. Did he stop to-- in 1939, was he doing OK? Did you find your family-- LL: OK. We-- we had food on the table. When I went to the gymnasium, I wore throughout all-- all the four years, the same uniform. We had-- because he couldn't afford to, you know-- the first uniform I got was about three sizes too big for me, and then I grew into it. [LAUGHS] 
INT: We're going to stop here for a moment-- LL: OK.  INT: --while we change the tape. LL: Yeah, but I think--  INT: Today is October 4, 1996. I'm talking to Paul Lustig. I'm Rosalie Franks, tape two. When we paused a moment ago to change the tapes, Paul, we were talking about your childhood and early teenage years in Poland. Were you bar mitzvahed? LL: Yes. I certainly was bar mitzvahed, yes.  INT: Do you remember anything about it? LL: Not really. I, [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] I had a-- to tell you the truth, I, I didn't care for religion since I was born. But I didn't know. I was-- it was just I didn't like it. Maybe it was because of the, the general situation where I was born. Most of the Hebrew teachers-- they used to call them melamed, you know-- were indoctrinating Jewish children, or educating, if you want to call it that. And the homes were very Orthodox. And [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] they were very learned in, in Hebrew. But as far as the [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] non, non-religious ways, they were-- they were light years behind us. And they were unappetizing, many of them. They were snuffing snuff and sneezing. And [LAUGHS] they had messy beards. And their, their kaftans were in tatters, patched, you know, and this and-- to a child it's very offensive. And, and my grandmother, grandmother, my father's mother had this great idea to send me to a cheder, because then-- there they will straighten me out, you know. And so I came to this cheder. It was a building which later on became the Judenrate. The Germans made this. You know what the Judenrate was? 
INT: Yes. LL: Yep. [INAUDIBLE] and I see little children with payos and very Orthodox, and the rabbi-- the rebbe was sitting at the head of the table with a big stick, long stick so could reach everybody. And [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] I was-- I was clean, cleanly dressed. And it smelled terribly from old salami and old thing there that was lying around. And I wanted to go home. But he wouldn't let me. He hit me with this stick, you know. So I kicked him in the shin and I left. So [LAUGHS] they decided that he doesn't want me there, you know. And so they left me alone. Therefore, I, [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] I-- I'm not really very fluent in Hebrew, or really I'm, I'm very Zionist and very Jewish. But [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] organized religion of any kind is repulsive to me. I, I really-- I blame it for, for many, many ills of this society. And I felt that way since, since I was a child. I think I was right too.  INT: Before we go on to the war years, tell me something about your grandparents. LL: My mother's parents-- or maybe I should-- maybe I should start with my great-grandparents, my--  INT: What were their names? Do you remember their names? LL: Of course. My great-grandmother, she was a midwife. Her name was Gitl-- G-I-T-L-- last name, Erdman-- E-R-D-M-A-N-- N, right, double N. And her husband was Salomon, [? Slome ?] in Yiddish. She was a very-- all my-- all three of my-- of my grandmothers-- my great-grandmother and my mother's mother and my father's mother were very overbearing, domineering women. They were-- [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] in today's parlance I would call them emasculators [LAUGHS] and very aggressive women. And they, they wanted to have their way. And the men, they were pussy cats. They were, you know, they were just-- they listened to that. And I was surrounded by women. I was the only male grandchild, the only male child. Everything else, all my cousins, everybody was-- they were all girls. Of course, I was spoiled by, by all of-- all the grandmothers because they wanted-- they wanted to show off with me. I was the only male. But they, they made-- they made life very difficult for my parents. My mother suffered very much from her-- from, from her mother. And my father had to buckle under too, you know, to, to his mother. And sometimes we had complications in our life, but we stuck together. My great-grandfather-- my great-grandmother, as I said, was a midwife. She studied in Vienna. She was very good. And she delivered hundreds, if not thousands, of children. She died at the age of 79. And still, two weeks before her death, she was delivering children. And [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] after a funeral there, many, many of the children, they brought candles to the house. They lit candles. And that was-- it was quite a tribute to her. But she was tough to live with. But she loved me. My grandfather was a handsome man with a very elegant beard. And he was her pet, actually. She gave him some money to do business, but he always lost it. And she knew that he's not going to make any money. But it wasn't important because she made enough for-- to take care of both of them. 
INT: Let's talk now about the war years. What was the first indication that the war was approaching? LL: Yes. That's a very interesting question. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] When Hitler came to power, I used to listen to people talking about Hitler, about what he said, about his speeches. And I was frightened because I believed that he, he will want to do everything he says he's going to do. The-- another reason was always, also that I, I spoke to different friends and acquaintances as a child. I was an early teenager. But I was-- I was very astute in that time. They told me about Petliura, about the Schwartzbard trial, about the Beilis trial, everything. And I knew what was happening to Jews, about the pogroms, about Bogdan Khmelnytsky and Symon Petliura. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] I knew this can happen. And [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] one-- after Hitler came to power-- that was in 1933 he came to power. But he started, of course, kicking out the Jews, non-German citizens, Polish Jews and other Jews, back to their countries. And one of them was an uncle of a classmate of mine in the gymnasium. His name was Kuba Lang-- L-A-N-G. And this was his uncle. And he spent a little time in Dachau. And because he was a Polish citizen, they let him go and they kicked him out. He came back to Drohobycz, to my hometown. [SIGHS] And--  INT: Now, was he Jewish? Was this-- LL: Of course he was Jewish. Yes. And he was sort of-- [PAUSES FOR 5 SECONDS] not ostracized, but he was avoided by the rest of the Lang family because he was telling terrible tales-- what happened, what he had seen with his own eyes in Germany. 
INT: And this was what year? LL: That was about 1935, '36, I would say-- '36 probably. Yeah. And one day, Kuba Lang, his nephew and I, we went in the public garden, which was across the street from our house. And we see his uncle. He's sitting like this on a bench and contemplating. And so we sat down on the bench next to him. And he was just saying, nobody wants to listen to me. Nobody wants to believe me. So Kuba says to me, you see, Paul, that's all he says all the time, you know. So I asked him, what, what don't they believe you? He said, I was in concentration camp. And I have seen how they were pouring molten lead into my friend's mouth. And I, I just felt paralyzed. I was so scared. And this picture, my image, never-- still today, sometimes I think about this, this man telling me about, about this episode. So I came home, and I told my parents and my grandparents about it. Said, oh, he's-- no, he's not altogether, you know. I spoke to Kuba's mother. And this is-- he's crazy, you know. It's nothing. So I said, no. I know he was telling the truth. They said, oh, stop it, you know. And, [LAUGHS] and that was it. But then briefly afterward, people started coming. More and more refugees started coming. And [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] then the rest is history, of course.  INT: Did your parents ever think-- I-- they were very poor, but did they ever think of trying to run away? LL: [LAUGHS] We were registered with the American-- the American Consulate in Lwów to go to the United States since 1930. 
INT: Now how, how did you happen to be registered? LL: We registered. They had-- you wrote a letter for an application. They send you an application. And together with the application there was-- if-- it's a form letter include that there is a tremendous economic crisis in the United States. Forget about it, that it will take many, many years until your turn will come. And also, they are looking for a specialist, you know, of course. It was almost stated they don't want any Jews because they want miners-- if they want on the Polish quota, they want miners. They want blacksmiths and bricklayers and things like that. [LAUGHS] And most Jews didn't qualify, of course, you know. So there was-- but that, that was the only chance because we didn't have any money, so we could have gotten a loan from the HIAS or something like that. But we wrote also-- I even wrote a letter to, to Princess Elizabeth, the present-day Queen of England, and to help us to get out of Poland because it's so bad, to go to Australia or to New Zealand. So I got a very polite letter from some secretary that this is not her business, [LAUGHS] you know. But I wrote a letter to, to, to Mrs. Roosevelt and this. Now, they didn't want-- especially they didn't want poor Jews in America at that time.  INT: So your parents-- LL: Some Jews escaped. But these were mostly affluent Jews who came, let's say, to the World Fair, and they stayed behind. 
INT: So your parents [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] had written to the American Consul, but nothing happened. LL: Of course not. They say-- they'll, they'll tell you, after they received, they politely acknowledge they received the application. And they said we'll contact you. Don't call us, we'll call you when the time comes, you know. But every once in a while they were-- they didn't want us to, to burden the quota, you know. That was a quota system. We used to get, like every two years, a letter saying, well, you know, the things, things don't look much better, you know. We suggest that you cancel your application and try elsewhere. Finally, ironically, in 1939, about at the time when they kicked me out of school, you know, we got an invitation for an interview to the consulate. That doesn't mean that we would have passed the interview or something. But that was the first step forward. Probably they would have flunked us, and it would have been over. But-- so we were very happy. We thought, oh, we might be going to America. So--  INT: Did you-- did your family ever go to the interview? LL: No, the war started.  INT: The war started. LL: No.  INT: Tell me what happened when the war started. What happened first? LL: When the war started, first, [PAUSES FOR 5 SECONDS] the Jews were mobilized, like everybody else, to the Polish army, to defend Poland. And hundreds of Jews volunteered. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] And then-- and for a week or so, while Poland existed, it was-- it was terrific harmony between the Polacks and the Jews. 
INT: Now what did you do? You were very young then. Did you-- LL: Yeah, I was 15, 16. What did I do? I, I became a Polish patriot too, because I was against Hitler, you know. And things will be better, we hoped. And we were going to fight to destroy Hitler. But things didn't turn out that way. Two weeks later we had-- no, less. A week later we had already German troops in our city.  INT: Now, did you see-- what happened when they came into the city? Did you see them? LL: Oh, yes.  INT: What did you see? LL: They didn't do anything. They didn't-- one, one Jew got beaten up. But they behaved very well. They stayed only a week because there was a treaty between Molotov and Ribbentrop, between the Soviet Union and the Germany, that this territory is going to go to the Soviet Union. And then Soviet troops marched, and the German troops left to the-- to the new border.  INT: Now, what was it like for you when the Soviet troops came in? LL: When the Soviet troops came in, we were jubilant-- before they came in, when we found out that they were coming in. We were jubilant because, after all, the Soviet Union was the socialist country, communist country. They are not going to beat Jews or kill Jews, equal opportunities, free education, free medical care. And it's a democratic country, you know. The propaganda was so unbelievable. Everybody thought it that this is going to be our salvation. 
INT: How did they behave? LL: How did they behave? Before they entered the city, the smell entered the city-- preceded them. Because they were-- they were smoking those tobacco roots rolled in in the newspaper. They didn't have cigarette paper. And it was-- it stunk terribly, you know. And then they started seeping through into Drohobycz from every direction, with tanks, and, and infantry, and cavalry, and everything. For days and days they were marching and marching and marching. And they looked awful. They were filthy. They stunk, not only tobacco, but they were-- they were-- they were dirty. And they had, of course, the political [? cadres ?] within those [INAUDIBLE] troops, with red stars on their sleeves. And those [INAUDIBLE] troops were, naturally, trained by, by the Communist Party. Some of them spoke Yiddish. Some of them spoke Polish. They were very educated people. And they were telling us what a wonderful life waits for us, just to vote, because they had to-- it was, theoretically, a plebiscite. So everybody, the age of 18, had to vote. That was--  INT: And what were you voting-- what were they voting for? LL: Whether to join the Soviet Union or not. So the selection was, like, this was an open booth. So if you wanted to live, you just threw in the ballot without monkeying around with it.  INT: Do you remember seeing your parents vote? LL: Oh, sure. Everybody had to vote-- had to vote. And then the, the result was that 98.8% of the people voted for, for the Soviet Union, to become Soviet citizens. 10 days-- 
INT: Now-- LL: 10 days later they called us, you know, and they issued Soviet internal passports. And we didn't know how dangerous that was, this internal Soviet passport, because they ask you about you. They ask you about your social origin. That means what was your father's occupation? So I told them that my father's occupation was, he was a small merchant. He said, oh. They wrote it down. [NON-ENGLISH] means like that my social origin was sort of shady, speculant, you know. Small merchant-- that means that I was marked to be a pariah for the rest of my life. Means I couldn't go to any first class, first rate college or anything, you know, not, not to study medicine, not conservatory, something-- no, no forget it. I could be a worker, ditch digger, or something, not-- the least desirable occupations. [LAUGHS] So the discrimination started already two weeks after we became Soviet citizens. And my father, he worked in the flour mill because he knew about grains, you know. And he was in charge of the grain and flour storage. So [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] of course, it was very hard work because they had to drag those heavy sacks of flour and this. But he also had to account. It had to-- the weight and the number of bags, everything had to be correct. One day the director of the enterprise comes to him and says to him, [NON-ENGLISH]. It means Herman, son of Moses. That-- that's the way they address him in Russia, [NON-ENGLISH], I need two sacks of flour. So he says, sure, you know, boss, you know. Yeah. But I need the receipt from you. He said, no, no receipt, you give me two. So he says, but how will I account for? He said, don't worry about it, you know. Just give me. So he said, I cannot do it. You tell me to steal from the government. So he says, you are very naive. And he says, we have three categories of people. There's one category of people that are in jail, and one category of people that are going to be in jail, see? And the rest, you know, we'll see, you know. So you have a choice. Either you go to jail right away, you know, or you'll play along, you know. And we'll be-- and we'll be partners. He says sure. So this-- they forced him to be a thief. [LAUGHS] So, that was the Soviet system, you know. 
INT: Did he ever get caught for stealing? LL: Oh, no. No. They, they weren't there long enough, because they didn't last even two years, you know.  INT: Well, then what happened? You said the, the German-- the Russians came in. Did you-- did you go back to school? LL: Yes, I went back to school. That was the-- the high school education was for everybody. It was-- it was free.  INT: So then what happened? LL: They didn't teach you that much there, but it was free for everybody. Yeah, I-- then I, I finished in 1941-- it was the last two years-- in, in June. And the Germans invaded the Soviet Union a week later. So then I became a-- I don't know-- German subject or whatever they called it, [NON-ENGLISH]. And--  INT: Did they come back into your town? LL: Yes.  INT: The Germans came back? LL: Oh, yes, with a big parade, and the, the pogroms started right away.  INT: All right, tell me about that. LL: They gave the Ukrainians and the Poles a free hand for two days. They could do anything they wanted with the Jews. What happened was, when the Russians left, they left a pile of cadavers under, [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] under a pile-- under a pile of coal, several railroad carloads. These were people that were murdered by the KGB during those two years of the Soviet occupation. And some of them were Jewish, Zionist activists, Bundists, et cetera, et cetera. And some of them, many of them were communists. But they accused them of having been Trotskyites. But, you see, death is an equalizer. The Germans declared them all Gentile, and the Jews killed them. So naturally, every God-loving, Christ-loving Ukrainian and Pole decided it's OK to kill Jews to get even, especially if the Germans endorse it. So they slaughtered 1,500 people the first two days of German occupation. 
INT: Did you witness the murders? LL: Sure I witnessed the murders. I was in hiding. But [LAUGHS] we had to bury them. Then I, I was assigned to a-- to the burial detail. We dragged them from, from the city to the cemetery. And we buried them in, in mass graves. Sure, I had to dig ditches, dig the graves. I did it many times.  INT: Paul, let me understand it. The, the Russians left, and the German soldiers came in? LL: Yes. CREW: All right. Now, how did they-- did they-- how did you get to the point where they forced you to bury the bodies? LL: You see, OK.  INT: Tell me, what was the organization of-- LL: Yes, what, what happened, they had like an auxiliary militia, they called them, Ukrainian militia. Because the Ukrainians said this is their territory, Ukrainian territory. They wore armbands, those blue-yellow things, their national colors. And they started [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] chasing Jews out of their houses, catching them on the street, to uncover those bodies. That was the first compulsory labor. So they started first uncovering those bodies, the layers of, of--  INT: Coal? LL: --coal. And then their-- the relatives of, of the people started to recognize-- most of them were decomposed. It stunk something terrible. And the Jews had to remove them, you know. And whoever could recognize a cadaver, you know, they took them-- they took them wherever. And they were-- they were buried in the-- in their cemeteries. But the people who worked there, the Jews who uncovered the cadavers, they were killed. Many of them were killed there, and many of them, many Jews-- they were so angry because they were told that these are all Christian bodies and the Jews collaborated with the KGB, that [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] they decided they, they had to kill a lot of Jews in order to get even-- and also plundered. The, the-- we had farmers, peasants coming from the villages in the mountains with pitchforks and with, with axes. They were killing people with pitchforks. And the first time-- that was the first time that little babies were killed. You know, they were piercing their bodies with, with pitchforks, you know, and, and then throwing them like garbage. 
INT: Did you see that happen? LL: This I didn't see happen personally. I would have been dead. [LAUGHS] But I saw many killings, you know, from-- because we lived-- the Russians kicked, kicked out-- kicked us out from our house, from our apartment house.  INT: We're going to stop here, Paul, because we're coming to the end of the tape. And we'll resume in a minute. LL: OK.  INT: It's October 4, 1996. I'm talking to Paul Lustig. I am Rosalie Franks, tape three. When we paused a moment ago, Paul, you were telling me about some of the tasks you had to perform when the Germans came in. But before we get to that point, what happened when the Russians came in? You were-- you-- to your family, to your house? LL: Right. Right. We lived in-- in an apartment house. I-- as a matter of fact, I have a picture of this house. And I have-- I-- I made even floor plans of-- of the whole house with all--  INT: How many rooms were in the house? LL: I can't tell you easily, but I will have to take a look at the floor plans. Yeah. Because they're different-- different times. There were some more tenants, fewer tenants, and so it would take really too much time to-- to explain. It's-- it's not that relevant. But at any rate, our-- our apartment, the Lustig apartment, our family, was one room, first. We lived in one room, my parents and I. Then, after 1937, when my father started the new business, the adjacent tenant moved out. It was Mr. [? Alberman, ?] a jeweler. And my great-grandmother-- it belonged to my great-grandmother, this house. She permitted us to-- to take another room. We paid-- we paid rent. It was not free. And we lived there. My parents had their bedroom now. And I lived in the first room. There was a partition, which was a kitchen. And the maid had a cot there. And then we had a dog too, little, little chihuahua. Cherí was his name, beautiful little creature. And-- [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] but at all times, my dream and my parents' dream was to go to America. We were-- we were Americans since I remember. We wanted to go to America. It was our-- our dream, because there was just no future anywhere. When the Soviet came-- the Soviets came, they evicted us. But at-- at that time, in 1939, my great-grandparents were dead, both of them. [? Bastian ?] passed away. And we-- my maternal grandmother and some aunts lived there too. So we-- we moved. We found an apartment, two rooms, in a farmer's house outside of Drohobycz. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] And [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] the-- the farmer's family lived in one-- on one side of the house, and we lived on the other side. 
INT: Do you remember the name of the farmer? LL: Yes. Tarkowski-- this was their name, T-A-R-K-O-W-S-K-I. They were very, very nice people. As a matter of fact, when the Germans came, [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] they-- they were hiding my parents. I had to go. I went to work because I knew, if I won't volunteer to go to work, to the graveyard, to the detail there, then they'll-- they'll come after us, and they'll plunder everything. And they'll, perhaps, kill my parents too. So-- but at-- I went there towards the end, when the worst part. When they started settling down, the Gestapo took over because they said, well, we gave you the free hand. We could-- you can do anything, you know, but for two days. After that, you behave yourself. We take over. And we-- these are our Jews from-- from then on. We-- we know what to do with them. So I got a good beating, was black and blue. And--  INT: Who-- LL: I helped to--  INT: Who beat you? LL: Anybody who was around-- Ukrainians, Poles, the farmers, workers, intelligentsia, because many of them had their-- their relatives, their kin killed there by the-- by the KGB. They had a legitimate complaint. And the Jews had a legitimate complaint too, because among them was Dr. [? Adlersberg, ?] who was a-- a lawyer, very prominent lawyer. And he was a Zionist activist. He was arrested by the Soviets. There was Dr. Nacht, N-A-C-H-T. They were different-- they were representatives of different wings of the-- different shades of Zionism. 
INT: And they were in the pile that had been murdered? LL: Of course. They were there too. And of course, I didn't see them because everything-- most of them were beyond recognize. Who was-- and also, who was interested? I just wanted to get it over with. And so we had Jewish bodies in the pile, also some merchants, big business people too. And we had Jewish bodies recently killed with pitchforks and hatchets, by the Ukrainians and by the Poles. So it was-- it was really like from Dante's It was.  INT: How old were you when you started burying the bodies? How old were you when you had to do this? LL: I was 18 years old, 17 and 1/2.  INT: 1941. LL: '41, yeah. I think so, yeah. Yeah.  INT: So what happened after that? LL: But this was not my main occupation during-- during my trials and tribulations, during-- during the Holocaust.  INT: Well after-- after you did-- after you buried the bodies-- LL: I went home.  INT: OK. And then what happened? LL: What happened then? Every able-bodied Jew had to registered with the so-called Arbeitsamt. That means authority, labor authority. They had the labor authority for Aryans and for Jews.  INT: Now, how did you hear about that? Did they put it on the radio? Were there newspaper? How-- LL: No radio. They had runners, Jewish runners. They rounded up-- because the first thing they did, they-- they formed a Jewish authority, which was working for the Gestapo. That was the Judenrate. And in the Judenrate, the members of the Judenrate were mostly intelligentsia. They collaborated. A lot of the Jewish intelligentsia collaborated. The head of the Judenrate was Dr. Rosenblatt. And his son-in-law was the-- the high official there. His name was Matthew Ruhrberg, Maciek in Polish. And-- but these-- these are long stories because those must be-- 
INT: Tell me-- no. Tell me this. So, the Germans formed a Judenrate. LL: Yeah, they formed a Judenrate. And the same-- and so it was like a government.  INT: Yes. LL: You had the president, and you had the secretaries and this and this. And they had the welfare office-- welfare office, yes-- and then the Jewish police. It's-- it was called Ordnungsdienst. It was service for order, you know.  INT: Did you know anyone on the Jewish police? LL: Oh yes. Yes, I did. As a matter of fact, I-- I have some-- [DRINKS] yes, I remember many of them. Some of them were my teachers, [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] like Mr. [? Nemlich. ?] He was the geography teacher. Many were family friends and some relatives. That was--  INT: Do you remember the-- any of the names? LL: I remember, of course. Let's start with relatives first. I had an uncle. He married my mother's sister. His name was Meier-- [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] last name-- isn't it crazy? I'll- it'll get back. I mean--  INT: And he was a member of the police? LL: He was a member of the-- he was a member of the-- he became-- he became a member of the police after his wife, my aunt Clara Goldstein-- Meier Goldstein. And he had a brother, very nice brother, [? Jacob ?] Goldstein. His wife, my aunt, was executed with the Flower of the Jewish Youth in Drohobycz. They were taken to the forest, about 1,500 people. And the ditches were already prepared there. And they were machine-gunned. And then-- 
INT: How did you hear about that? LL: Oh, that was a well-known fact. I remember it because the people who-- who were rounded up, they were first in the concentration camp outside of Drohobycz. It was called [NON-ENGLISH]. They made roof tiles. And we knew exactly who was there because sometimes they-- when they had a few hours off, we used to mingle. And I had a cousin there also, Manja.  INT: Who worked at the roof tile. LL: Who worked at the roof tile, and my Aunt Clara, and Meier Goldstein too. But they didn't execute everybody. There were maybe 20 people-- excuse me-- that were let go because they claimed they were specialists. And they needed specialists. I don't know what kind of specialists. So they were transferred to our camp. And so this way we knew that everybody who remained was loaded up on trucks, were taken to the Bronica Forest. And they were executed. And Meier told us that too. Shortly after, he became a policeman in the-- in this camp, in this labor camp. And he stopped talking to us. He didn't even acknowledge that he knows us. You know. When he was released, he came to-- to tell us, you know. And we all cried. We fed him. He had some-- some food. And then-- then he became a policeman. And I never spoke to him at that time. He never spoke to me. This was a very coveted position. And I had a classmate, [? Alek ?] [NON-ENGLISH], who was a lovely boy. I loved him. I still do. But he lost his parents, you know. And there was an opening. He became a policeman. And then he was shot. 
INT: Now who arranged to appoint these people policemen? Do you know? LL: Through connections. Through connections. Through bribery. They had some-- you could give the-- the chief of the police, you gave him a diamond or something. And it was a very--  INT: When you say chief of police-- LL: The Jewish police.  INT: The Jewish police? LL: Yes. The Jewish police. Or the camp-- or the Jewish camp director. Or by-- there was a vacancy, and you were around, you know, they had to fill it in a hurry. So there are many volunteers. There are many volunteers.  INT: To be Jewish police? LL: Policemen. Oh, yes. Yes.  INT: In-- LL: Right.  INT: --Drohobycz-- I can't-- I have terrible pronunciation. LL: In Drohobycz, yes.  INT: Drohobycz. LL: Yes.  INT: Was there a ghetto in Drohobycz. LL: There was a ghetto in Drohobycz. This, the ghetto, was the first step towards, towards rounding us up and separating us from the rest of the society. So they formed, at first, an Arbeitsamt in-- in the ghetto. It was run by Jews, some non-- not-Jews too, and the Jewish police. The Jewish police, they were the runners for the Arbeitsamt. They knew where the Jews lived, and they-- they had printed forms. You had to report within 24 hours, such and such place to-- because you will have to work, you know, for-- for the Reich. So, of course, the problems started right away because there were some more desirable jobs and some less desirable jobs. If you were rich, you could buy yourself a safe job, where there was little-- not too much Gestapo. If you are poor, if you were poor, they send you, right away, to places where you never come-- came back. Like, they-- they-- the Soviets blew up a bridge in the Carpathian Mountains, not too far, over-- over a river, like the bridge over River Kwai. And [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] all the poor male young people, strong, they were sent there. None of them came back. They were-- but we heard, of course, I wasn't there. If I were there, I would have been killed. 
INT: Well, let's talk about you. You're living. Your parents are living outside of the city with this-- LL: With the farmers.  INT: With the farmers. LL: With the Tarnowskis. That's right.  INT: A runner comes and gets you and tells you-- LL: Gets me. That's right.  INT: OK. LL: And we knew because everybody knew about it, and it was-- you didn't leave anything to chance, you know. There was-- you know, there were no excuses. Because, if you are looking for excuses, that was a death warrant, you know, that there was no kidding around.  INT: So then what happened? You worked? LL: Then you were assigned to different-- to different jobs, different-- you had your brigade. They called it brigade. And the head of the brigade was a brigadier. And he was also a collaborator.  INT: So they were all Jews. LL: All Jews, right. Right.  INT: When-- LL: It was like a trustee, you see.  INT: When did they form the ghetto? LL: The official ghetto was formed in 1942. They had the first Jewish districts. That means they were shrinking all the time, you know. Because they said, well, the Jews and Gentiles, they cannot live together. But we have Jewish districts, you know. And then they-- they provided space for the expansion of-- for the Gentiles to-- to have more apartments by-- by rounding up Jews and-- and killing them. [LAUGHS] That was the byproduct. You know. 
INT: So what happened to your family, because you're busy living outside-- LL: Yes.  INT: --of the city. LL: The-- the first victim, the first person we lost was my Uncle Joseph. He also a sickly man. And they issued an ordinance, you know, that all Jews who are sick, unable to work, you know, have to go and submit to a physical examination in order to determine their status, to what kind of work they're suitable to do. So [PAUSES FOR 5 SECONDS] my Uncle Joseph was declared incapable of working. And they took, of course, his name, address, and everywhere they can reach him. And a few days later, he got an announcement that at such-and-such date-- was, I think, it was in November of 1941, that he has to report because there will be work assignments for people who are not so strong. And, of course, was a-- was an upstanding citizen. He reported, you know, together with almost 1,000 other invalids, or people with heart disease, you know, and all kinds. It was at the Jewish old age home, which was right across, diagonally across the street from the Gestapo. It was a beautiful building and the Jewish poor and sick were taking care of there, very well, before the war. A lot of money was coming from America from the Jews. But at that time, the Soviets made a library out of it. And then the Gestapo, they used it for their purposes. And they were-- all the Jews were in this main hall of the old age house, Jewish old age house. And at that time, they had organized already a Ukrainian militia with black uniforms, just like the Gestapo. They had tridents on their visor caps. And they had-- all of them had Soviet booty, submachine guns. And [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] they had Soviet trucks, military trucks, that were painted and they drove all those Jews to Bronica again, to this forest. And they were executed there. Actually, they were murdered there, in-- in Bronica. 
INT: Now how did you-- LL: Among them, my Uncle Joseph too.  INT: How did you find out about the murder of your uncle? LL: I found out, also, you see, because there were different stages. That was at the beginning of the German occupation. They had Jews working in the Gestapo. The Gestapo was a huge organization. They-- they requisitioned many, many buildings that they had storage places. They had Jews sorting out clothing after they executed people, you know. And many Jews became prosperous by finding currency and jewelry sewn into the clothing. And--  INT: How did you hear about your uncle, though? LL: Wait a second. It's coming. Meier Goldstein became, later on, the ghetto-- the camp policeman. He worked at the Gestapo. At that time, they did not collaborate. They were slave laborers like everybody else, but some worked in the Gestapo. They were sorting things. He brought my uncle's 3/4 jacket. It was lined with kangaroo fur, you know. He stole it. He brought it to show that he-- that he is dead. And there was blood, you know, and he-- he knew. He recognized-- he recognizes-- he recognized clothing of different people. And my Aunt [? Hannah, ?] that was his wife. She was a lovely woman, but very naive, you know. If we told her about this, she would absolutely freak-- freak out. So we told her that we found from some farmers that all those people, you know, they're really working in the forest, picking up [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] oak leaves, or that those, you there. And there were-- there were many-- there were many Ukrainian farmers that were-- they made an industry out of it. They were going to Jewish people, telling them where they saw their relatives working, you know. Hell they were working. They were killed in Bronica, in the forest there. So, she didn't-- she didn't know till the last moment of her life that he was killed. She always hoped that somehow he'll come back and this, you know. And then, few months later, she went. Now, she went, not to Bronica. She went to Belzec. She was gassed. That transport was-- went to Belzec. But Uncle Joseph, he was the first victim of our family, the first. 
INT: Now, you were living in-- out with the farmer. Did they ever force you to come back and live in the district that they had set up for Jews? LL: No, for a short-- no, no, not yet. When the Germans came, after things quieted down for a little while, because they had-- they had to retrench. They organized. We moved back to our original house, where the KGB was. It was-- I have the picture of that.  INT: Yeah. LL: We moved back [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] because the Tarnowskis didn't want us any longer there. They were afraid. They were nice people, but there was one son, he was an alcoholic. And there was an old lady and a daughter. And she died at the same time, you know. So we helped. And they were good people, but they were simple, scared people. And so after the daughter was buried, you know, there was another daughter. She was a teacher, you know, that-- and they said they want to move into our apartment. Would-- we would, please, let them. So-- so we went. We took a chance. We went back to our-- to our old apartment. And we expanded, as a matter of fact. We took another room. And we took on a tenant, not a paying tenant, but a friend moved in with us, a Mr.-- what's this? I'll-- I will recall it.  INT: Now, I take it then, where your apartment was was within the Jewish district. LL: There was some Jews there, but it was not the Jewish district. But this didn't last long because they had aktions. So-called aktions were round-ups. After the first aktion, where officially they rounded up Jews to take to Belzec, they had previous executions. But this was-- they called it [NON-ENGLISH]. It means a resettlement action. They resettled them to Belzec, to the gas chambers. After that, they had many vacancies in the Jewish sector because those people went first. That was the lowest rung of the Jewish society. They were real poor people, like I have in those pictures, you know. 
INT: Well, what happened to your family? LL: My family, OK.  INT: During this time, like during this time-- LL: During this time--  INT: --you're living in your old apartment building. LL: My-- my grandmother, my mother's mother with the grandfather, they lived-- they went to the Jewish sector. It means the area where there was the highest Jewish concentration. [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] And [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] we went to the old apartment house for a while. And [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] Aunt [? Hannah, ?] she was killed. And then I had another aunt that lived there. She was killed too-- [? Yeti, ?] Aunt [? Yeti. ?] I would like to digress because it's important in order to understand this. It's important to know how it happened that we got caught in the German occupation. I wanted, in spite of my distaste for communism and the Soviets, I wanted to run away east with the retreating armies, with my parents. Because I knew that the devil, the other devil is worse than the Soviet devil. But my grandmother, my mother's mother, she absolutely persuaded. They were ready to leave, but she persuaded my parents to stay. And I didn't want to leave them. And I never forgave her for that, never. I still hate her for it because she really destroyed our family. [PAUSES FOR 6 SECONDS] So this is-- this is how come that we stayed. And we tried-- I tried to persuade also my parents that we are not too close during the occupation. I mean, we have to-- my father was-- was really a saint. He used to bring flour, and bread, you know, and potatoes. 
INT: During the Russian occupation. LL: He smuggled. During the-- no, during the German occupation already.  INT: OK. Well, let's-- let's-- let me understand now. During the German occupation, did they ever enclose the city, the-- the Jewish section with barbed wire? Did they create an-- LL: Yes. Yes.  INT: OK. Let's-- let's move along and-- and talk about that. LL: Yes. That was in 1943.  INT: OK. LL: 1943. OK. Things were getting sticky. They-- they knew-- they knew that we are doomed. But this was just a matter of timing, whether you go right away or whether you have a little bit more time, maybe to escape, find a hideaway or something. So my father, at the beginning of the German occupation, he still had his job in the flour mill because they needed him. That's why we were relatively comfortable, because the same people-- we had-- he had a communist boss who was stealing flour with him. But there was a Mr. [? Tarnowski, ?] who worked also there. He knew what was going on because he was-- he was the technical director. So he said to my father, well, we're going to do the same thing. Nothing's going to change. We're going to steal now. And we'll split, you and I. So he didn't want to do it. He says, are you crazy, with the Gestapo? He said, look, you are going to go anyway. So you will go with a full belly or you will go hungry, you know. So what's the difference? It was a very powerful argument. So I think we are supposed to-- 
INT: Oh, no. You can continue for a few more minutes. LL: Yeah. And-- so we had plenty of flour. I was working in this flour mill too. And I was stealing too. And I helped-- I had a girlfriend. So I helped her and some of my cronies because it was sort of an atmosphere, devil may care. We knew that we are doomed, you know, that it doesn't matter.  INT: Now, were there both Jews and non-Jews working at the flour mill? LL: Yes.  INT: And Mr. [? Tarnowski, ?] was he-- LL: Mr. [? Tarnowski, ?] he was a Ukrainian. And his son's, [? Slavic, ?] worked there too.  INT: All right. So you-- LL: And the-- the-- the mill, originally, before the war, it belonged to Ukrainians, to the Sasyk family, S-A-S-Y-K. And the flour mill was nationalized. And the Sasyks, the young Sasyks, when the German-- Germans retreated the first time to make room for the Soviets--  INT: OK. I think we'll pause right here, and we'll continue after the end of the tape. LL: Yeah. This is important to understand.  INT: Today is October 4, 1996. I'm talking to Paul Lustig. I am Rosalie Franks, tape four. When we stopped a moment ago, Paul, you were telling me about the flour mill. LL: Yes.  INT: And about the-- the-- LL: Sasick, Sasick.  INT: The Sasicks. The Sasicks. LL: Yeah. Yeah. Yes. The Sasick family owned this flour mill. The way my father actually got this job in this mill was because my grandmother and the Sasick grandfather, they were doing business together. She used to, before World War I, she used to lease this mill for a while. She was sort of-- she was running-- she was running this mill. Then after World War I, the Sasicks, the new generation, they took over this thing. And-- but my father had some connections, acquaintances. When the Soviets-- before the Soviets entered Drohobycz, the Sasicks, they were prominent Ukrainian nationalists, fascist nationalists. They ran away, because the Soviets would have killed them. And they went west to western former Poland, which was the Generalgouvernement. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] And they came-- they returned back with the German forces, occupation forces, in 1941, which was less than two years later. It was like 22 months later. Because I think the Soviet rule lasted only 22 months at that time. So there was a-- there were two brothers, Sasick. [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] The younger brother, his name was Michael, and he had a glass eye. He was-- he-- he-- he worked for the Gestapo. He had a gun in his pocket. He used to show me. And then there was his sister also, [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] who was doing the cooking for the family, for the Sasicks. But [? Tarnowski, ?] Mr. [? Tarnowski, ?] was friendly with the Sasicks because he used to work for them before the war. And this is how the-- so the experiences from the Soviet occupation and via Mr. [? Tarnowski ?] went back to Sasick. So they were stealing together. And they-- because the Sasicks wanted to-- this-- actually, this flour was supposed to be for the German soldiers, for their bread. So some of it was stolen by the Sasicks, and people from the ghetto were buying this flour in order to survive, at black market prices. So [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] that's-- that's how this-- this whole operation worked. 
INT: Now, your father worked there and so-- and it sounds like you worked there for a while. LL: I worked there too at one-- one of the big millstone machines, and I was filling the sacks with flour.  INT: But eventually-- LL: But eventually, this job was-- was getting dangerous, because-- because of Michael Sasick. He wanted to get rid of the Jews as soon as possible. So my father bribed somebody in this Hyrawka camp. This was a-- a garden camp. We had the hothouses for flowers and early tomatoes, et cetera, et cetera. And I spent a year there. It was very nice there, very, very good. And--  INT: Would you spell the name of the camp for me? LL: H-Y-R-A-W-K-A.  INT: Now, this Hyrawka camp-- LL: Yeah.  INT: --who ran that camp? LL: This camp was run by Jewish agronomist, Dr. Reitman. And-- but the overall boss was a German by the name [? Helmrich, ?] Eberhard [? Helmrich, ?] H-E-L-M-R-I-C-H.  INT: Now, was [? Helmrich, ?] was he part of the Gestapo? LL: No. He was in the army. He was a captain or major in the German Wehrmacht. This guy was a true hero.  INT: Why was he a hero? LL: He was a hero because he took incredible chances to save Jewish kids.  INT: How? LL: He worked together with his wife. They had their projects. [PAUSES FOR 5 SECONDS] His wife-- was much more difficult to save male Jews, because they were circumcised. 
INT: Were you circumcised? LL: Yes. But the-- the girls were relatively easier, because there was no physical symptom, or no physical evidence, no mutilation. Mrs. [? Helmrich, ?] she used to-- she had connections in Berlin at the-- in the police, not in the Gestapo, with some friends. They were forging papers for nothing, just-- just because they were human beings. And they saved numerous girls. She sent them with false papers to Berlin in an environment that their friends, they worked as Ukrainian servants.  INT: Do you know of anybody that was saved by this woman? The name of anybody? LL: Yes. Oh, yes. Yes. There was a-- an Altman girl, Miss-- Miss-- Altman. As a matter, two Altman sisters, A-L-T-M-A-N. And their father, Mr. Altman, he was a Viennese Jew, a refugee. And he-- he became very close friends with-- with Mr-- Mr. [? Helmrich. ?] And ironically, [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] I-- I met [? Helmrich ?] in America after the war. [PAUSES FOR 5 SECONDS] He fell in love with a Jewish girl. And his wife, she knew about it. There were times when I worked in-- in the building where-- where they lived, his wife and-- and Eberhard. And this girl was also Jewish. Her-- her name was [? Suzy. ?] I don't remember her-- her last name.  INT: What was the wife's first name? Mrs. [? Helmrich? ?] LL: Mrs. [? Helmrich, ?] I-- I have her name written down. [PAUSES FOR 6 SECONDS] I'll tell you later. 
INT: That's OK. You can tell me later. LL: Yes, yes. This is a very, very, very interesting story. She knew that-- that he was cheating on her, but she-- she loved him one way or the other. And she gave him a divorce after the war. And he married-- he married this Jewish girlfriend. And he was disgusted with Germany. And he came to America. They live in Queens. And he got a menial job. He was a very bright man, but he just didn't fit into-- into America. And he was supported by survivors, basically, who were-- we had a big party for him, you know? In New York. And--  INT: So he was able to save the Jews? LL: And his daughter, Cornelia Schmalz-Jacobsen, she is a member of the German Parliament. And I spoke to her a few times. I'm going to see her my-- the next time I-- I-- I'm in Germany.  INT: Now, her last name is Jacobsen? LL: Schmalz-Jacobsen, that's her married name.  INT: Yes. LL: Her name-- her maiden name was obvious [? Helmrich. ?] But this is--  INT: But she didn't marry-- Jacobsen, she didn't marry someone Jewish. LL: No. No, no, no, no, no.  INT: All right. Now, so you worked-- how long did you work in the agronomist camp? LL: Oh, about a year, take-- take a few months one-- one way or the other.  INT: Then where did you go? LL: From there, but this-- I wanted to tell you that from this camp, it was not far from the Jewish cemetery. Any time there were mass killings on the street or something, they were sending a group of us boys to dig ditches, because we were digging ditches in the-- in the garden camp, so we knew-- we were experienced in digging ditches. So we were digging graves and burying the Jewish-- the Jewish dead. And one day, they send me to a-- a-- a-- to bury two people. And it was turns out that one was-- one of them was Schulz, Bruno Schulz. I buried Bruno Schulz. 
INT: You buried him. LL: They brought them from the ghetto. He was-- yeah. He was shot on-- on the street by Günther, by murderers, SS men. So I didn't see the shooting, but I saw him shot. And some other people brought him from the ghetto to the cemetery. So when I saw him already, he didn't have a jacket on him. He had-- his pants, they were half-- half down. I remember his shirt. I remember his skull, open on the side, you know, brain, brains coming out. I remember, it was like a grin, you know. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] So--  INT: How did you know Bruno Schulz? LL: He was my teacher.  INT: Where? LL: In-- he-- he was my teacher starting 1937, '38, '39, '40, till '41.  INT: At the government gymnasium? LL: Yeah. And then later on, the Soviet gymnasium, yeah. He was teaching draftsmanship, and he-- and geometry [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] and shop. But [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] we had two shifts during the-- during the Soviet occupation in-- in the-- in the school. It was the former Jewish gymnasium. So the older children were going in the afternoon and the evening. And so he was a terrific storyteller. He didn't communicate too well with grownups. He-- he had a good time with kids, because we listened very-- we were mesmerized by him. He was telling those crazy stories. Especially when there was a short circuit, you know, there was no light, you know, there-- there was no-- the utilities didn't work too well during the Soviet regime. And we helped. When Schulz had a lesson, we used to burn fuses. We put the [INAUDIBLE] onto the fuse, and it went, and Schulz was telling stories. So I used to walk him home and help to-- help him to carry his case. He was-- he was unbelievable but very shy, very shy. [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] 
INT: So you buried Bruno Schulz. LL: Yeah. And his friend, Mr. [? Hauptman. ?] Mr. [? Hauptman ?] was a brilliant cabinet maker. But he-- he used to do wood inlays, [NON-ENGLISH] work in-- in-- in wood. So [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] he-- [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] he worked for-- and he was-- they were both-- they had a protector, a sergeant, SS sergeant. His name was Felix Landau, who was caught after the war and spent the rest of his life in jail. He was a mass murderer. But he loved his Jews, those two Jews. Because before he became an SS man, he-- he was also a cabinet maker. So Schulz was designing and Hauptman was executing the designs. Because Schulz was not only a writer, but also a painter.  INT: Felix Landau, what was his position? LL: He was a sergeant in the Gestapo.  INT: In the Gestapo, for the town? LL: Yeah. Yeah.  INT: I see. OK. LL: They didn't have that many Gestapo men in Drohobycz, because they needed them wherever.  INT: Yes. LL: But they had the auxiliary Gestapo, the Ukrainian police. They were much, much worse than they are-- than they were. And they did--  INT: Now, why was-- why was Schulz shot? LL: Schulz was shot in retaliation, because Landau shot Günther 's Jews. There were three girls. I remember some of the names. You see, he was-- he was training his rifle with a scope. They were working in the garden there, attending flowers and things. So Landau, from the balcony, he could see them. And they were-- they were Günther 's Jews. So he had a rifle with a scope, and he had his girlfriend, you know, he was making love with, and they both-- they decided they were target shooting. So they killed those three-- three girls. 
INT: Landau target shot and killed the girls. LL: Günther 's girls.  INT: Günther 's girls. LL: So in retaliation, Günther killed Landau's Jews. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] They were arch enemies. They didn't do anything to one another but to each other's Jews. So-- [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] and those girls were believable. There was one, Vera Zuckerman, she was gorgeous, and she was a concert pianist. Was-- she was a gorgeous girl.  INT: And Landau shot Vera-- LL: Shot her, yeah.  INT: Vera Zuckerman. LL: Zuckerman. And then there was the Sternbach girl, too, [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] Dora, Dora Sternbach. And then the third one, I don't remember offhand her name.  INT: Spell the name of the other Gestapo officer. LL: Günther? G-U-N-T-H-E-R. Günther The U is with umlaut.  INT: So one was Landau, and the other was Günther? LL: Günther, yeah. Yeah.  INT: I see. Now, where did you go after you worked in this farm? LL: In Hyrawka?  INT: In Hyrawka. LL: Then-- yeah. Then my father, the-- the-- the flour mill became dangerous.  INT: Yes. LL: And he got also a job not only for me-- me there, but also for his brother--  INT: Yes. LL: --Salomon and Mr. [? Hershman, ?] his friend. This is-- Mr. [? Hershman, ?] his wife, and daughter lived with us in our old house. I forgot the name before. That was this person. [? Hershman. ?]  INT: So where did you go? LL: My father got a new position in the refinery. And he got a job also for my mother. And he bribed somebody, and he got me a job in the-- in the same enterprise, and I was supposed to be a blacksmith. You know, I was very strong, and I could pound a hammer so I became a kettle smith. Not cattle like cows and that, but-- but vats, huge. 
INT: Kettle. LL: Kettles, that's right, out of steel, big, big, huge. Some-- some of them were like-- like a building. And I did-- I helped in riveting. I was inside, supporting the red hot rivets, and they were pounding with heavy hammers. It was a terrible job, because the noise was deafening from this.  INT: Now, what was the name of this place? LL: That was-- the name of the firm was the rough-- refining plant [NON-ENGLISH], or [NON-ENGLISH].  INT: Now, how long-- LL: It used to-- this refinery used to belong to a consortium, part of the Standard Oil of New Jersey, too. Because we were in a-- in a oil center there. This was the refinery. So my father was in charge of the storage. He worked for another hero, true hero, Mr. [? Dietermeyer ?] a German.  INT: Now, tell me about that. LL: He-- he was hiding Jews. During when the things were getting hot, they were looking, chasing Jews, hounding them. So he opened the back door of his storage, and they were hiding on the sacks and something, he covered. He fed them. I mean, they caught him, he would end up in a concentration camp, at least, if he's lucky. They probably would have shot him.  INT: What was his name again? LL: [? Dietermeyer. ?]  INT: Would you spell it for me? LL: D-I-E-T-E-M-A-I-R.  INT: And what was his position at this-- LL: His position, he was the-- in charge of this magazine, they called it, storage, storage area. 
INT: Now, was he a German officer? LL: No, he was a German civilian. He was a bookkeeper by training. And I was in correspondence with him a-- a couple of years after the war still, when I was studying in Germany. He lived in Reutlingen, outside of-- outside of Stuttgart.  INT: So he was hiding runaway Jews? LL: Yes. And he was protecting his Jewish employees, too. There he-- he made up stories how important, essential they are, yeah, what-- what geniuses they are, what they can do for the Reich, you know. So my father was one of his Jews. And my Uncle Salomon, too. And also, there was a-- a-- another couple that worked for him, a husband and wife. His name was Teicher, T-E-I-C-H-E-R. And Teicher and his wife-- her maiden name was [NON-ENGLISH], Ada. Ada [NON-ENGLISH]. She was a beautiful woman. And I think that-- that [? Dietermeyer ?] was in love with her, I think. I mean, it's just-- I-- I-- I-- there's not--  INT: So he protected all-- LL: He protected the whole crew, everybody. And I used to-- I used to come to see my parents during the short lunch break. And he was feed-- he was stealing food for them too, for nothing.  INT: Now, how long did you stay working as a [NON-ENGLISH]? LL: Mm, till the liquidation of this position. We knew that we are going to be deported somewhere, but they were telling us, you know, that we're essential Jews for the war effort and all these things. And there was one Jew, a Jewish engineer, [NON-ENGLISH] was his name. I have to mention this because this is a Jewish hero, a true hero, a very unusual, attractive man. His wife was [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] [? Steinhauser. ?] Her parents, they-- they had the-- they had a plant. They were making concrete pipes for drainage, but huge, you know, for city-- city sewer. They were very, very affluent. And he was a brilliant engineer. He had many patents, you know, related to refining of oil. And the last few weeks, the evacuation started. The Russians started pushing. And he was well-connected. He-- he had connections everywhere. And [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] the Gestapo came to him and said, look, we know that you have hideaways. So if your wife, your-- your son disappears, we won't say anything. But if you disappear with them, then we'll kill all the Jews, finish them, but on the spot. And you know we mean business. So he said the way his family, they survived, they-- they lived in France. I believe his wife might be still-- still alive. She was a beautiful woman. 
INT: And what happened to him? LL: He ended up in concentration camp, together with me. And he died.  INT: He died in the camps. LL: Yeah. Yeah. There were not too many people [INAUDIBLE]. I was very friendly with his brother, [? Emil, ?] you know? So--  INT: So. LL: But another hero was Mr. Altman. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] He was on [NON-ENGLISH], this Viennese jeweler that I told you.  INT: And the two-- LL: And his-- his daughters--  INT: Yes. LL: --were safe. He could have saved his life. He had connections. He didn't because he knew if-- if-- if he runs away, that [? Helmrich ?] won't be able to handle this thing. Because if [? Helmrich ?] handled the situation together with the Jews, something would leak up or leak out. So he was the-- the middleman. Because Reitman, he was no good. He was-- he was after money. He-- he took the bribes to get people in and out, you know. So-- so he went. He stayed in Drohobycz, and he was killed in the forest, together with Clara, the same-- the same time and-- and another cousin of mine, too.  INT: What was the name of the other cousin? LL: The other cousin? I had two cousins by the first name Manja. Manja is Mary in Polish. So one was Manja Lustig and was Salomon's daughter. And the other was Manja Fleischer. That was on my mother's side. That was [? Yeti's-- ?] my Aunt [? Yeti's ?] daughter. So. [? Yeti ?] went to be gassed before her. And Manja, Manja and Clara died at the same time in the-- the burning of the forest there. 
INT: Now, where did you go? Things were getting tighter. What happened after you left the place where you worked as a kettle man? Where did you go next? LL: No, I didn't go anywhere. They told us, you know, that was in 1944, in--  INT: Yeah, what happened in 1944? LL: Yeah, let me-- let me-- yeah. In 1944, in April, it was April 1944, the Russians were enclosing. Very-- they were very close. Many people had hideaways with non-Jews, for money. If not for money, they had bunkers in the forests and [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] et cetera. And I have to tell you, I have to digress, [LAUGHS] because this is an interesting story. There was a Jew by the name-- Orthodox Jew, [NON-ENGLISH], and that was-- I'm going back to the ghetto.  INT: That's all right. LL: He-- he was the supplier for the Gestapo, and the scout to ferret out diamonds for the Gestapo. He had a long beard. He had a wife and this. He lived an enchanted life. He decided he was dealing diamonds, he was selling for them too, whatever. And he had-- he built himself, in his house, a hideaway with the most elaborate maze. And he thought that that will do him good. One day, before the liquidation of the ghetto, he and his family, they disappeared into this hideaway. And [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] the Ukrainian police, [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] with the Gestapo, they started looking for them, though it took them, I think, two or three days to-- to find this hideaway, even it was around his house. Well, and they shot him, of course. A similar thing was with [? Ruhrberg, ?] this guy from the Judenrate. He went, he got himself false papers. He had a lot of money, went to Warsaw. And he was found on the street of Warsaw. He was betrayed by one of the Jews from Drohobycz who recognized that is was him in that town. He was on false papers there. And they brought him back to Drohobycz with his wife and child. They shot them, the Gestapo, in the yard. 
INT: Who shot them? LL: The Gestapo.  INT: The Gestapo. LL: Yeah, they shot him.  INT: Now-- LL: Now, we were-- whether they--  INT: Well, I-- I was wondering, did you ever leave these two-- Drohobycz and go to another camp? LL: Camp? No. Yes, from Drohobycz, on December-- on April 13, 1944. We were deported to Plaszów. Plaszów camp was the one that was compiled.  INT: Now, Plaszów was in what city? LL: Not-- outside of Cracow.  INT: Yes. LL: Yeah. But anyway, many Jews disappeared from the camp. They couldn't control it. Because the Ukrainians were in a state of panic too, because the Russians were coming. So Hildebrand, who was the head of the Gestapo for the camps there, he came one day. It was the beginning of April. He says, look, you Jews, you're running away. I cannot keep it in-- keep you inside. But you are going to be deported, but not to be killed or anything. We have refineries in the west, and you are specialists. We need you. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] Just to prove my point, I ordered all my sentries. Everybody are disappearing. They are going to their-- their billets, wherever they live. And you can come and go as you want. And-- but they give you a deadline. I'm giving you a week. After that week, I'm closing the camp again. Whoever is going to be found on the street is going to be shot on the spot. 
INT: We're going to stop right here. LL: OK.  INT: And we'll continue in a moment. LL: This is an important segment.  INT: It's October 4th, 1996. I'm talking to Paul Lustig. I'm Rosalie Franks, tape five. When we stopped a moment ago, you were in Plaszow. But is there anything else you'd like to tell me before we go into greater detail about Plaszow? LL: No. I-- I want to-- I think it's important to go back to [NON-ENGLISH], to the place where I worked with my parents, and my uncle [? Salomon, ?] and his wife and daughter, for Mr. [? Dietermeyer. ?] There were more and more rumors about the so-called evacuation. That means deportation to-- to destination unknown. And my uncle [? Salomon, ?] he had some connections in the village outside of Drohobycz. The name of the village was Litynia. L-I-T-Y-N-I-A. And allegedly, most of the Ukrainians there, they were not Catholic, but they were Jehovah's Witnesses. And they were supposed to hide him, his wife, and daughter, and her fiancee and the fiance's brother, because they were village Jews. They had a lot of land. Their name was [? Zuckerberg-- ?] [? Zuckerberg. ?] And we were not told about it, but shortly before their-- they were supposed to-- their departure, Uncle [? Salomon ?] told my father that as soon as they are located there, and he'll let them know. And we should join them too to hide. So first, my cousin [? Manja, ?] [? Salomon's ?] daughter, went with her mother. And then the two [? Zuckerman-- ?] [? Zuckerman ?] boys went. Each time after they sent back a note with the Ukrainian that they have arrived OK. And the next two went, you know. And then my uncle was the last one, because he received a note from the [? Zuckerman ?] boys that everything is clear, that-- well, anyway. And he said goodbye to my father that, you know, that he hope you'll be able to arrange that and we will go there too. And we-- we don't hear anything. Week, two weeks. 10 days. And there is a man coming, a Jewish man, a friend of ours, Mr. [? Berkendorf. ?] His son is still alive in Israel. And he goes to my father, and he takes out the scarf, a woollen scarf, bloody with a slash there. And he says, is this [? Salomon's ?] scarf? So my father says, yes. He said, well, they're all gone. They're killed, because I was going to my peasant there, to be hidden. And across this river, this brook, whatever it is. And here I see a naked body there. And I didn't know. I took a look. Yeah. He was circumcised. He's a Jew. And then I look, and I see this. And I said, well, this is [? Salomon ?] Lustig, [? Simon ?] Lustig, you know. And so the whole family is dead. My father was-- oh, he went to pieces, because he wasn't a nice guy, my uncle, but he loved him. [LAUGHS] And he told [? Dietermeyer ?] about it. So [? Dietermeyer ?] said, [? Herman, ?] I cannot bring back your-- your brother or your family, but they'll pay for it. So he went to the Gestapo. The Gestapo didn't like competition. They liked to do their own killing, you know, because there was always a byproduct of the murder was some jewelry and stuff like that, and money. They didn't like the Ukrainians to take it away. So they went to this village, a whole detachment of Gestapo with the Ukrainian auxiliary police. And they fished out those people. And 10 of them were strung up in the city square in Drohobycz for-- for [GERMAN]. That means for murder and plunder. [LAUGHS] So they didn't like competition. Now, let's go to Plaszow. Next we went-- 
INT: How did you get to Plaszow? LL: Yeah. That's what I'm trying to tell you. [PAUSES FOR 5 SECONDS] We had nowhere to go. They closed the camp again. We had no connections. We had no money. We were very-- totally impoverished. So [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] we-- we decided to take a chance. Maybe they really need us. Because after all, in-- [? Watermann ?] is going too on the same transport, you know, that we were supposed to go. Not to Plaszow. They told us that we are going to [NON-ENGLISH]. That's-- that's halfway to Cracow, and they had oil wells there too that we are supposed to help in production, you know, for-- for the military and this. So they got us into this train. There was a truck inside of the-- the camp. There was a railroad track that was next to the building where I worked with my parents for this [? Dietermeyer. ?] And I will never forget, because [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] he was standing and waving us goodbye, and he was crying.  INT: He was crying? LL: Yeah. I'll never forget it.  INT: How old a man was Mr. [? Dietermeyer? ?] LL: Oh, he was young. He was at that time maybe 40 years old-- 45, at the most.  INT: Did they take all the Jews out of his-- LL: Yeah. Yeah.  INT: Out of the factory? LL: Yeah. [? Ada ?] and her husband, they went into hiding with the baby. She had a baby too. They-- they were in hiding, because her father was one of the chief engineers in the refinery too. So he was very well connected with workers and this. So they survived, and they lived in Israel. 
INT: [? Ada ?] who? LL: [? Ada ?] [NON-ENGLISH]. [? Ada ?] [NON-ENGLISH]. I think [? Dietermeyer-- ?] I know [? Dietermeyer ?] was in love with her.  INT: Yeah. LL: Yeah. But she was not in the transport. She was-- she went into hiding a few days before. So OK. We were in the train. And the train-- they didn't-- you see, they-- they-- they had a shortage of manpower. They didn't have enough people to man every-- so they pretended. They played [INAUDIBLE] guy. The gates of those cattle trains were open. You could jump out, you know. There was only one guard inside, an old German with a rifle, and a very jovial, congenial-- and he was-- he was a soldier, not an SS man. And he-- So there were about maybe-- I don't know, 20, 30 cattle cars, but they-- they had hay, you know. And it was comfy, relatively. And it wasn't cold. We were going, and going, and going.  INT: What time of year was this? LL: That was in spring, early spring. And it was in April.  INT: Of 1944? LL: 1944, yes.  INT: Now, were you with your mother and father in the cattle car? LL: Yes. Oh, yes.  INT: Why didn't you jump out? LL: There was nowhere to go. There was-- there was-- the antisemitism, the hatred was-- you see, they-- the moment they caught you, they recognized you, they grabbed you, you know. They ganged up, and they brought you to the Gestapo, or to the local police, and you were finished. You couldn't go just at random to any house and to ask, save me. Oh, did you know the majority-- the vast majority-- was so hostile, so hateful. And they still are, you know. Only if you had some devoted old servant, you know, or a lot of money at the same time. If you had only money, you were in danger. It had to be-- money was just to sweeten the pot. 
INT: How long did it take you to go-- LL: Two days.  INT: Two days? LL: Two days. In the meanwhile--  INT: Did they feed you? LL: Hm?  INT: Did you get anything to eat? LL: No. We took-- they gave us the food ahead of time to take along.  INT: I see. LL: Yeah.  INT: Now, what about going to the bathroom or anything like that on the train? LL: To the bathroom? The train stopped every once in awhile, and we could go to the bathroom on the side, you know. And they-- and then they surrounded us, and their guns were trained, you know. And then we got back nicely, back into the-- so we were quite at peace because it was totally atypical. It was not like the usual transport to-- to the death camp. Because in-- in-- if you were going to-- to Treblinka or to Auschwitz or somewhere, once you-- you were in the sealed car, they didn't give a damn. But they put in-- normally, there was room for 40 people, you know. They put 80 or 100 people. And they were crapping all over. [INTERPOSING VOICES]  INT: Were you crowded in your cars? LL: No. No. That came later. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] Anyway, we passed yes [NON-ENGLISH] and [NON-ENGLISH], those towns. We knew that we were lied to. Then they didn't open it. It's not far from Cracow already. And we-- we arrived in Plaszow. Plaszow was a different story. Right away, they surrounded us with dogs, with whips, you know. And with kapos, and-- and Jewish policemen, and-- and Estonian, and all kinds of whatever. I don't remember whether they were Estonian or they were Lithuanian. But there were Ukrainians. And of course, Germans. That was-- But they used to, before we arrived in Plaszow, they used to kill a lot of people every day. There was this Amon Goeth, the head of the camp. He used to go on his horse with a Tommy Gun or pistol, you know. He used to go hunting, you know, and kill people. But then Auschwitz opened the extra gas chambers and extra crematoria, so they told him not to-- not to kill so much, because everybody-- they want to utilize whatever there is, you know. And they had-- we had so-called Appells, which was line up in the morning. 
INT: Now, [INAUDIBLE] is this in Plaszow now? LL: In Plaszow. Yeah.  INT: OK. Let's-- before we talk about that, tell me what you remember when you first arrived at Plaszow. LL: When I first arrived in Plaszow, it was the station. There was the track, not far from the camp. And we saw-- we didn't know what to expect. So Plaszow, I never heard of Plaszow. I knew that we are not far from Cracow. But Plaszow, I never heard of again, Plaszow. And I looked there. I see there are Jewish men. They looked Jewish, you know-- strong semitic features [BACKGROUND NOISE] with the horses and buggies. And [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] they were getting close to the train, and then they started unloading the luggage. Whatever-- some people had all their possessions with them. And they didn't talk.  INT: The Jews didn't talk? LL: The Jews didn't talk. So one of them got close. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] So my father asked him, are they killing here? Jews? So he says in Yiddish, [YIDDISH]. That means, no more. So he said, [YIDDISH]. That means they-- they don't-- they don't kill? And he said, no more. How is it here? Good or bad? He says, [YIDDISH] It means, it's a little bit better. [INAUDIBLE] OK. Good sign. [LAUGHS] So [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] they marched us to-- to the camp.  INT: And what about your mother? LL: We were together still. We were not separated. 
INT: I see. LL: We were together in the camp-- in-- in the train. And we marched together, men and women. This-- this came later in the camp. We entered the camp, you know. So they had the sentries with them, with dogs, you know. And they were heckling us, you know. And we saw those turrets with machine guns, you know. And-- and those hateful faces of the-- of the Gestapo people. And if you were a little bit--  INT: Did they look at you with hatred? LL: Oh, yes. Oh, yes. Absolutely. And they were whipping us. They had those leather whips. And then inside where they stopped, the Jewish kapos, and the Jewish police, and the Blockalteste-- Jewish-- they were tormenting us. You know, we were in the state of panic. They were chasing us like-- like cattle. And then we see the Lageralteste. That means the elder men of the camp, Mr. [NON-ENGLISH] and his wife. She is a Lageralteste für Frauen. That means for women. And they used obscenities that I never heard. I-- I know many obscenities, but I never heard anything like that, you know. The most elaborate things. And she-- they were-- they were beating us, you know.  INT: And what were they speaking to you in? What language? LL: Polish, Polish, Polish.  INT: So the Jewish police, these-- these people, these Lageralteste. LL: Most of them were Polish Jews-- Cracow Jews. Yeah. Because--  INT: But they were speaking-- LL: The Schindler's list, the Schindler's list, most of those Schindler's Jews were-- were Cracow Jews. 
INT: Yes, yes. LL: And they were-- they were, you know, they had their connections. You know. This was-- Schindler might have been a hero. He is now. I don't know. But this-- this whole thing was organized by Cracow Jews, by [? Ferber ?] and the others.  INT: So you-- so they're-- they're yelling obscenities. LL: Obscenities. Says, yeah, you're going to behave yourselves. You know, this is not Drohobycz. Because Drohobycz was considered a-- an enviable place. And men go to the right, and women to the left. And whatever you have, the jewelry or something, you leave right here. Right?  INT: Now let me understand. It sounds like it was the Jews that were organizing. LL: Well, the Jews were-- they were authorized to run-- the Germans had very little to do with the internal running of the camp.  INT: Of Plaszow? LL: Of Plaszow. This was a Jewish administration. And, of course, it was under German orders, but they were very efficient. They-- they picked the worst characters on the-- on the-- on this planet, you know, to run it.  INT: Tell me their names again, and spell them for me, Paul. This-- this man and his wife. LL: Who? Hilewicz? H-I-L-E-W-I-C-Z. Yeah. They were underworld criminals, and the slimes.  INT: So they-- LL: Then they had-- they had-- his number two man was [? Finkelstein. ?] [? Finkelstein, ?] like Frankenstein.  INT: Yes. LL: And he was a henchman. He was hanging people when the-- you know, he-- he was performing executions for-- before-- before we came. 
INT: So the women-- you said they separated the women from the men at this point? LL: Yes. And the-- we were-- there was one bath, shower thing for men and one for women. Then, when we came to-- to the bath there to take a shower, you know, they-- we couldn't go all at the same time. So they divide us into, you know, 50 at the time or something. And [? Urmann ?] was with me. So we were talking, you know. But the men was calm, this-- but he knew that he's not going to live. He couldn't-- he was too-- too soft.  INT: What was his name? LL: [? Urmann. ?] This is the guy that-- he was the head engineer that the Germans-- and then they told him if he-- he escapes, all the Jews are going to be killed.  INT: Yeah. LL: Yeah. Yeah. So the SS again, they inspected us, whether we have any diamonds, or money, or anything, you know. And-- and while-- as soon as we arrived-- so there were-- the-- the prisoners, you know, every-- anytime there was a new transport coming, there-- there was a group of prisoners. They played sick. And they-- they approached the column. They said, well, if you have any money, anything, my name is such and such. I'm-- well, you give me the money, and we'll split the money after the bath. You come to me, I'll give you half of your money, which never happened. But these-- these were those piranhas, you know, that-- [LAUGHS] 
INT: So you and your father-- did you stay together with your father? LL: Yes, of course.  INT: And what happened to your mother? LL: My mother was in the-- in the-- in the Frauenlager. That was the camp for women. But we could-- we could visit them, and we could see. We could meet at lunchtime when we had a break. I visited my mother. She worked in a barracks stitching something. They were repairing-- they were repairing and cleaning uniforms of wounded or fallen soldiers that were recycled for-- for reuse. So that was a good assignment for my mother because she was getting an extra ration of bread, and she was sharing it with us. And my father and I, we worked in the quarry. There was a quarry. That was the worst assignment. My father was very weak. He was getting-- he was losing a lot of weight, and he was bleeding. He bled to death eventually.  INT: In the camp? LL: Hm. In Flossenbürg, yes. He had a terrible bleeding hemorrhoids and-- so that was Plaszow. I-- I met some-- some people that I knew. There was a [? Mia ?] [? Weinstock. ?] It was an acquaintance of mine from Drohobycz. She was my age. I think she's still alive somewhere in America. She escaped Drohobycz on false papers-- Aryan papers. And she was caught in Cracow. And there was an execution of hostages-- Polish hostages. Because anytime a German was killed by the Polish Underground, they executed ten Poles. So what happened in jail there, they took her out. Took her also alone and shot-- 
INT: So instead of being killed as a Jew, she was going to be killed as a Pole. LL: Right. And before the execution of the Poles, they asked, who has false papers? Who is Jewish here? She said, I'm Jewish. So they let her go. She stayed in camp. [LAUGHS] And we saw those executions practically daily. There was a pit there, and they herded them. They had to undress. They were all Poles. And then sometimes Germans too, deserter, [INAUDIBLE]. So they told them, you know, to undress, you know, and this-- and there was a sergeant, an SS sergeant with a Tommy Gun who killed them off. And then--  INT: When you say you witnessed it, you mean at Plaszow? LL: Yes. It was during broad daylight. There was no-- it was no secret. You could see--  INT: And you were working in the quarries. LL: That's right.  INT: So were they-- were they killed at the quarry? LL: No. No. They had a separate section, but you could-- you could see it all right, because it was a big commotion, and everybody wanted to see it. It was like a-- like a Roman festival or something, you know. It's crazy. It was-- it was an event. So-- I mean, life was worth nothing. It was meaningless.  INT: Mm-hmm. LL: And especially if non-Jews were being killed for a change, you know. But--  INT: How did you know they were non-Jews? LL: Because we knew. We were told. Because when they were coming from Cracow on the track covered with a-- with the-- with the tarpaulin, you know, we knew that these are hostages, you see. And they had, on the side of this pit, they had mountains of broken furniture from the ghetto that they brought. So after they were executed, the dentist came, extracted all the gold teeth. That was an inmate. And then they covered them with those broken furniture, a big pile. And then the German came with a canister of gas and covered it up and lit a match. And they had a bonfire. And the whole camp stunk something terrible. But only two months before, this was the daily ritual. They were killing Jews there. But when I came, there was very-- they were not killing Jews. They had selections. Like, they had one selection in May, I believe. And a lot of people from Drohobycz went to Auschwitz to be-- so, older people. We had an optometrist, Dr. [NON-ENGLISH], very elegant gentleman. And also children. Little-- little children were sent to Auschwitz to be gassed too. 
INT: Were there any children in Plaszow? LL: Yes.  INT: What happened-- tell me about how they-- what happened to the children? LL: The children-- the children-- most of the children, unless they were children of the camp dignitaries-- this is the same type of a Jew that was on the Schindler's list.  INT: Yes. LL: With exceptions, you know. They were-- they were in hiding in camp. The Germans knew about it, but they--  INT: The children? The Jewish children were hiding in the camp? LL: Only of the very prominent, you know. It-- I-- Herr [NON-ENGLISH] didn't have any children, but some Blockalteste or some other clerk in the German office, secretary of this. So they-- they didn't want to upset those people, so they let them hide. But most, 99% of the children, went with this transport, with the old people together to Auschwitz.  INT: Did the people know? LL: Of course. Well, they-- [INTERPOSING VOICES]  INT: Did know what was going to happen to the children in Auschwitz? LL: No, no. We didn't know-- I didn't know what Auschwitz was there.  INT: Even in 1944, you had no idea? LL: No, I didn't. I didn't know. I found out only later on in Wieliczka. I met a-- an inmate, a former inmate from Auschwitz. He told me what is there.  INT: So you-- LL: Because in-- in-- in Plaszow, we didn't know. Maybe some people knew, but we didn't know. We knew about Majdanek, about Belzec, about Treblinka, we knew. 
INT: But Auschwitz-- LL: We didn't know. Auschwitz-- we knew there was a concentration camp in Auschwitz. But we didn't know that it was a [? real ?] [INAUDIBLE] [? that ?] factory. We didn't know.  INT: What were the living conditions like in Plaszow? LL: As compared to what? Compared to Drohobycz? Terrible. Compared to the further camp, terrific. [LAUGHS]  INT: Did you have enough to eat? LL: No, no. But there were-- the thing is, there were some people who had enough to eat.  INT: Now, explain that to me. LL: If you had friends-- you know, because these were the old inmates from Cracow. Yes. They were better off, because they had whatever remained of their-- from their home. You know, they didn't-- because each transport caused an attrition, not only of your health-- deterioration of your health-- but attrition of your resources, attrition of your contacts, of your friends. So you could be very savvy in your own parochial area. And if you didn't have something to eat, you went to your friend. Do you have something? A bite for me to eat? You know, something. But if you were alone in strange-- in foreign territory, you couldn't go to a stranger, or very seldom, because they had their own problems. And they were helping their friends that they grew up-- grew up together with. But still, I met some very lovely people in Plaszow from Cracow, you know. And I got some help-- [INTERPOSING VOICES] 
INT: How did they help you? LL: Bread. A piece of bread. A bite of bread was a big deal, I'll tell you that. You know.  INT: Now, what about-- LL: Or a bowl of soup.  INT: What about sleeping arrangements? LL: Sleeping arrangements, there were platforms-- Three tiers, and-- or [? 43, ?] I think. So I was sleeping next to my father. I was protecting my father. And my mother was in a separate barracks, but she was in better shape. She was physically in good shape. She was a very brave woman. She was unbelievable. Mm-hmm. And what little bread she had extra, she saved for us. She shared with us. So [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] then there were selections-- other selections. Ah. Well, during this transport of children and old people to-- to Plaszow, there was such a scream and yelling of--  INT: OK. I think-- I hate to stop right here, but we'll pause right here because it's coming to the end of the tape. LL: Yeah.  INT: Today is October 4th, 1996. I'm talking to Paul Lustig. I'm Rosalie Franks, tape six. When I had to stop a moment ago, Paul, you were telling me about the children, and the deportation of the children-- LL: Yeah.  INT: --from Plaszów. LL: Mm, yeah. Well, I told you about Dr. [? Acht, ?] and I-- I remember a little girl with her father, [? Karen ?] Kroll, K-R-O-- with two dots-- L-L. This little child was adored by the father. And the mother was very sick, and she stayed beside. She couldn't go with this transport. So-- and Mr. Kroll was very well-liked, and very important to the-- to the Germans. He was a German Jew. So one of his German connections arranged for Mrs. Kroll to go to the non-Jewish hospital. And he left her there. But of course-- I found out later on-- that the Gestapo came and they took care of her. 
INT: They murdered her? LL: But [? Karen-- ?] yeah-- but [? Karen ?] and her father went to-- hmm-- went to Plaszów. And they wanted to separate them, to take [? Karen ?] away, and he could stay. So he wouldn't hear of that. He went with her. And I'll never forget. They had a loudspeaker system, public address system. They were playing lullabies. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] Yeah. [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] And that was not the only time that I have seen parents going with their children-- even in Drohobycz, in this camp, in [NON-ENGLISH], there was a Mr. Wiesenthal, just like Simon Wiesenthal-- the same-- as matter-- they might be-- might have been related. He had a drugstore, very, very nice man. And during the selection they wanted to-- to take his little boy away, you know, and-- and his wife. So he says, he's going, too. He doesn't want to be without them. So this SS man-- his name was [? Minkus, ?] a murderer-- says, oh, yeah, that's-- that's a very noble gesture. You-- you go with them. That's-- that's all right. They were shot in the afternoon the same day. And also, even-- there was one [? ordinary-- ?] one-- one policeman. He-- he didn't last too long as a policemen. He was too soft. His name was [? Immich ?] [? Feingold. ?] And he was married to a very beautiful young woman. And they was--  INT: And he was a policeman where? LL: In-- in the [NON-ENGLISH], in Drohobycz. But they took away his wife, they segregated, because she was not essential for the world-- for the war effort. So he says he wants to go with his wife. So he was-- he joined his wife. They were standing. And so she was angry at him. She said, you cannot help me. She started pushing him away. And he's-- he changed his mind, you know, this-- so they stopped him, no. Once you made up your mind, you go with your wife. So-- [LAUGHS] 
INT: What happened to them? LL: Killed, oh, sure, in-- in the forest. They were killed in the forest in [? Brunnlitz. ?] Yeah. Now, we had a crew of thugs there. It was [? Hildebrand. ?] And there was [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] [? Sabota, ?] and [? Menzinger, ?] and [? Scheinbach. ?] They were really-- they enjoyed their work.  INT: Now, these were the thugs where? LL: In Drohobycz.  INT: In Drohobycz. Now, were they Jewish policemen? LL: No, they were the SS.  INT: They were the-- LL: But they--  INT: SS. LL: SS. SS men. But we had Jewish policemen. They were every bit as-- as bad. They didn't have any guns, but they were murderers. Yeah. There was one-- one man, [? Bross. ?] He specializes in-- he specialized in uncovering bunkers with little children. That was his specialty.  INT: In Drohobycz? LL: Yeah, yeah. Well, anyway, let's-- let's go back to Plaszów.  INT: How long were you in Plaszów? LL: Maybe two months at-- at the most. Because--  INT: And the kind of work you did in Plaszów? LL: In the-- in the quarry.  INT: And worked in the quarry. LL: Yeah, I worked in the quarry.  INT: OK. Did you do any other kind of work? LL: No, no. They didn't need me for any other kind of work. This-- this work in the quarry was not needed, either. This was only to exhaust you. So you croak in a hurry. 
INT: Now, where did you go after Plaszów? LL: After Plaszów, we went-- they drove us by trucks to Wieliczka. Where this is the Polish capital of salt mining there. They had salt mines. And they build an underground assembly plant, either for jets or rockets. I think for jet planes. Because it was [NON-ENGLISH]-- [INAUDIBLE] was it? Yeah. So first when we arrived, there were no barracks, so we had to work day and night to erect barracks. You know, they had-- they had modules, and we put them together. Everything was done but I think it was brought from somewhere else, and we are reassembling it, while they were retreating, you know. They were, you know.  INT: Now, what kind of war was this? LL: That was late spring and summer of 1944. But this was-- events were so quick. This was totally ridiculous work, because the Russians were all the time on-- on our heels.  INT: Did the Germans start acting differently toward this time of year, because the Russians were approaching? LL: I didn't notice. The first German that I noticed that-- that change was in Leitmeritz. That was in the-- that was in subsequent-- after Flossenbürg, yeah.  INT: But when you were in Wieliczka? LL: No, cruelty, murder, as-- as usual.  INT: Now, who was watching you there? LL: We had Romanian SS. We had a few Germans. And [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] of course, the Jewish police. To the Jewish police, was always in-- in every camp till then. But then, after Flossenbürg had changed, there were no Jewish policemen. There were some Jewish kapos, but no Jewish policemen. 
INT: Now, how long were you in Wieliczka? LL: In Wieliczka? A few weeks.  INT: And what did you do there? LL: I was breaking-- I was mining salt. It was-- It was--  INT: Was your father with you? LL: My father was with me, and my mother was with me, too. And she was-- she was pushing lorries underground in Wieliczka. And my father pretended that he was working. He couldn't. I protected him. He was next to me always. And so I was digging, and using the pick, you know, to break up the salt. But it-- it was a work-- work without any significance, because they knew that nothing will come out of it. And nothing came out of it. All of a sudden, after two or three weeks, they said, well, you are being-- going to be evacuated, but we had to take the barracks apart first. We just built them, so he took them apart, and we had to carry those-- those heavy walls and everything. And-- and the-- the root supports and the roofs. That took about 36 hours. I almost died. My father couldn't do it anymore. But there was one-- one Blackalteste, our Blackalteste, he was half-human. I told him, you know, that you take care of my father, you know. Don't-- you know, let him hide here, because he'll die. And someday, I might be able to do something for you, too. So that-- that persuaded him. He was very nice, [INAUDIBLE]. 
INT: Was he a Polish Blackalteste? LL: Jew.  INT: I know he was Jewish, but he's-- LL: Oh, there were no Polish Blackalteste in-- in Wieliczka, no. That was a Jewish camp.  INT: But they were Polish-speaking? LL: Yeah, we were all mostly Polish-speaking.  INT: I mean, Jews from Poland. LL: From Poland, yes, yes, right. But there were executions every day-- not hangings, but beatings, you know, like 25, 50 on behind-- you know, naked behind with whips. And the Jewish internal police were doing it.  INT: The Jewish internal police were doing the beatings? LL: Yeah. That was the order of the German. The Germans were watching and having a good time. There was one-- there was one Jewish policeman, he was beating one inmate. Not-- not very-- he-- he felt sorry for him. He didn't want to hurt him. And the German noticed it, so he gave the policeman a beating, and he showed him how to do it. And so he started beating him again, and he said in Yiddish, you know, [SPEAKING YIDDISH]. That means, forgive me, please.  INT: Do you know what happened to any of these-- to that man, or-- LL: Nah.  INT: No. No. LL: No, it was all so impersonal and dehumanized. It was-- [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] so.  INT: Now, where did you-- LL: Anyway, from there, [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] we were evacuated. And this is where, unfortunately, we parted company with my mother. My mother was in the Frauen camp. It means the women's camp. And they told us that she's going back to Plaszów-- but it was a lie. She was taken to Birkenau, and from Birkenau to Stutthof. And in Stutthof she was still alive in January of 1945. And they drowned her, along with thousands of other women, in the Baltic Sea, on a ship. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] And I have her death certificate here. Because they made a museum out of Stutthof, and they-- they have all the files. So I wrote for the death certificate, and they send me last year. They send me a death certificate. And my father and myself were herded on the train. And there was a tremendous-- tremendous hurry. They were beating us. And I got separated from my father. I was in one cattle car and my father was in another one. And the transport to Flossenbürg took seven days. It was only maybe 200 miles. But there were bombings on the way, you know. And it was in the middle of the summer. We were dying of heat, and no water. And then finally, when we arrived in Flossenbürg, we didn't know where we were going.
And my father was very weak. He survived the transport. That was a miracle. And I helped him. I was weak, too. But I-- all the people who couldn't walk, there were wagons like, you know, buggies. And I carried him to the-- to this buggy with my friend. And we pushed those buggies to the mountains, because this camp was on the top of the mountain. It was a-- the station was in the valley, and the camp was-- it was beautiful. I noticed the beauty of the scenery, and on the-- the contrast, how they treated us. You know, clean mountain air in the Alps. And-- And we finally, with some help and some prodding with whips, we arrived in the camp in Flossenbürg. And it was manned mainly by-- inside, the internal thing-- by German criminals. They had green triangles. We had the Stars of David, red and yellow. And also, there were some gypsies. And they had black triangles. And then homosexuals had pink triangles, et cetera, et cetera. But the-- the discipline was oppressive, incredible. They took us first to-- to-- to the showers, and they gave us about three minutes to take a shower and to clean ourselves up. They gave us some old uniforms. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] And then, they chased us to-- to the barracks. And everybody had a berth-- but no blankets. They gave us paper bags-- huge bags, like cement bags. But-- but four times as big, twice as wide, and twice and three times as long. And with a string-- you know, you could-- when you got into this bag, you could pull the string, you know, so you-- only your head stuck out. But it was warm, because the paper-- multiple layers of paper-- was insulation. And they explained to us, you know, why those bags. And he said, because you're not worth it. And if you die, then all we have to do is to pull the strings over your head, you know. You go to the crematorium. It's more practical this way. [LAUGHS] [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] Well, my father was really failing in a hurry. So 10 days later there was a new transport-- my father couldn't walk anymore-- a new selection. There was the SS doctor, so-called doctor. And he had a bottle of red ink and a brush. And he-- we paraded in front of him, just like meat. If you were first category, that mean prime meat, you got one. A little bit worse, you got two. And then a little bit worse, you got three. And four was three crossed this way. So my father, of course, got the three with the cross. So-- [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] then they chased us again to-- to the showers. And they gave us new uniforms, and striped pajamas-- white and blue. Then [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] my father was just sitting next to the wall. He couldn't walk properly. And he just waved to me, goodbye. And I couldn't look at it. And I just turned away. And my-- I couldn't-- I couldn't look at it anymore. And they drove us by truck, in trucks, to-- to Leitmeritz-- Litomerice in Czech. It was in Sudetenland. It used to be Czechoslovakia, and then, after Hitler came to power, he occupied Czechoslovakia and the Czech Republic and Sudetenland. It was about three miles from Theresienstadt-- from Theresien. And we knew that there were Jews in Theresien. We thought that it was sort of a-- like a resort, you know. Because international commissions are coming, and the Red Cross, and that. We envied those luck-- lucky Jews in Theresienstadt. We didn't know. We thought that it was-- yeah. So there, in-- in-- in Litomerice-- in German, Leitmeritz-- I did some real work. We had to carry telephone poles, you know. Of course, I always-- I was the tallest one. I got the heaviest end, the thick end [LAUGHS] I had to carry. Sometimes, I had to carry three, four sacks of cement at the same time to feed the-- the cement mixer, and this. 
INT: Did you know by then that your father had been-- had died? LL: No, he might have been alive. He-- it's amazing how long he lasted. I thought that he will die within a week.  INT: Because they-- [INTERPOSING VOICES] LL: And I have his death certificate. And it turned out that after my departure he lived another four or five weeks, because there were some people, some-- some of his cronies. And they-- they were helping us, too. Jews from Drohobycz, you know.  INT: How old was he when he died? LL: When he died, he was 44 years old. My mother was 41. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] He was born in 1900. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] And my mother was born in 1904.  INT: When you were in Leitmeritz, did you think your father was still alive? LL: No, I thought my father was-- was dead. He was still alive. I don't know how he survived. It was a miracle. Because he couldn't walk straight. He had-- he had a prolapse of the rectum. And the only way he could walk a little bit is if he supported his rectum with a-- with one hand. And it was bleeding all the time-- seeping with-- Well, anyway, Leitmeritz was something else. Heh. We had-- it was not exclusively Jewish. There were a lot of German criminal element. There were gypsies. They were-- most gypsies were criminals. I mean, sounds very romantic, gypsy music, and violins and everything. But they were-- they were backward, stupid, uneducated, and cruel. So it's a part of their-- their culture, I suppose. They're very musical-- I love gypsy music. But-- 
INT: You mean, the-- the-- the-- LL: But they were cruel. The people-- the inmates.  INT: The inmates, you said, were cruel. LL: Yes, very cruel. [INTERPOSING VOICES] LL: Many of them came via Auschwitz, and they lost their families in the gas chambers and everything. But still--  INT: How were they cruel? LL: They were informers. The strong ones were beating us. They were antisemitic. They had no principles, you know, because later on, when I ended up in-- in Dachau, in Augsburg, you know-- because Dachau was not one camp. It branches out into-- I was in several camp that were under Dachau jurisdiction. And they had many gypsies there. And they were sexually used by German homosexuals who were in high positions there. And some of them perhaps they were not gay, but there were no women, so they-- but they were well-fed, and they had to unload their energy somehow. They slept with-- with gypsies. And also they had young kids, too. And there were Jews later on I met in the-- in the-- in camps-- in Jewish camps. And they had their so-called [? pimples, ?] too. They were young kids, 8, 10 years old, and they were beautifully dressed. The Germans tolerated it. They had, in the tailor shop, they had tailor-made suits.  INT: The children? LL: The children, that's right, with little SS-style caps.  INT: And they were used by whom? LL: By the Blackalteste, by any people in power-- any inmates in power. Whether they were the-- the block leaders, or the camp accountant, or something. You know, the-- they were saving their lives, too, [INAUDIBLE] but it primarily-- it was not their-- their idea. 
INT: So Jewish inmates in power were having sexual relations with little children? LL: Yes, right, with little Jewish inmate survivors. Because their parents-- by some miracle, they survived, you know.  INT: Did the German officers ever have sexual relations with the children, too? LL: No, I don't think so. No. With women, perhaps, but I-- I-- I-- I-- I-- I am not 100% sure. Because theoretically, it was Rassenschande, you know. It was not permitted for Germans to copulate with-- with Jews. Because it was-- the race was-- the blood, you know, the-- according to the Nuremberg laws.  INT: Whatever happened to these children? LL: Survived.  INT: They did survive? LL: Yes, I met several of them in-- in Landsberg after the war, right after liberation, of course. Yeah. Yeah. I met also children who were castrated in Auschwitz-- boys. Yeah. Yeah. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] The children were cruel, too, because the person in power, a cruel person, it was their image, their father figure or whatever, their protector. So they tried to outdo them. At the gate-- at the gate in Flossenbürg, when we entered and when we left those-- to the transport to Leitmeritz, there was a little boy. He had a miniature SS uniform-- not in the same colors. It was in civilian fabric. But he had-- he had high boots, you know, and riding britches. It was like a caricature of a-- of an SS-- with a little SS hat, you know, this thing. [INAUDIBLE] 
INT: Was he a Jewish child? LL: Yeah, that one was a Jewish child, yeah. And also there was a brothel for the prominent inmates. Prominent means murderers who were Blackalteste. And they're-- you know, that they were getting the salary. There was little coupons they were getting. They could buy some inferior tobacco, or-- or old rotten anchovies, or something. Or-- and also a woman if they-- you know.  INT: And where was this? LL: In Flossenbürg. Yeah.  INT: Now, who were the women? LL: I don't know. No idea. I don't think they were Jewish, because I think the SS sneaked in there sometimes too now. I saw them sitting on the-- on-- on the side, looking when we were marching. They didn't look Jewish. But then, I don't know. It's unimportant. It's just I'm trying to describe you what--  INT: What it was like. LL: What-- what-- what it looked like.  INT: Did people ever pray in Flossenbürg? LL: Whether they prayed in Flossenbürg, or anywhere?  INT: Or Plaszów-- I mean, did you ever see people-- LL: Yes, not-- not in Flossenbürg, anymore, no. No. In-- in Plaszów, they still prayed, yes. Yes. Yeah.  INT: Did they pray alone? Did they pray together? LL: Oh, not-- not group-- no, no, no, that was dangerous. No, no. They-- they were in corners, you know, and quietly. They didn't have a tallis or anything like that, no. They might have had, because people in transports were coming, you know, with household goods and everything. And some of-- some of them-- it was all confiscated, anyway. They had never seen it. But Jews worked in sorting out those rags, you know. In Auschwitz, there was this so-called Kanada-- Kanada, they called, you know. So of course, they had-- 
INT: But you never-- you never went to Auschwitz. Yeah. LL: No, thank god, no. No.  INT: You know, I-- I'm just wondering, was there ever any cultural life? Did people ever try to sustain themselves by singing? LL: Yes, yes, by singing, yes. I tell you that in those miserable times, the worst times, I had some good times, too. I was hungry. if you excluded this hunger. Because it all depended who you were with. I always looked for a congenial group, for somebody-- not for people who talk all the time about food. I would like to eat-- just-- and-- and it worked. Because I used to whistle very, very nicely. As a matter of fact, once I was on the radio during the Soviet occupation. They sent me from the school, you know. There was a-- like an Olympiad of art, you know. It was bullshit-- excuse me. And-- [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] and I used to sing, too. So I'll never forget. It was on December 8th, my birthday, 1944. I was sitting with-- with my cronies. It was towards the end of the day. We didn't work much anymore, because there was nothing to do.  INT: Where were you? LL: I was in Kaufering. That was a subsidiary of Dachau.  INT: OK, we're going to have to stop there, Paul, because we're-- LL: But we didn't get to Kaufering yet. I-- there's a lot in between.  INT: We're going to hear-- I want very much to a hear the story. We'll just pause here. LL: OK, fine. That'll give me a chance-- 
INT: October 4, 1996. I'm talking to Paul Lustig. My name is Rosalie Franks, tape seven. Paul, when we paused at the last tape, you were talking about singing and about whistling. But perhaps we should sort of-- first you were in Flossenburg, and then you went to Leitmeritz. And maybe you can tell me a little more about Leitmeritz. And then I'd love to hear the story about the singing. LL: Right, right. Leitmeritz was located in Sudetenland. The scenery around was really beautiful, and the camp itself was an old cavalry [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] compound. It used to be-- the Czech cavalry used to be there. And as I mentioned before, Theresienstadt was a few miles away, about 3, 4 miles away. It was located-- at the location where we worked, we-- we marched every day. We had those wooden shoes. They were very uncomfortable. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] And the inmates were a mixed bag. There were-- there were a group of Jews who came-- we came together via Flossenburg from-- [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] from Wieliczka. And the rest were non-Jews that were Yugoslavs, and Italians, et cetera-- political criminal element, all kinds of people. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] What is interesting, there was also a large Polish contingent. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] The-- some of those Poles were old prisoners that were arrested at different localities. They escaped execution because of resistance. They were in the resistance. But about the same time, when I was in Leitmeritz, there was an outbreak. There was the Warsaw Uprising. Not the Warsaw ghetto uprising, but the Polish uprising. 
INT: Which took place in 1944. LL: That's right. It was a Polish home army-- Polish home army was a Nazi organization, except they were fighting other Nazis. But they were-- they deserved one another, so to say. And in Warsaw, the home army-- they deny, of course, now, and everything-- they were delivering-- they couldn't shoot Jews themselves. They were delivering Jews to the Gestapo for a premium. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] So the Russians did not bail them out in Warsaw. They were left to their own devices to fight the Germans. They were surrounded by the Germans, and they surrendered. They had a deal that they're not going to be executed if they surrender. And the Germans stuck to the bargain. And they brought some of them, a few hundred, to Leitmeritz. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] We were in our barracks, and they came late in the afternoon from the railroad station, and they were talking Polish. And they found out that there are some Jews. Yeah. So the first thing, we had-- our barracks were more comfortable than theirs. Because we were the first-- it wasn't planned that way. So they came with wood boards and sticks and this, and they wanted to stage a pogrom [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] to displace us there. And the Germans had a very good time. They were-- they had a wonderful time. They were looking at Polish Jews and Polish Pollacks fighting one another. So anyway, at that time we were not scared of them anymore, you know. And they got a good beating, and they went to their stables. But the situation was extreme hostility-- always throughout the concentration camp, there was hostility between the Pollacks and the Jews. They were vicious-- they were much worse than Germans. A Polish kapo was much more cruel than a German kapo. 
INT: Now what about relations between the Jews, and you said there were Italians there, and Yugoslavs? LL: Civilized, I would say. I can't say cordial, because under those terrible conditions, you know, how can you be that cordial? It was-- we were dehumanized, [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] most of us. But what was interesting, I was working on the construction site, and in the middle of the day they were giving us the so-called lunch. We got our piece of bread, and sometimes a piece of margarine, and-- and some ersatz coffee. And there was a young German SS man leaning, and he was having his lunch, you know. I kept a very respectful distance from him. So he called me, and he speaks Polish to me. I said, what are you, Pollack? He says, no, I'm a Volksdeutche. That means an ethnic German, but I lived in Silesia. I speak Polish. So he gave me a piece of sausage, and he gave me 2 marks. That was dangerous. Money, real [LAUGHS] German currency, you know. And he says when he'll come tomorrow, or the next day, you know, he'll bring me a bottle of beer and some-- some more food. So I said, how come you're doing this? Said, I didn't want to go to the front, so I volunteered for it, because I don't want to be shot. I want to survive. He said, but I hate Hitler. I hate the Nazis. Started looking-- shut up, you stupid. [LAUGHS] He said, I don't [INAUDIBLE]. I'm fed up, you know. Of course, he was fed up because the Russians were close, too, you know. [LAUGHS] You know. It was a very grim future, especially Sudetenland, what the Russians and the Czech did there, too, and the Germans was really not so nice. But they-- they earned it. 
INT: Did he continue to give you food? LL: Then he was transferred. Yeah, for three days, every day-- that's right. That kept me alive, I really-- you know, I had a crony-- Willie Schreiniger. He was from Boryslav. That's a neighboring town.  INT: Oh, so you remember his name? LL: Sure.  INT: Spell his name for me. LL: Wilhelm, that was like Willie--  INT: Yes. LL: --Kaiser Willie.  INT: Yes. LL: Schreininger-- S-C-H-R-E-I-N-I-N-G-E-R.  INT: Do you know where he was transferred to? LL: He was transferred to Bergen-Belsen. He died there.  INT: He did in Bergen-Belsen? LL: Yeah, because half of us were sent from from-- from--  INT: Leitmeritz? LL: From Leitmeritz, were sent to Dachau, and the other half to Bergen-Belsen. At the time of the transport, I didn't know where I was going, and I didn't know where he was going. But the-- all the people who went to Dachau were from the top of the alphabet-- A, B, C through, I think L, maybe. And this-- the bottom part went to Bergen-Belsen. And Bergen-Belsen was even worse than Dachau. So--  INT: So when were you transferred? LL: But we were very, very close, that we became friends in Plaszow already, and our fathers became friends, and his father was also sick. He-- he was left behind in Flossenburg.  INT: Whose father? LL: Schreininger-- Willie Schreininger-- this is my friend that I-- that I told you just a second. 
INT: No, you told me about Willie Schreininger, but I thought he was an officer, a German-- LL: No, no, no, no, no, Willie Schreininger was a Jew. No, I was sharing what the German SS man gave me. We worked, because I gave this share--  INT: Oh, I see, I-- I missed that. LL: I split it with--  INT: I see. LL: I split it with my friend--  INT: I see. So-- so the German-- LL: --with Wilhelm. Because he was splitting with me, too.  INT: I see. OK. LL: We called this organizing--  INT: Yes. LL: --food.  INT: Yes. So-- LL: So sometimes he organized something, and he-- he-- he smuggled some money in-- in his behind. In the-- yeah, so-- you know.  INT: OK. I understand. So the German-- the German officer-- LL: No, he gave it to me.  INT: Gave it to you, and you shared it with your friend. LL: That's right. That's right.  INT: I understand now. I understand. LL: Yeah.  INT: But did you know the name of the German officer? That was my-- LL: No, no.  INT: No, no, no. LL: No, I was-- I couldn't believe it, that it was for real, you know-- I was-- you know, you couldn't expect anything from them. But the interesting thing is-- and there was one kapo, a Pollack there, [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] he-- he was also the-- the hangman for the camp, too. He was the most cruel, awful creature you can imagine. When Leitmeritz was liberated in the spring of 1945, the Poles strung him up. They killed him. How did I find out about it? Because later on, in Erlangen, where I was studying at the medical school, dental school, I met two Polish students, became very friendly with them. They were in the Warsaw Uprising. They were-- [LAUGHS] they were-- they were the ones that participated in beating the Jews when they came in, in Leitmeritz, you know. Of course, I said, where were you after the Warsaw Uprising? Said, we went-- we went in Leitmeritz. We went to Leitmeritz. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] We were incarcerated there. [INAUDIBLE] remember when you wanted to stage the pogrom, you know, to kill the Jews? Well, they say, oh, no, that was a misunderstanding. That was a-- are you kidding? You know, this-- anyway, I became very friendly with one of them, called [NON-ENGLISH]. He lives in California, around San Francisco. He's a dentist, too. And he married an ex-girlfriend of mine. I introduced him. She was Jewish. She's Jewish, you know. [LAUGHS] 
INT: So the Pole was beating people in Leitmeritz-- LL: That's right, now he's--  INT: He married a Jew? LL: That's right. He has two gorgeous girls, daughters, you know. And the other one, [? Kupski-- ?] his name is [? Kupski, ?] he married an ethnic German woman in Erlangen, a very beautiful woman. But totally vacuous. He was quite bright. Was-- he made a good doctor. And anyway, she was not faithful to him, so that-- that fell apart. But it's a small world. It's just-- [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] so we are finished with Leitmeritz, now.  INT: We've finished with Leitmeritz, and you were going to tell me the story about singing. LL: Yeah.  INT: Now, where did that happen? I asked you-- LL: The singing--  INT: --if there was any singing and cultural life in the camp. LL: Yes, after Dachau.  INT: OK, well, then let's-- LL: But there was also-- no, excuse me, there was a lot of cultural life in Drohobycz in the worst times. We had-- we had shows, in-- in Hyrawka camp-- Hyrawka we staged like a revue at Hanukkah, Christmas time, you know. We were singing. And Heimlich's right-- right-hand man, who was his collaborator, a German, whose name I forgot to mention. His name was Albers-- was Albers. He was another hero. I mean, they worked-- they organized everything together. They-- they was just--  INT: Now, where was this? LL: That was in Drohobycz still. Yeah. Because he was a part of the-- the club that was saving Jewish girls, you know, and tried at all costs to make life safer and easier for us. 
INT: Now, would you spell his name, please? LL: Albers-- A-L-B-E-R-S.  INT: Was he Jewish? No. LL: Oh, no, as Nordic as they come. The most handsome creature. [LAUGHS]  INT: Was he an SS? LL: No, he was a civilian. A-- but you see, certain civilians were administrators, accountants, and this. They were very important for the war effort, that they were-- they were-- they were not forced. They were [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] not forced to serve.  INT: They were volunteers? Well, they were-- LL: No, no, no, they were not volunteers. They were drafted as civilians to work in--  INT: I see-- LL: --in the-- for the war effort.  INT: They were Germans drafted-- LL: They were Germans, sure--  INT: --drafted to serve in-- LL: Many of them were Nazis, and members of the party. But he was not.  INT: So they had a cultural life in-- LL: In Hyrawka, yes. And everywhere, we had-- we had-- for example, in the camp [NON-ENGLISH], [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] we had a husband and a wife [? Arthur-- ?] no, not [? Arthur-- ?] but his last name-- that was his brother, was [? Arthur-- ?] Mr. Bartischan-- B-A-R-T-I-S-C-H-A-N. He was with his wife, was our neighbor in this camp. And we had one day off, and the day off in the afternoon, he played the accordion. But he was a real virtuoso accordion player. Lovely, lovely man.  INT: So they didn't stop the cultural life in Hyrawka. LL: They-- I mean, in Hyrawka-- 
INT: Did they-- LL: --it was almost clandestine.  INT: Yeah. LL: The Gestapo didn't know-- didn't know. But in this camp, it was in the open. Also in Plaszow, they had a lot of musicians, and they were playing in the evening. They were the privileged class. I remember there was a guy by the name Halperin in Plaszow, and I met him later on in Italy, again, in Santa Maria di Bagni. He was heading towards Israel. And he-- he salvaged his violin through the war.  INT: And who did he play for? LL: He played for the blockalteste, for the Jewish [NON-ENGLISH], for the important--  INT: Did he ever play for the Germans? LL: If they called him, I am sure, yes. They-- they called Jewish musicians very often for their private parties and their orgies. Oh, yes.  INT: Now, what about you and your singing? Remember, I asked you if you ever-- LL: No, that was--  INT: Oh, that was in Dachau. LL: That was-- that was in Dachau.  INT: Did you ever do it anywhere else? LL: Not in Dachau, it was in-- it was in Kaufering, which was after Dachau. It was a part of Dachau. It was a subsidiary--  INT: I see. LL: --of-- of Dachau. Dachau was the so-called mother camp, and they had the umpteen-- maybe 15, 20 satellite camps in the radius of 75 miles, maybe. So I arrived from Leitmeritz to Dachau. From Dachau, I went to Augsburg, which was also a satellite of-- camp of Dachau. My-- I was losing my-- my strength there. It was terrible conditions, you know, there. 
INT: Now what time of year was that? LL: That was already the fall, in the winter. It was cold, bitter cold.  INT: Of what year? LL: Of 1944.  INT: Yes. LL: It was-- that was November. I-- I estimate it was like-- yeah, I'm sure it was November of 1944.  INT: Now, how did you get from Leitmeritz to Dachau? LL: By train.  INT: Was it cattle car? LL: Cattle car, that's right, yeah. And from Dachau to Augsburg by truck. And I didn't last too long, in-- in-- [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] in Augsburg, because I suffered from furunculosis. I had all kinds of lesions. I was so emaciated and so thin, that I had infections. I had here, like open sores, and here. So I reported to the dispensary, because I-- I didn't give a damn any more. And there was no doctor, but there was a German-- one of the criminal inmates. He was-- he was the nurse. He dug out the-- he-- I had here the-- the furuncle. And he dug in a-- a [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] the pin setter, you know? Right into it, and he tore out the core. The-- without sterilization, anything. I just-- I was in agony [? terrible. ?] I screamed. And so then we go on the side, you know, so-- and the SS doctor came, and he got a whole bunch of beauties like me. And they sent me to Kaufering, which was the so-called hospital camp. But this was actually a death camp. You died slowly there. So this is the camp. But for me, it was a tremendous relief, because I would just as soon die not working than working. And [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] this was a Jewish camp manned by Jewish doctors, who were the kapos. Some of the kapos were non-medical doctors. But those doctors were not-- no bargain, though, they were-- some of them were criminal. They were awful people. With exceptions. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] There was-- 
INT: What kind of-- LL: They were mostly-- some of them opposed Jews. They spend-- they went through Auschwitz, and they were so hardened so that it was-- just no heart. And some of them were Hungarian doctors from Budapest. They came with a Hungarian contingent a few months before, via Auschwitz, everything. And they-- they resented the-- the Polish Jews, because when they arrived, the segregation in-- in Auschwitz, most of the personnel were Polish Jews. The Kanada was all--  INT: Yes. LL: Yeah. And they were pushing them around, and shoving, and beating, too, you know, so they blamed all the Jews out of frustration. And also, later on, when the Greek Jews came to Kaufering, was the same thing, because the Polish Jews were the first ones-- the first prisoners in the-- in Auschwitz. So it was, they had those [INAUDIBLE] battles, you know, rivalries. But I was--  INT: Did you get any treatment from any of those Jewish doctors when you were in Kaufering? LL: No, they had nothing. They didn't even have any aspirin. They had stethoscopes they made out of-- out of cardboard. They made like pipes, you know.  INT: Yes. Yes. LL: They were listening, you know. The only thing they had the power, to give you time off, you know, to say that you cannot go in the rain to work, or something. But what happened, I was-- [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] in my barrack, there were-- there was one Polish doctor, [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] Thaddeus Stabholz. He was Jewish from Warsaw. And I had a congenial group of young people to-- and we were singing, and I was whistling. And so on December 8, one of my cronies knew it was my birthday. Can you imagine they-- they cut a little tiny slice of bread, each one put together, and they gave me as a birthday present. You know, so-- [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] these are the-- [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] but I had-- but I had to perform. I had to whistle for them. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] But they were-- at that time, I was really happy. I mean, everything's relative, you know? This was-- even on the-- you can find happiness even under the worst circumstances. Not when you look for it, but it happens. 
INT: Why were you happy? LL: Not-- I don't know whether that's the right word, but it's-- you felt comfortable, because you were surrounding-- surrounded by-- by friendly souls, you know. You knew that they really like you, you know. They were not hostile. When you stumbled, they didn't let you fall, you know? [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] It was-- it was mutual cooperation. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] And then there was an outbreak of typhus in-- in Kaufering. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] So they were looking for volunteers to work as nurses in the typhus blocks. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] But the prerequisite was that you had typhus before, that you recovered, so you developed immunity. Which was garbage, you know. I knew that I'm going to get it anyway. So since it's for sure that I'm going to get it, I might just as well lie and say that I had it already, and work in this block there. Because there was food left over behind, you know, because people couldn't eat. They were dying, and they left their portions. So if you were there, you could-- you could put together some extra calories. And another possibility was always if you were in so-called [? todeskommando-- ?] that means the death command, means you-- you were pulling the carts from-- with dead people from the block to the mortuary-- there was separate barrack mortuary-- and from there to the forest, where was a cemetery, concentration camp cemetery, which-- which I visited a few years ago with a German friend. That's a different story, again. So I went there, and I took sick three, four weeks later. I don't know what the incubation time for typhoid is, but obviously I was already probably infected when I went there. And naturally, there was a lot of stale bread left over, you know, in this, so I gained a little weight, and then I took sick. And I was one of the few that survived in this barrack of all the people. Everybody else died. [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] So after I recuperated, it was like end of January, February of 19-- 1945. [PAUSES FOR 5 SECONDS] They told us that we have to gather at the Appellplatz, which was the-- the place, the parade place, or whatever you want to call it, [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] you know, for physical examination. So [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] the same-- the same physician that was the expert in Plaszow, the same SS man, SS doctor, was examining us. His name was Blancke-- Dr. Blancke-- B-L-A-N-C-K-E. And [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] I had-- I had my uniform, my striped pajama on. And my shoes, wooden shoes. And he looked, here, go-- go here and here. I was selected as healthy to go to another camp. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] So [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] they marched us to-- to camp number seven. Kaufering was camp number four, they called it-- lager [NON-ENGLISH], that was lager [NON-ENGLISH], camp seven. That was in the village of Urlach-- U-R-L-- L-A-C-H. Was not far from Kaufering, was maybe 5, 6 miles. They marched us there. I was exhausted. I didn't have the energy. Finally, I arrived there. And [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] the whole camp, all the police around, they were Ukrainians. But they were different Ukrainians. They were scared. They knew they lost the war, and this. They said that they couldn't help it, and this. They were every single one-- they-- they spoke to us, can you imagine? A guard in concentration camp, a Gestapo guard, talking to you, and being nice? [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] They saw the war will be over pretty soon, you know, and this. You know, just hold on, you know. They said-- I say, you hold on, too, that's right. We'll hold on together. [LAUGHS] But you were getting the same ration in Lager VII as you were getting in camp four. And it was next to nothing. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] So I found out that Blancke is coming back to select people who cannot work in camp seven, to send them to the-- to camp four, to the hospital camp. 
INT: We're going to stop here, Paul, because we're coming to the end of the tape.  INT: October 4th, 1996. I'm talking to Paul Lustig, I'm Rosalie Franks, tape eight. When we paused a moment ago, Paul, you were telling me that Dr. Blancke was coming around to indicate that sick workers could go back to Lager IV. LL: Right.  INT: OK, tell me what happened. LL: Well, I looked at the people who were reporting sick. And I notice that they were all naked, and they had a blanket over their head. And they were-- some of them were barefoot or something. They-- they wanted to present themselves as sick, so they look like nebbishes, right? So I follow suit. I got rid of my striped pajama and put-- put the blanket over my head. And I was naked and for a while I was in the lineup for Blancke. There was [? 100 ?] of us. Of course he didn't remember me, or he didn't know; he didn't give a damn. So he sent me back to-- to Kaufering, to Camp IV. And I went back to my old cronies there. And they were happy to see me. [LAUGHS] Then, a few days later, [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] we saw the first jet planes, German jet planes flying over the camp. Because they had-- they developed those jets. We didn't know what it was. And we heard artillery and-- distant artillery. It was getting closer and this. And we knew that the war is almost over, because we used to go [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] with our honey wagons. You know what a honey wagon was? We were-- because they had-- they had like wells for toilets and then there was no sewers. So we had to clean out those toilets, you know, the fecal material, into-- into barrels. They were mounted on-- on wheels. And then we-- we pulled it to fields-- to the field. And then we took out the-- the cork or whatever was plugged in this barrel. And we fertilized the fields with human manure, with the human waste material. But it was a very desirable job, because in the fields you could find some old potatoes somewhere leftover, and also leaflets that were dropped by the Allied planes. So we were pretty much up to date. We knew what was happening. It was a risky business, but we were well-informed. You know, we got newspapers, two-- two days old, three days old, sometimes current. So we knew what was happening. And then we get the news there is an evacuation. We are going to be evacuated. Where? There was nowhere to go. [LAUGHS] But they opened the rear fence, not the front, and the rear fence. They started chasing us, if people were reluctant to get out of the barracks, which were half under-- underground and half above ground. They threw hand grenades inside, you know. So we were in a hurry to get out. That was very persuasive. And they marched us to the railroad track, which was in the back of the camp. And from there they took us to Camp Number One. 
INT: Now who is 'they'? LL: The Gestapo. The SS.  INT: The SS. LL: Yeah, the SS people. And Camp One was the worst of the nine camps or whatever, or 11. Yeah, there were 11 camps. But besides those 11 camps, there were other camps like that belonged to Dachau, like Augsburg that I told you before. But these camps went by the number. And this was Lager Eins was the most infamous because there was-- at work-- there was the worst cruelty there and murder. They were building underground plans for V-2 and for jet planes and this. And they had a lot of civilian [PAUSES FOR 5 SECONDS] Meisters. How do you say it? Civilian foremen. They were armed. They had pistols. And they were shooting people right and left. Just like the-- like the Gestapo, they didn't like if you made a mistake drilling a hole somewhere in the wrong place. Just gone. But--  INT: And are these German foremen? LL: Yes, yes. But anyway, [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] the work stopped. They couldn't work anymore. And there was-- you could see they were demoralized, and they were going home; they were disappearing. But the SS was still controlling us. And they loaded us in-- into the-- into this train. Where are we going? They say we are taking you back to Dachau. But they couldn't go to Dachau because the Americans already cut the track-- tracks there. That was April 28th-- April 27th, I think. And our train got stuck a few miles away from-- from Camp One in the village-- Schwabhausen is the name of this village. S-C-H-W-A-B-H-A-U-S-E-N. And [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] the-- the-- the things-- the doors, the gates were closed on those lorries, those cattle cars. And planes were coming, bombing. So we knew these are American-- American planes. And we got hit too. So we said, now if the Germans won't kill us, the Americans [LAUGHS] will kill us. You know, it was-- And so we forced the-- the door open and we could see disarray. People were-- there were forests on both sides, and it started raining. And there were two trains. The reason they bombed this train I was in because in the next track, parallel track, was-- was a German military train with anti-aircraft. So they abandoned it completely. And I couldn't walk too much, because I was totally emaciated. I weighed at that time 110 pounds. But I had my Hungarian koronis that I picked up. They didn't speak any German, so they-- they started plundering the military. [LAUGHS] And they brought me a loaf of bread and a can of [LAUGHS] corned beef or something. And they took care of me. They were very nice. We went to the-- 
INT: The Hungarian Jews. LL: Yeah, yeah. And we went into the forest. I didn't-- I didn't have the-- the pajama, the striped-- so that I-- I just had two blankets. I went to the forest. It was wet. I was sure I was going to die there. But then we-- they helped me, you know. And there was a clearance at the end of the forest. There was a farmhouse with-- with lights, dim lights. And we get closer. And it was impossible. The rain was fierce, and it was cold. Even it was in April, it was very cold. So there was a bell on the chain. I said, look guys, I'm-- let's see what we can do there. It's the end of the war, you know that's-- and a woman opens the window and says, who's there? So I told him-- told her that we are prisoners who are Jews. We are not violent. You don't have to be worried. You help us. The war is over. So she said, let me talk to my mother, [LAUGHS] you know. So the mother said, let them in. She let us in. It was nice and toasty. And she gave us something to eat. And there was a big stable, you know. They-- she had hay there and all kinds of-- and she had a Yugoslav worker. He was also a prisoner, but, you know, they treated them much less harshly. And he prepared for us like a nest there in the hay with blankets and everything. It was nice and warm. And so we waited for the Americans to come. And all of a sudden there's a terrific artillery fire and everything. And we look. I push the shingles, the roof tile, and I see there is a tank on the horizon somewhere. And on the balcony of the farm, there is an anti-Panzer crew there, with a little cannon [LAUGHS] shooting at the Americans there. I thought, Jesus, that's all we need, you know. [LAUGHS] And they fired one shot at this tank there. And the tank didn't fool around. He fired back. And the whole balcony, together with the Germans, with the artillery piece, went down [LAUGHS] crashing. And [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] then the Gestapo still came. They were looking with a dog, you know, smelling around. But the Yugoslav, he poured kerosene around the whole stable. You know, so they obviously-- they couldn't-- they couldn't smell too well, you know. Next day we started walking towards Landsberg. We met the first Americans. In the first tank was an American Jew. I spoke Yiddish. 
INT: The first tank had an American Jew on it and he-- LL: That's right, from Brooklyn. The red-headed Jew. [LAUGHS]  INT: Who spoke Yiddish. LL: Yeah. I didn't speak any--  INT: I keep on [? sitting ?] here. Did you have any clothes? By-- when did you get your clothes? LL: When I got the clothes? I got the clothes from the farmer's woman. She got me her father's-- her late father's pants and [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] a jacket and his wedding overcoat, I think, it was. I looked very dapper in it. [LAUGHS]  INT: What was the first-- LL: But the Americans, but-- but--  INT: Tell me about that. LL: They-- they-- they called for an ambulance, and they took us to Landsberg. And we got first aid there, and then they drove us to-- to the camp, to the DP camp, which was in the Panzer Kaserne. That means it was-- the tanks were stationed there. And what happened later, there's still a lot of stories to tell. I'm giving you the highlights now, because I want to--  INT: Well when you went to Landsberg, did you go into a hospital? LL: I went to the hospital first, but I didn't stay too long. There I stayed one day. Because those-- those scenes there in this hospital were terrible. There were people-- they were dying, you know, from starvation. They couldn't digest anymore. And after-- after I got through with this corned beef and this loaf of bread, I got terribly sick. I couldn't digest it. This food almost killed me. But I couldn't stop eating, I just couldn't control myself. I got tremendous pains. I suffered the whole night, you know. Finally I managed to-- to void it. And it was awful. 
INT: So where did you go after Landsberg? Where did you go after the hospital? LL: After-- the hospital was in Landsberg. Back-- it was in the camp.  INT: Oh, in the camp. LL: It was a military-- it's a-- it was a former German military hospital on what-- in the camp.  INT: Oh, I see, OK. LL: And there were some barracks and buildings. And we-- we lived there. And then things started getting interesting, because the American administrator of the camp, in his wisdom, decided, because I was born in Drohobycz, the former Soviet Union, that I should go back there. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] So he assigned me to the Soviet barrack with the former Soviet prisoners-- PWs, but not only PWs. They were also defectors from the Soviet army. They were Nazis [LAUGHS] from General Vlasov, you know. So I knew if they catch me together with those Vlasoves together that they're going to be executed for sure, and I'll go with them, because they're not interested, you know, to find out those minutia. They get hold of them. So one day-- one day the-- a Soviet, young Soviet, handsome colonel comes-- it was in the American zone. And we have a big meeting. The [INAUDIBLE] says, ah, children, how are you? I have the honor, you know, to take you to your motherland, you know. And your motherland waits for you [LAUGHS] to award-- reward you for everything. So I figure, thanks a bundle. I don't want to go to my motherland. I want to go way out, out. And there was a transport going the same day to Italy at the same time. And I knew one of the Italians, the head of the transport, you know, from-- from the camps before, you know. Franco [? Lancilotti. ?] And I tell him, Franco, I go with you. I spoke French-- German with him. So I says, I don't care, you come with me and nobody will know. Just don't talk. Because you'll start talking, they'll catch you, and I'll be in trouble. I say, no, no. So one truck was going to-- towards Innsbruck. That was the Italian transport. And the other truck was going towards Hungary, you know. That was the Soviet one. So I went to Innsbruck with the Italians. And we arrived in Bologna. From Bologna we went to Rome. We were in Cinecitta. There was a DP camp in the Cinecitta. And from there we went to Bari. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] In Bari they sent us to Santa Maria di Bagni. That was a very beautiful village on the sea coast, the inside of the heel of the Italian-- of the boot.
And [PAUSES FOR 5 SECONDS] what happened? [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] There was nothing to do. There was not enough to eat. I met a woman, Polish, Jewish woman-- and her boyfriend who was-- who was from a city not far from-- from my city-- [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] that she had a sister in the United States, in New York. And I needed help. I needed some clothing. I needed food and a little money. And before-- before we parted company with my parents, my father always asked me to remember this address of our relative in Buffalo-- Dr. Charles B [? Handel ?] 3-- 131 Linwood Avenue, Buffalo, New York. I remembered this address by heart through all the camps, because this was the beacon that I was supposed to follow. So she wrote to her sister in New York that she should contact Dr. [? Handel, ?] that I need help, you know. I'm his relative. And this is the address where she got it from. And she called them. And her husband is a-- was a doctor, too. His name was Adolf Lichtgarn, L-I-C-H-T-G-A-R-N. That was my friend's brother-in-law in New York. And he was from Boryslav. He was from the town next to Drohobycz. And he contacted Dr. [? Handel. ?] No dice, he wouldn't help. He says, I have my own problems, and that's, you know. So he gave-- Dr. Lichtgarn gave my name to the-- to a Jewish organization in New York, and they applied pressure, you know, that he should send me an affidavit, and some money, some food, clothing. You know, this is his duty. So one day I was sitting on the beach of Santa Maria di Bagni. A package arrives from America for me. I was so happy. There was a can of hominy grits, a can of peanut butter, and a moth-eaten suit fit for a midget, you know, that's it. [LAUGHS] Well, I had another relative, my father's first cousin, a lawyer in Tel Aviv. I'm friendly with his sons. One is a lawyer, one is a professor at the Chaim Weizmann Institute, Dr. Lustig on-- [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] what's the name of the street in Tel Aviv? [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] It will come back. And I met a journalist of-- a Jewish Palestinian-- at that time, Palestine was Israeli-- newspaper, and she knew him-- Allenby Street. Tel Aviv, Allenby Street, it was his office. And [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] she called-- she contacted Dr. Lustig, the lawyer, you know, that Paul Lustig, he's your first cousin's son. He survived the war. And he wants you to help him, because he wants to go to Palestine too. That's what they told us, you know, that we'll go, and-- So under pressure, he wrote me a letter that he doesn't have the faintest idea who I am. He-- I went with my father to say goodbye to him when he was leaving Drohobycz in 1938. [LAUGHS] So anyway, total rejection. And I made up my mind. I'm not going to Palestine. I'm not going to fight any more for any country for nothing. I want to go back to school and to make something out of myself by hook or by crook. That's all. I don't want to be dependent on anybody. And that's what I did. 
INT: Where did you go to school? LL: I was in Italy till [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] March of 1946. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] And [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] my mother's sister survived the war. I brought her to America. She's with her husband in Brookline, Massachusetts, but we're not on the best of terms. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] And I got a message from her that she survived in Lwów, and that she's going to Palestine. Fine. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] But I decided I was not going to Palestine. I-- [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] I went with a couple of other Jewish men. One was a hunchback, you know, but he was a tailor, and he was making some money. He bought the tickets for us. We went back to the Austrian border, north by train, not as refugees but as travelers. [LAUGHS] And we had the address of a-- of a smuggler there to walk us across the border to Austria, because I wanted to go back to Germany, because at that time I knew already that they were giving scholarships to-- to ex-inmates. So we ended up in the French zone of Austria. We went through the Alps. That was really-- it's a miracle we survived. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] And [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] we slept in a farmhouse, high in the Alps, in-- in Carinthia. And the tailor, he was running out of money too. So for our keep, he was making pants for-- for the farmer, you see. And I was sleeping in a sort of-- it was like a coffin but it actually a bench with a lid. And there was straw-- [BACKGROUND NOISE] nothing happened. [PAUSES FOR 7 SECONDS] --with a-- with an opening there, heart-shaped opening. It was just where my mouth was, [LAUGHS] and so I could breathe. And I slept there maybe a day and a half. And the farmer's wife was giving us dumplings, you know. And so it was nice. From there we hitchhiked to the next DP camp, which was in Villach. That was on the Yugoslav border in the French zone in that time. And [PAUSES FOR 5 SECONDS] the head of the camp was a refugee also. He was from a town not too distant from where I was born. And I-- I spoke to him. He asked me where I was from, I told him from Drohobycz. He says, so what's your name? I told him, Lustig. So he asked me whether I'm related to [NON-ENGLISH] Lustig. And [NON-ENGLISH] Lustig is my grandmother. So-- and he was doing business with her before the war, you know. So I say OK, so we're almost related, you know. Can you help me to get to the American zone? He says, well, it's not easy, but I'll talk to the-- to the woman in the uniform. She was a social worker, a New Zealander. He spoke to her. Yes, I'll fix it, you know. She got us a pass to go to Salzburg first. We got in Salzburg. It was-- this was a transit camp. People were going in every direction-- east, west, south, north. But I wanted to get back to Germany, because I wanted to go to school. 
INT: Where did you-- did you know where you wanted to go to school? LL: Yes.  INT: Where did you want to go-- LL: I want to go in Munich to school. [BACKGROUND NOISE] Do you-- UNIDENTIFIED SPEAKER: Hi. LL: Hi, [? Herb-- ?]  INT: No, no, no. Did you go-- eventually go to school in Munich? LL: Well, no, I matriculated there. And-- but the university was so destroyed, so bombed out, it was really not very interesting. I found out that north of Munich there is another university town. It's Erlangen, and it's near Nuremberg. It's almost a part of Nuremberg now.  INT: Did you got to-- did you go to the-- LL: This is where I went to school, that's-- I was admitted to the University of Erlangen, Frederick-Alexander University. I have a diploma there. And--  INT: What did you study? LL: I-- I started with medicine. I wanted to study both medicine and dentistry, because I wanted to do maxillofacial surgery. But then the Berlin blockade started, and I was afraid that there will be another war, I'll be caught. I wanted to go to America in the worst way. I was on the list already at this time, OK. And in order to finish medicine, I would have-- I would had to stay another extra two years. So I decided not to study medicine. I just finished my dentistry. And my case worker worked it so out that [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] three weeks after my graduation in Erlangen, I was in Bremerhaven, ready to go to America. And I went to the States. I landed in-- [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] on December 17th I landed in Brooklyn. 
INT: December 17th what year? LL: 1949.  INT: 1949. LL: Yes.  INT: I see. LL: Yes. And in 1950, in September, I was already a junior at Harvard Dental School.  INT: Now how did you get-- you-- you told me you got your doctorate in dentistry from the University of Erlangen. LL: Yeah.  INT: How did you finally end up at Harvard? LL: [LAUGHS] Because in order to practice dentistry in the United States as a foreigner with a foreign diploma, at that time you had to go another two years, the last two years in-- in an accredited dental school. Otherwise you couldn't practice. You couldn't get the license. So [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] the school of my choice at that time-- I didn't know that Harvard even had a dental school; I thought it was strictly a medical school-- was Tufts Dental School. And I went-- I worked in the vegetable-- in a packing plant and this-- anyway, I saved up some money. I didn't speak any English on December 17th, but by March I spoke some English already. And I went to-- I took the train. I ended up going to the south station. I stayed at the Essex Hotel.  INT: We're going to stop right here because we're coming to the end of the tape. LL: Right.  INT: 1996-- I'm talking to Paul Lustig. I'm Rosalie Franks, tape nine. Paul, a moment ago, you told me that you came over here in 1949, and that you were studying dentistry at Tufts. Where did you go after that? LL: No, I was-- I-- I went to Tufts-- I was admitted there-- [PAUSES FOR 6 SECONDS] this was contingent upon my finishing a preparatory course to sort of get acquainted with American methods. That was a six-weeks course. And was no-- no-- no particular problem. I passed the exam, and I was admitted. But then, while I was at Tufts, I was living with the Rabbi Zigmond from the Hillel Foundation, but he did it on his own. He did not get any support from the home office, because they had other more worthy causes to support, or something. I don't know what-- whatever it was. They were very wonderful to me. And I found out that Harvard Medical School also has a Harvard Dental School, and it was a more serious school. So I decided to go for an interview. I took a trolley, the Huntington Avenue trolley to Longwood Avenue and I went to see the dean. And we got along real well with the dean, and he called up for a consultation a Dr. [? Cryer, ?] who was professor of pharmacology at Harvard Medical School, and dental school, for that matter. And he was a German, married to a Jewish woman, kicked out by Hitler. And he-- he was professor before the war in Leipzig. So he knew my professor of pharmacology, [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] and he knew what a Nazi he was. And I got a terrific grade from him in spite everything. [INAUDIBLE] I want you here. So it happened shortly after. I didn't have any money. I told the dean that I'm broke, so I got the check for $1,000-- sort of loan scholarship, whatever. Then in September of 1950, I was married to Helga. I send her to work. She helped me to finance the studies. I got some scholarships-- not from Jewish sources, unfortunately. I never succeeded in securing any-- any help from-- from Jewish sources. It's a whole story, but we deal some other time. 
INT: How did you-- LL: And then I--  INT: Oh, I'm sorry. LL: Then I graduated in 1952. We had a-- we had a child first, Herbert. I was teaching as an instructor there till March of 19-- 1953. I was drafted during the Korean War, and I was shipped back to Germany as an Air Force officer, dental service. And Mitchell was born in-- in the service in Germany. When I came back, I opened my practice on Copley Square. First-- no, first on Boylston Street, 80 Boylston Street, and then a couple of years later, in Copley Square. And ironically, my neighbors on the same floor, on the ninth floor, was the general consul. [LAUGHS] That-- about the same time, approximately, I got a subpoena from the German government to appear in Bremen at the trial of a well-known war criminal, Hildebrand. He was a captain of the SS force in Drohobycz, and I witnessed, personally, how he killed several people. Before, he killed hundreds of people in-- in Lwów in the Janowska Street camp. Anyway, there were some other survivors besides me, and we got him a life sentence. But a few years later, he was pardoned, or he got sick or something.  INT: What was his name again? LL: Hildebrand-- H-I-L-D-E-B-R-A-N-D. And that was in Bremen.  INT: So you were one of the witnesses against this man? LL: Yes, yes.  INT: And he-- LL: Yes, yes-- there were a few other people, too-- one woman that emigrated to Australia, and [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] one person from Amsterdam, and a couple from New York, too. 
INT: We're about to come to the end of your testimony, Paul. When you think back of your experiences, what is it that you would like someone watching this tape to come away with? LL: My feeling right now, this minute, is that nothing is black and white. There are different shades of gray. There are some normally good people that, under adverse condition, they abandon their principles and become monsters. And there's some monsters who, somehow, become human sometimes. And this is-- this is nothing to do with nationality-- with religion, yes. I have very strong feelings about the danger of organized religion. Because religions justify monstrosities, because they rationalize. They give you-- give-- give different groups excuses for-- for-- for committing atrocities. And this is not only the Catholic religion, but Muslim religion, and some Jewish religions. That's-- I'm scared of religion. I'm scared of people who are too righteous. Yes.  INT: What does Judaism mean to you, then? LL: Judaism-- I'm proud of my cultural heritage. Enlightenment, arts, humaneness-- this is, to me, the true Judaism. This-- this is the way it looks like to me. But extremists distort the principles of Judaism, and it's very-- can be very dangerous. [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] I'm scared of superstition. A lot of human-- human suffering is rooted in superstitions. And superstitions and religions, they are closely inter-related. [PAUSES FOR 6 SECONDS] I feel that people, in order to be pious, they-- they need not be religious. They cannot [? rest ?] their God directly without any interlocutors, without middlemen. Everybody, every man, woman, every person can find a direct path to his or her individual god. Bottom row, yeah. The first row is a picture of my mother on the left, and my Uncle Jack-- he became the first American-- no, the second American in our family. That's my grandmother's brother. And my aunt Regina, who was-- 
INT: No, that's all. LL: Yeah. Then the second row is my grandmother, maternal grandmother, Pesla Graumann, and her mother, my great-grandmother, [? Gitele ?] Erdman with her husband, Salomon. And my Aunt Hannah, who was-- their daughter, too. Behind my Aunt Hannah on the right, in the last row, on the right side, is my Uncle Joseph. In the middle, my Aunt [? Jeti, ?] and my grandfather-- grandfather, Eisig.  INT: Was-- LL: Graumann, Eisig Graumann.  INT: Where was this photo taken? LL: This was taken in Drohobycz around 1915, I think. And the little baby, the little child on my great-grandfather's lap, is my mother's sister, Toni. CREW: [INAUDIBLE]. [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] Go ahead. On the stand on the right is a picture of my Uncle Joe. He left Drohobycz in 1900. He was the oldest son of my great-grandparents. This oval picture is a picture of my great-grandparents, my great-grandfather, Salomon Erdman, his wife [? Gitele ?] Erdman, and myself in the middle.  INT: Where was this taken? LL: This was taken in Drohobycz around 1934. This picture--  INT: Oh, wait, wait, I'll tell you. CREW: Go ahead. LL: This picture dates back probably 1919, or 1920, right after World War I. You see on the left, my grandfather, Moses Lustig. And next to him, his wife, [? Razia ?] Lustig, and behind them, my father, Herman Lustig. Yes, this is the wedding picture of my parents. It was in January of 1923. 
INT: Where? LL: In Drohobycz, yes.  INT: What are their names? LL: My mother's name is Otilia. My father's name was Herman. Yes, this is my baby picture, I presume-- I was born on December 8, 1923. I presume, this is probably-- I was maybe two months old at that time.  INT: Where was this taken? LL: It was taken in Drohobycz. I even know the name of the photographer-- his name was Mr. [? Heilig. ?] Over the-- it was--  INT: But you can't-- you can't talk like that. LL: Our apartment.  INT: But you can't-- well, I suppose you could say the upper left hand. Is this it? LL: Yeah. CREW: We're rolling.  INT: This is the house where I was--  INT: But-- LL: What? This is the house where I was born. It's 18 [? Slovaczki ?] Street in Drohobycz. And the window over the front entrance is the window of the room where we lived. It was--  INT: Where was this taken? LL: This was taken probably last year, or maybe early this year. Date-- yeah, it's late '95, or early '96. This-- this is a picture of the gymnasium that I attended. It's now a college, pedagogical college. The picture was taken in 1996-- I presume around March of 1996.  INT: Where? LL: In Drohobycz. This picture was taken in Drohobycz late in 1939. It's a picture of my mother's sister, Clara, and her husband, Meier Goldstein, who later became a camp policeman. On this picture, from left to right, is my cousin, Manja, and-- 
INT: What's her last name? LL: Manja Fleischer. And in the middle is a friend of mine, Alex-- Alex [? Haberman. ?] He's still alive in Israel, in Tel Aviv. And the right is myself. And it was taken in a resort place, by the name [NON-ENGLISH], which is 7 miles south of Drohobycz, in or about 1934. The picture above is myself. This is my first picture, as I was-- went to gymnasium. It was in 1935.  INT: Where was it taken? LL: In Drohobycz. And I was, at that time, I was-- [PAUSES FOR 5 SECONDS] 12 years old, yeah. This picture was taken in Drohobycz in 19-- 1939, right at the beginning of the Soviet occupation. You'll see in the background, already they have a picture of Stalin and Marx. On the right side here, or would you call the left side? On the left side is [? Bruno ?] [? Schulz, ?] who was one of my teachers. And the rest of the people are mostly Jewish students who perished during the war. There were a lot of many very, very bright people there. Yes, the picture here was taken in Drohobycz in the forest during an excursion. This is my cousin, Manja Lustig. This is my first cousin, my father's brother's daughter, Uncle Salomon's daughter. She was brutally murdered, butchered, in 1943, in the village outside of Drohobycz. This is a picture of myself taken in Erlangen while I was a student at the university. It was about 1947, late 1946 or '47. This is our wedding picture, Helga and myself. We were married in September the 4th, 1950. 
INT: Where? LL: The Somerset Hotel in Boston. Yeah, this is my picture in the service in 1955. It was probably around March of 1955.  INT: Where was it taken? LL: Just prior-- it was taken in Frankfurt, Germany, just before my return to the United States. Was-- Ah, this is a picture of my two sons as babies, Herbert and Mitchell. It was taken, my estimate is around 1956, '57.  INT: Who is Herbert? Which one is-- LL: Herbert is on the left, and Mitchell is on the right.  INT: Where was it taken? LL: Where? At the photographer's somewhere, but in Boston.  INT: In Boston. LL: Yeah.  INT: Paul, would you like to introduce the woman sitting beside you? LL: Of course. This is my dear wife, Helga. We have been married since September, 1950, right. And she saw me through thick and thin, through all kinds of stormy situations, but also some very, very happy. OK, and she gave me two wonderful sons, sitting right here-- Herbert and Mitchell, here. I'm very proud of them.  INT: How did you meet? LL: How did I meet-- how did I meet? Well, then that was a very interesting meeting. I met her at the international student center, and-- HELGA LUSTIG: In Cambridge. LL: In Cambridge, Massachusetts, right. Was a dance. And I looked at her. She was sitting in the corner. And there was another guy that I didn't like right away, because he was next to her. So I tried to dispatch with him in a hurry, and I succeeded. And here we are. [LAUGHTER] 
INT: Helga, what has it been like these last many-- these many years? LL: Horrible. HELGA LUSTIG: Very interesting. [LAUGHS] We've never had a boring moment. And Paul is a man of many interests, and he's always doing something, working different-- three different jobs at a time. And it's been-- it's been interesting. [LAUGHS] LL: It's like a-- like a Chinese curse, you know. [LAUGHTER] HELGA LUSTIG: No, no, no, no. LL: May you have an interesting life. HELGA LUSTIG: No, no, no.  INT: Herb, what is it like being married-- being-- [LAUGHTER] --not married. What is it like being the child of this wonderful couple? HERBERT LUSTIG: Well, I think I'm-- I'm very lucky to have parents that have so much knowledge between them and have such strong convictions about life and about how one should-- should lead that life. I think they're people of very strong ethics. And I think that's really helped me in-- in leading my own life.  INT: Did they talk to you about the Holocaust? HERBERT LUSTIG: Sure, sure. From a very early age, I always felt that our family was different from the other families on the street. And I didn't really know how our family was different, but I was aware that we were different. And it was almost a sense of being a little bit of an outsider. And I guess when I was about six or seven, I became aware of the nature of that difference. And I think it was a process of gradual awareness. And I think, as a result of that experience, [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] I've grown up to be someone who's very sensitive to injustice. And I've got a very strong sense of what's right and what's wrong, and how people should be treated. And I'm grateful for that. I think that's the good side of what's happened. I think the-- [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] the tough side of what's happened is it's taken away a lot of potentially very happy times for us. 
INT: Mitchell? MITCHELL LUSTIG: I think my father's seen the best and the worst that humanity has to offer. And [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] as his son, I feel extremely privileged, because the-- the man that I know, he has guts, intelligence, and extreme generosity. And [PAUSES FOR 6 SECONDS] it's very difficult to talk about it. He's always been forthcoming [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] about his background and about the Holocaust. And I know it's difficult for him to speak about it as well. I would have liked to have known his parents. [PAUSES FOR 6 SECONDS] And because I don't have grandparents on-- on his side, there is something within the family structure missing that other families do have. And I think that that part is difficult. On the other hand, because of my parents' strength, and because of [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] my father's [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] just outgoingness in general, he's, I think, able to compensate for that missing part of my family. He's an internationally renowned dentist. Individuals that I've spoken with, who are his colleagues, come to him for not only advice on a professional level, but on a personal level, because they know of his experience in life. And they know that he's pretty much seen it all, and he knows how to read people. And I think that-- that makes him very special. And I'm very proud to be his son. HELGA LUSTIG: That's nice. Very nice, yeah. LL: That's very nice. HELGA LUSTIG: I-- I-- I can add to that, that when we got married-- LL: Right. HELGA LUSTIG: --I felt really like a child bride as far as experiences were concerned. I was naive, and he was not old-- you were what, 28? But he had had a world-- many worlds of experiences, many lifetimes in that short period, whereas, I had been relatively protected-- LL: I was 26. HELGA LUSTIG: --during that time. 26, but still I was-- LL: I was a child, [INAUDIBLE]. HELGA LUSTIG: I-- I always felt that, you know, his-- his experience was, you know, made him-- although not in years, but in experience, so much older. LL: I thank you very, very much. I think the time has come to--