INT: It's October 4, 1996. This is an interview with Mrs. Thea Rumstein. My name is Brad Kurtzberg. We're in Levittown, New York, USA. And the interview will be conducted in English. It's October 4, 1996. This is an interview with Mrs. Thea Rumstein, maiden name Gottesmann. My name is Brad Kurtzberg. We're in Levittown, New York, USA. And the interview will be conducted in English. Good morning, Mrs. Rumstein. TR: Good morning.  INT: Could you please state and spell your name for us? TR: My name is Thea, T-H-E-A, Rumstein. R-U-M-S-T-E-I-N.  INT: And was that your name at birth? TR: No. My name was Thea Gottesmann. G-O-T-T-E-S-M-A-N-N.  INT: And when and where were you born? TR: I was born in Vienna, Austria, February 6, 1928.  INT: Tell me a little bit about your childhood in Vienna before the Nazis came. TR: Well, I was 10 years old when Hitler came. So what I remember is that we had a pretty normal childhood, my brother and I, my father, and my mother. We lived in the outer district, but we moved in closer to where my grandparents and my aunt and uncles lived, so we could see them more often and they could babysit for us. And we went every Friday to my grandfather for [NON-ENGLISH] Shabbat. Because my parents were not religious. They were Jewish. And we knew that we were Jewish. But they were not religious. I always wanted to be, but I had to look for that in-- at my grandfather's house. And I went to school. And every Sunday we-- they brought us to the movies. And like, we had a pretty normal childhood. The only thing is, I was aware when I was-- I-- I understood that there was something going on even before '38. That there were some kind of fights always in Austria, between the right radicals and the socialists. And this was already influenced through Germany. It was already-- they tried already making all kinds of troubles. As a matter of fact, in 1934, the chancellor of Austria, [NON-ENGLISH], was shot by the right radicals. And really, that was already 1934 and I was six years old. And I remember that. I remember people on the streets running, and shooting. And afterwards, the houses were shot. Even, as a matter of fact, when I went back to Vienna, there still could see the bullet holes in these particular houses. But nevertheless, you know, we were children. And we played on the street. And we played at home. And we visited the amusement parks. And it was pretty good time. 
INT: You mentioned spending Friday nights with your grandfather. TR: Right.  INT: First, what was your grandfather's name? TR: Yakob. Yakob.  INT: And was this your mother's father or your father's father? TR: My mother's father, yeah.  INT: What-- what would these Friday nights be like? What-- what did the two of you do? TR: Well, I was his favorite. He had-- we had my brother, and then I had another cousin, who unfortunately got also killed. [? Willy ?] was his name. And like I said, my mother's sisters lived now in the same district. And, well, we got there. First of all, the food was very important. You know, we had chicken. We had fish and chicken and prunes and what do you call that, this-- what you eat, this thing that you eat, with-- with gefilte fish. [LAUGHS] So, and of course, the praying and-- and the candle lighting, that-- that I always liked. And I didn't have it at home but I-- I started it at home myself. Because I-- I just always felt, we have to, you know, identify with someone. And, but we-- they were get-togethers and they were always happy ones, happy get-togethers.  INT: You mentioned your immediate family. What was your father's name? TR: My father's name was Julius. Actually, it was Jyula. It's a Hungarian name. J-Y-U-L-A. But in Austria, it's translated into Julius.  INT: And what did your father do for a living? TR: My father was a pharmacist. And he worked in a pharmacy. And that was his profession. 
INT: Mm-hmm. What was your father like? Do you have any special-- TR: Well--  INT: --memories of him? Or-- TR: Oh, yes. Oh, yes. He was-- well, like, everybody would say that. But he was a wonderful father. Was very good-looking. He was tall and very charming. And jovial. Always joking with other people and with us. And I have very good memories of him.  INT: Tell me about a specific time you spent with your father that stands out in your mind. TR: Well, like I mentioned, every Sunday-- you know, in Vienna, it was like a routine. First we were-- my brother and I went to the movies, to the children's performance. And afterwards-- that was, of course, in the summer and when good weathers. And afterwards, there's a very famous amusement park in Vienna that's called the Prater. And so-- and they have also gardens there, and-- and coffee houses. And so we used to walk there and went on all these amusement merry-go-rounds and whatever. And these-- that's the time we spent with him. Otherwise, he was working.  INT: Right. TR: My mother was home with us.  INT: And her name was? TR: Gusti. G-U-S-T-I.  INT: Mm-hmm. And tell me something about your mother. TR: My mother-- again, she was great. She was really the rock of the-- of the family, especially after my father didn't come back. She was very, very musical, had a beautiful voice. As a matter of fact, she wanted to become a singer. But my grandparents, especially my grandfather, was pretty strict. And I thought, to go into show business wouldn't be-- for a Jewish girl. [LAUGHTER] But she was always singing. And that instilled a lot of music in me, too. Because instead of singing lullabies, she sang operas to us. You know? Like [INAUDIBLE], whatever, [INAUDIBLE]. Things that-- that come very easy. 
INT: Right. TR: And--  INT: Did she have a favorite that you remember? Or-- TR: Opera?  INT: Yeah. TR: Everything.  INT: OK. TR: I have a book here that when she went to the opera and she crossed off all the operas. I think there's none that she hasn't seen, that she-- and like I said, well, I'll tell you later, when we started going to the opera, right when we came back. And she was a wonderful mother. She learned how to sew. She was-- actually, that was her profession. And she was a very good-- she's not even a seamstress. She was-- she went to Berlin and she worked in a-- a big company there, as a designer, or whatever. And so she sewed for us, too. Whatever had to be fixed and whatever had to be done, she did for us. And she was not a great baker. [LAUGHTER] We went to good bakeries. She-- but she was a good-- good mother. Excellent. And-- and wife.  INT: You mention you had a brother. TR: Yes. George. My--  INT: Older or younger than you? TR: He was exactly a year and six days older than I am. So we really grew up like twins.  INT: How did the two of you-- TR: We got dressed alike. You know? And we-- we got along wonderful. He was-- I was more the aggressive part. And he was more-- he teased me and then I became aggressive. [LAUGHTER] But-- but we had-- we had a wonderful relationship, as children, especially. 
INT: What about your education? What-- what kind of schooling did you get in Vienna? TR: Well, of course, I was 10. So I was in fourth grade. I'd just started fourth grade when-- when Hitler came. And I was in the-- I was in a mixed school, of course, which didn't last too long. In the beginning, you know, we-- we even-- I remember, the first couple of days, we had to write swastikas, you know, in a row. And it said, March 13, our-- our leader, fuehrer Adolf Hitler came. I mean, as a Jewish child, I-- we had to do this. But this didn't last long. Because, first of all, they started already [? haunting ?] us. And they spit at us, and-- the kids who knew that we were Jewish. And we-- we stayed, I think, a few months. And then we had to get out of school.  INT: Now, Before Hitler came to power in Austria-- TR: Yeah.  INT: --how would you describe relations between Jews and Gentiles? TR: You know, we didn't know the difference. We really didn't know the difference. We had-- I had girlfriends. And I must say, there were quite of a lot of non-Jewish. Which, of course, as soon as Hitler came in, especially one, I was very close with her. And when Hitler came in, maybe the same week, she says Thea, you cannot come and visit anymore. Because my father doesn't let me talk to you. My father doesn't allow me. For me, this was kind of, you know-- especially her, because she lived very close by. And I had no idea. But otherwise, you know, I was-- I, like I said, there was-- I remember also there were a lot of poor Jewish children in our class. We-- we used to drink milk, you know, we-- everybody bought milk. And everybody left a little bit milk left in in the bottle. And we poured it in the other one so to make a full one again for another child, so that they should have the [INAUDIBLE], because you had to pay for this-- 
INT: Right. TR: --and didn't get it for free. Well, I loved to go to school. I was-- [LAUGHS] I always liked to get all-- all As, always, in-- in class. And you know, you're a child. You really didn't-- didn't know the difference. Later on, I heard from my parents that-- you know, that they-- from the people that they hung out with, friends who are not Jewish, who actually were illegal Nazis. And they told them, they said, they told them and predicted that this is going to come. I'm talking just a-- a month or so before.  INT: Right. TR: You know, because everything was brewing to the point, in Austria. They said, you-- you should leave here. You should leave here. And we said, where should we go? Where should you-- can you, like, pick yourself up with two little kids, and where are you going to go? So, but basically, with us, with us children, we-- we had a normal childhood, you know?  INT: When the Nazis took power, you mentioned you weren't allowed to go to the public school-- TR: Right.  INT: --shortly thereafter. TR: Right.  INT: What other changes took place for you and your family that you can remember? TR: Oh, there were tremendous changes. Tremendous changes. I must say, I remember-- March-- first of all, I told you there were things before already. There were supposed to be elections in Austria, you know? And they put all kinds of-- of signs on the streets. They painted the streets to-- to vote yes for the-- for-- not for Hitler, for the other one. And as you know, they didn't even come out. Because Hitler marched in without waiting for-- for the-- for the election. So, of course we are-- I know my parents, I remember very well, and so did I, that we were glued to the-- to the radio-- what was going on. And when the Germans-- you know, the-- the Austrians welcomed them very well. If anybody says that they were overrun or they were-- you know, that they didn't want Hitler, or I wasn't for Hitler, they are lying. In general, and their-- majority-- I'm sure there were people who-- because nobody really knew what is going to follow. But, the majority of people welcomed him. Welcomed him with open hands and open hearts. You know? And, so we saw them starting marching, marching on the streets. And of course, the next day, all the stores had already signs-- Juden [NON-ENGLISH]. Not-- Jews are not wanted here. And the Jewish stores, where-- where-- [INAUDIBLE], you know, Jude, they wrote on them then. And all kinds of things happened. There was a lot of things going on. And you were sitting there and you didn't really know what is going to happen. And so when we found out, it was terrible. The first thing is-- that I remember very well-- when I came home from school-- that was just in the beginning-- I went on the street where we lived. And I-- there was a whole bunch of people standing around, and, you know, shouting, and shouting, Juden, and so on and so forth. And here I see my mother, on the street, on her feet, cleaning the street. They took her to clean up the-- the signs that they-- that they put on the streets for the election. And I said, Ma, what are you doing here? And she says, Thea, go home. Go home. She didn't want me to stand there. And I cried tremendously. And-- and-- and I didn't go home. I stayed there. I was like, Mommy. And the people, they had no compassion whatsoever. They were full of hate. All of them. All of them. I guess who were not, were not standing there. But, as a-- as a matter of fact, when we went to [NON-ENGLISH], I saw a picture of Austria, where people are standing around. And-- and I always-- I always imagine this is my mother. She looked like her. I mean, she might not be her. But it is a very, very well-known picture. And I saw it in [NON-ENGLISH]. 
INT: How-- how did that make you feel when you saw your mother like that? TR: Oh, I was-- terrible. Terrible. Unhappy. I was afraid. That's when I started being afraid. And I was afraid to the end.  INT: Did your mother talk to you about this when she got home? Or-- TR: Oh, sure.  INT: What did she say? TR: When they came home. But you know what it is? I think that people, all the time, lived in a kind of a denial. Because my parents knew already, from people who came from-- from Germany, there were people who ran away from Germany, who told stories. I mean, it wasn't-- it really started in Germany in '33. But the real bad time, also in Germany, started in '38, when-- when Austria was taken over. And I remember my parents telling us, and-- and I-- I remember, even, people-- and you know, you always thought, oh, maybe-- maybe they were not good. Maybe they were-- only the Polish people there were persecuting, not the-- not the Germans. And maybe they did something. You know? You lived in an egg shell of denial. And, well, as a child, I couldn't do anything about it anyhow. And that-- then all things started to happen after '38.  INT: What else started to happen? TR: Well, first of all, we lived on a main street, main street where people were marching, and the soldiers, and the people-- Jews were not allowed to live on a main street. So we had to move out where we lived. 
INT: Now, what-- TR: In a side street.  INT: What street did you live on? TR: I lived on-- in the Heine Strasse. Like, Heine, the famous poem-- poet. And from there, we had to move, it's called [GERMAN]. It doesn't mean-- only somebody from Vienna might know. We moved into a very large apartment. But this didn't belong to us. We had to share it with, I think it was four or five other families. Everybody get-- got a room. We had two rooms. Two rooms. One where my brother and I slept and where my parents slept. And there was one kitchen for all the people. And I remember, there was only one bathroom for all the people. But we somehow managed, you know? We made the best out of it. And [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] we lived there. And you know, my parents were, at that time, they were young. And we had a lot of people came to visit us and they tried to make it as normal-- as normal as possible. And wait, what's going to happen.  INT: Now, did you know these other four families previously to when they moved in? TR: No. I didn't. But it turned out-- which was very lucky for me-- don't forget, there were a lot of educated people there. This one was a professor. And-- a German professor-- Dr. Kornitzer, with his wife. And there another one was a math-- math professor, with his wife. Forgot his name. But somehow, while I was there and I couldn't go to school, I always ask him to give me something to-- to-- to learn. And-- and I took a little math from him and a little German from them. And-- and, you know. And we were discussing things. As a matter of fact, Professor Kornitzer was a great help to us when I came back. Don't forget, I was already 17 years old. And I had no formal schooling. But he vouched for me so that I could make-- could go on and go for higher education. And he said, she will-- she'll be able to catch up. So I got-- you know, I got into a class so I could go on with my education after the war, because of the-- Professor Kornitzer. 
INT: In between when you were kicked out of the public school, when you couldn't attend there anymore, and being taught by these professors-- TR: Yeah.  INT: --in your-- TR: Right.  INT: --apartment-- TR: Oh, I-- yeah.  INT: --was there any schooling in between? TR: Yes. Yes. This is the-- at-- that-- I got-- first, from-- when we got thrown out from the school, there was a school, it's called [NON-ENGLISH] in a second district, which was later a gathering camp for the-- for us to send us away. But before, it was a school. And all the Jewish children from all over Vienna had to go to this school. But also, not for long, because that also was converted into a camp. And we had to-- we had to leave.  INT: What was it like in that school? Did-- what did you learn about? TR: [SIGHS] Well, you see, in a way, all the best teachers were Jewish teachers. And so we had very good teachers in that particular school. The only thing is, it didn't last long. And-- but we got kind of a little bit-- I mean, 10 years, 11, 12 years. And that was it. After 12, I didn't go to school anymore. So the school was, you know, we knew what was going on. We knew we was tainted by the people. I remember they stood in front, the non-Jewish children, you know, in the winter, when we had a cap on, a hat on, for me, and I was-- they tore it off me. And you know. And they run away. And, and, I mean, they-- we were constantly haunted by the-- by-- by the children. Because they heard it at home, and they-- the Jews are no good. And then we were one of them. 
INT: What-- what other changes occurred for you and your family at this time? TR: Well, the changes were that we, like I said, we could-- nobody could go to work. Nobody had-- you know, we had-- well, this went on until, let's say, 1940. We couldn't go-- and then we had, I think in 1939, the war started with Poland. Hitler went into Poland. And then, England and France declared war. So the war started already in '39. And then he went to Czechoslovakia and to France and to all over. And I remember they were all the store-- first of all, flags all over, all the time. You know, the-- the swastikas, all over. And then we had to get the Jewish star. Then we really couldn't go anyplace, because then we had to be-- we are identified as being Jewish. I remember sitting on a windowsill and watching the people go by and be terrible, terrible envious about every-- everything that I saw, that I couldn't go anyplace. Couldn't play outside. They also started very much harassing us. Us and the whole-- the whole-- all the Jews. Because in the winter, they came and picked up my father and my mother, and then us, too, to shovel the snow. We had to shovel snow for hours, for hours. And the people were standing around and laughing. I remember I had a pair of boots. And they wanted-- they didn't take it. But they said, we could use those boots. You know, we-- [INAUDIBLE] would use those boots. But they didn't take 'em away. But I was afraid I will have to go barefoot in the snow. And all in all, the people were hateful. Absolutely hateful. And the one who were not, were not being-- we couldn't hear them. We couldn't see them. In one way, they were afraid. If you-- you know? Because we had a maid from before-- maid, somebody who cleaned and helped clean-- and she couldn't talk to us. I remember she came sometimes at night, you know, and brought us something. And then-- you know, all at night, so that nobody could see her. It was terrible times. Very terrible. And it-- it-- it went, it got worse and worse. And of course, then we had the Kristallnacht, you know? When the synagogues were burned. That was November 9th. They say it's 10th. I remember November 9th. No. November 10th. There is a dispute when it was. 
INT: Right. TR: In 1939. Then the Kristallnacht.  INT: What do you remember about it? TR: I remember we had a synagogue very close by, the [NON-ENGLISH] synagogue. It's called [NON-ENGLISH] temple. I saw it going up in flame. It went up. It was a very, very well-known synagogue. And we went to this synagogue. And all the people from the neighborhood went to this synagogue. And it went up. It mean, there were other-- a few others in the-- in the district. But this was a really-- we could see it. Because it was in-- in-- very close to us. And again, the people were happy and laughing that-- that this can happen. Nobody prevented it.  INT: As these things started to happen-- TR: Yes.  INT: --what do you remember the reaction of your parents being? TR: Well, they were very worried. And there were often talks, what are we going to do. I had relatives in Hungary, since my father was from Budapest. His two sisters and his mother lived in Budapest. And there were people who went illegally over the border, you know? There is a big lake between Austria and Hungary. And it's called [NON-ENGLISH]. It's large. But it's a-- a-- a-- sea-- a lake that is not very deep. And people could wade through there, with-- with somebody who took them. And I remember, one night, we were already ready to go there. But somehow, the last minute, the guy didn't show up who was supposed to-- I think my father gave him, even, money. Didn't show up. So we-- we-- we stayed. We didn't go. And as it turned out, it wouldn't have made any difference. Because my relatives in Hungary were just as much caught as we, you know, because Hitler went there too. And there were people who got affidavits to go to the United States. And we got one from a distant cousin of my mother's. But my father, since he was born in Hungary, didn't have the right quota. The quota-- we-- we had to wait. And that's the reason we didn't-- we couldn't come here. So we stayed in Vienna. 
INT: You mentioned your parents being worried and trying to find a way to get out. Do you remember any kind of group response from other Jews or the organized Jewish community? Any rabbis or any leaders in the community saying anything? TR: No. There was nothing to say. Everybody was afraid. It was-- it-- it-- you-- there the Jewish leaders were kind of silenced because you were nothing. You became nothing. There was no more Jewish leaders. There was called the [NON-ENGLISH], where they have, like, the organization of-- of the Jews who took care of the cemeteries and all this things. And I don't know. I guess people used to pay dues to them. But it ended. '38 was-- and '39, and then everybody was dispersed. People tried to get out. People to-- to-- to-- tried to just hope that the world will-- is not going to let it happen, you know? Especially my father was the biggest optimist. He says, no way will he get away with this. But he did. And-- no. We just lived our life from one day to the other. What is going to happen. First, one time is that my-- we were supposed to go to England, my brother and I, to Glasgow. To Scotland. And they tried to initiate that. And then the [INAUDIBLE]-- the last thing was, again, look. We're staying together. Whatever happens to us, will happen to all of us. They couldn't-- we couldn't part. Because we were children. And I guess my parents didn't have the heart to-- to just-- [INAUDIBLE] it was just initiated. It was not actually happening yet. But we didn't pursue it. Because my father said, my mother said, whatever happen, we'll stay together. Not knowing what's going to happen anyhow. 
INT: Right. At this point, after the-- after the Nazis came in, from '38 till '40, roughly, were you still able to to celebrate Shabbat with your grandfather? Was there any kind of Jewish observance still able to go on? TR: Yes. Yes. In the beginning, yes, I would say. Because like I said, we just walked over to him. And we had-- we might not have had the same food or something, but-- in the beginning. I'm talking, now, '38, '39. '40, it started already with the deportations. '41 was the biggest deportations.  INT: OK. We're going to stop here, tape number one, and pick this up with tape number two.  INT: It Is October 4, 1996. So you were mentioning the-- the leaders of the Jewish community were not really able to do much of anything at this point. TR: No. No. Because, you know, they were leaders, you know, whatever they had to do within the community. But nothing to help or do anything for you. You were actually on your own.  INT: You mentioned you were no longer allowed to go to school. You weren't allowed to walk-- TR: Right.  INT: --certain streets, even. TR: Right. Right. We walked. But you know, you were always, especially when we-- we wore the-- the star of David, the Jewish star, that we were identified. And we really couldn't go anyplace. And-- and you know, even the food became rationed, too. You know. So you had, like, books, and you cut out. And not everybody wanted to sell you things. It was a terrible time, as everybody knows. And we just stayed there. Because in '41, already started the-- the razzia. They call razzias. They came with wagons. And they took all the people on the wagons, and they put them in-- in a camp, in a gathering camp. As a matter of fact, that school that I mentioned to you before, that I went to in the beginning, became a gathering camp for people to-- they brought them there. And from there, they dispersed them to, mostly, to Poland, in 1941. 
INT: OK. TR: '41, '40, '41.  INT: At this time, you're not in school. You're sort of restricted a little bit in-- in your movement. TR: Right.  INT: What did you do every day? TR: Well, I must tell you what we did for a-- for a while. We worked on the Jewish cemetery. Friends of mine and we-- we-- this we got through the Jewish community. There was a Jewish-- there's a Jewish cemetery in Vienna. It's-- it's-- [GERMAN], it's called. And on the-- there is, like, four different kinds of, they call it doors. One is for Christian and-- and one is for-- till the number four is-- was the Jewish cemetery. So-- and also on the two were Jewish. Because they were the prominent Jewish people who were buried there. And just to pass the time and do something, a-- a-- a bunch of us kids worked on the cemetery. We cleaned the graves. We took the leaves off. We-- we took care of the grass. And that was-- kind of our-- took our time. And-- and-- and we were together. So I remember we ate lunch-- we had lunch in the-- in where the death people-- where-- I mean, there were no death people in there. But that's where they prepared them. That's where we sat. Or we sat on the graves and we ate. It's morbid. But we were children. And this is-- where else could we have sat? But it brought us together. And we laughed. And we-- [LAUGHS] it kind of passed our time. 
INT: Mm-hmm. You mentioned that deportations began in-- in 1941. TR: Yes.  INT: What-- what started to happen? How was this announced? TR: Well, it was kind of-- people got letters in the mail, that they have to appear with-- with the luggage that they could carry, in that gathering camp, in the [GERMAN]. And from there, they were packed together and were sent away. Now, nobody knew where. And this is how it started. And also, they had, like, I don't know what you say that in English, but they have, like, actions. Like-- they're called razzia in German and it's actions. They came with-- with trucks, pulled people out from their apartments, said, you have one hour to pack up whatever you can, took him on the tracks, brought him over there, without invitation, and they were sent away. And so it went on and on. And-- and it started and-- and constantly. Also, while we lived in this apartment, every week they had another action. If they needed wool, wool clothing, they came in the [? SR, ?] pushed open the doors, knocked, pushed open, went through-- through all the closets, and took whatever they need. Or they collected silver, or gold, forget about it. Everything they needed, they wanted. You were like an open door. Everybody could come in and out.  INT: Did they take things from your family? TR: They took constantly. Constantly. And there was a-- a-- story what my brother did. My brother-- we lived together. And he wanted-- he loved to go to the movies. And he loved to go to the-- to the amusement park that I mentioned, that we used to go. But Jews were not allowed to go there. So he went with a couple of friends. He went in there. And they caught him. He was, that time-- maybe this was 1940-- so he was around-- he was 13 years old. And they caught him. I remember my parents were terrible, terrible upset. Because that-- they-- they started already with the actions, sending people away. And he got-- he got sentenced to three days in jail. And from there, we were supposed to be sent right with the family, back to-- to the place, [GERMAN], and from there, wherever we-- they send us. And I remember, my mother went to-- and begged-- he worked in a place there. He worked, also, my brother worked someplace. And she went to the master there. And he-- she said, please, please call the jail. And please do that. And tell them that he's very important to you. So they'll-- should let him out direct to work. And he succeeded doing that. So we were safe-- [LAUGHS] you know. We had a couple of times that we were saved that we didn't be-- we are not sent away, before we were actually sent away in '42. And, of course, he got it from my father that time that he shouldn't do that. But he was a kid. He wanted to-- he wanted-- you know, he didn't understand it so fully, the consequences of that. 
INT: You mentioned that your brother was roughly 13 at the time. TR: Yes.  INT: Was he able to have a bar mitzvah? TR: No. No. He didn't have a bar mitzvah. We had-- after that-- don't forget, there was not even a synagogue around. There was nothing around. It was destroyed. And-- and it was just a very, very tough, tough time, especially for grown-ups, and also for children.  INT: You mentioned, now you had to share this apartment with four other families. TR: Right.  INT: How did all of these families get along? And did-- were there any other children your age in this-- TR: No, there--  INT: --group? TR: --were no children. There were no children. There were just the two doc-- professors. They had-- didn't have any children. There was a Turkish family. They didn't have children. And there was two sisters, you know, spinster sisters, who lived there too. They had another apartment. And us. So we-- we were the only children in that apartment. Well, every woman had, I guess, when they were cooking, they had to make a schedule. Who is where and when. The bathroom was more important. [LAUGHS] That, we had to really line up, and say, I'm next, and I'm next, and-- this is-- this is how it worked. But, you know-- after whatever came after, this was still bearable.  INT: Mm-hmm. You-- you mentioned there were a few instances where your family was able to avoid deportation, besides-- TR: Right. 
INT: --that one. TR: Right.  INT: Tell me about some of the others. TR: Well, the other time was 1941. My grandfather had already, you know, the notification that he has to appear there with his wife, who was his second wife. She was-- he was, like, maybe, not even 70. And she was 46. She was much younger. And he married her, and you know, they got along very well. She had children in England. But I don't know anything about them. So my grandfather had already the invitation, for, let's say, for the next week or two weeks. And there was an action. No. We had a-- a Turkish family in our-- lived with us. And they came to get this family, you know, to-- to-- you know, with a truck, and all these things. And then they said, and all the rest of them have to come, too. The one professor who was there, the-- the English professor, Dr. Kornitzer, had a non-Jewish wife. So he didn't have to go. He could stay in the apartment. But the rest of them, we all had-- they gave us a-- maybe an hour or two to pack up, and-- and take us, you know, they picked us up and brought us to this camp. And when my grandfather heard that, that we are in there, he said, I'm not going to wait two weeks. I go myself before, so at least I'm together with my family, with my daughter and her children. And so we were all together, in-- in-- in that camp, lying on the floor with our suitcase. I don't know if we had, we had knapsacks. Whatever we had, we were not prepared for that. And my father knew a few people there who worked in that camp, you know, they did all kinds of menial work. Mainly, carrying the suitcases from-- from the cars and whatever they-- they arrested us with, into the camp. And so they gave him these heavy suitcases or whatever it is, and let him prance in front of the SS who was standing there like this and watching the people. And one who was there a longer time already, a guy, said, this is a good man. We could use him. He's a very good worker. He's very fast. So they said, all right. So let him do these things. They said, but his family is here. He says, let them go home. So we were saved. That was 1941. But unfortunately, my grandfather was in already. And he was sent away to what we found out later, to Lodz. And later, we found out that the whole group was killed, was shot. Not gassed. They shot them into a-- a grove there. 
INT: So, at this point your immediate family was allowed to go home, but-- TR: My mother, my brother, and I went back to the apartment where the professor still is. The rest of it was-- they were all sent away, never heard from. But we were just saved another year. Another year that was.  INT: You seem to be mentioning that people knew that deportation was bad, even if they didn't know what the-- the eventual destination was. What-- did you hear any rumors, or-- or any-- TR: No.  INT: Like, why was this feared-- TR: No.  INT: --I guess is the-- see, this is what people-- actually, I get, sometimes, very mad. Because people don't understand it, that people did not know. There was denial on the people who were there. Absolute denial, to the last, [INAUDIBLE] unless we went to Auschwitz. Then we knew where we were. But there was denial. Because this is natural in a human, that if you give up and you think this is the end, then-- I mean, many people killed themself and-- and-- you know, committed suicide. We knew it's no good. But we didn't know where and what-- they always said that they-- they-- they'll relocate them. You know? Relocate them to-- in the work camps. That's all we knew about it. Nobody could write from there. Even though, I mean, nobody could write for [INAUDIBLE]-- I-- I-- I don't know about anybody writing from there. Because they killed them, either they sent them into labor camps. But you couldn't sit down and write a letter back home, to [? home. ?] 
INT: Right. At what point were you and your family finally deported? TR: Well, this was in September, '42. My father was still schlepping the-- the-- the suitcases there. And that was actually the reason that we were kind of lucky, which you will find out that we went to Theresien, to Theresienstadt. Because we wouldn't have gone there. We would have gone to Poland. But because he worked there, this were the last big transport from Vienna, in September, 1942. Large transport. I don't know how many people. But maybe we are 500, maybe we're a thousand. But this was the last transport who went to Theresienstadt from-- from Vienna, was send away. Later, they were just small transport, were like a hundred people or 50 people. And then it stopped altogether, beginning in '93-- what is it? What year are we? '43. That ended then. But we-- we were send away in '42.  INT: What happened? Tell me-- TR: Well--  INT: Tell me about it. TR: --this is when we got the invitation. And we knew already. We knew exactly where we have to appear. And we packed up our things. It was not that we had to do it hastily because we knew exactly where we going to go. And then we were collected there. And it was-- and-- and we-- we didn't-- really didn't know-- we had, I think we knew that we going to Theresienstadt. But it didn't mean anything to us. Because nobody wrote from there. I-- we-- nobody knew about it. And so for us, it was the same if they send us away from Theresienstadt someplace else. We didn't know where we are going. We were in-- in regular wagons, not in cattle wagons. And we were very tightly fitted into that. And-- and we send-- and that time, I-- I met already people are in the camp that-- that I knew, children that also went there. And then we arrived in-- in Theresien. 
INT: How long did the trip take? TR: I really don't know. But it-- it-- it was a day trip. It was maybe six, seven hours. Because it's not that far from-- from Austria. You know, it's not far from Prague. It's-- you know, it was not an-- I-- I remember when we arrived there it was daylight. So either we went through the night, or it was daylight when we arrived there. And then we had to get off the trains. And they took-- told us-- we packed a lot of things. But they told us we can only take what we can carry. Everything else we have to leave back. So we grabbed whatever-- I-- I-- I remember-- see, I played accordion in-- in-- in Vienna. I took up accordion because with that, I figured I can take it every place. So I took my accordion along. It-- it was like-- it looked like a suitcase. So I grabbed that and something else, and left other things back. Which came pretty handy then, in the camp. Because I played for the children there, and they [LAUGHS] were dancing. So we had kind of made our own entertainment.  INT: Right. TR: And-- but it was awful when we started marching there, with the heavy suitcase. I remember my-- my father collapsed. He-- he-- he was like, it-- when he saw, the one who was so optimistic that we came in there, and the way it looked, he collapsed. But then, you know, we got him up. And we walked quite, quite a bit into-- into the camp. And there, they had a lot of army barracks, you know? I don't know the-- in-- in-- in German, you say [GERMAN], which is a big-- it's not barracks. It's like big buildings. Because it was a garrison city, you know, where it's called Theresienstadt after Maria Theresa, you know? She was the-- the queen or the Empress of Austria. And the whole thing used to be all Austria-- 
INT: Right. TR: --before the First World War. So they brought us in this-- in this place, and they placed us in these barracks on the floor. And there we were and waited until whatever happened to us, you know?  INT: Were you still together with your family at this time? TR: No. We stayed for a while, you know? Then we found out there is a youth home in Theresien, for German and Austrian children. And we tried-- I think my mother tried to get me into that. Because it was the-- the life was impossible. Like, we just lived-- lived on the attic. There was attics and they're one next to the others, with their suitcases. And you couldn't do anything. So I got into this youth home, which I shared a room, maybe with 30, 35 children-- children. We-- I was 14. Some were 13. Some were 15. But they basically stayed together in-- in-- in certain ages. And my brother went to another youth home, also for-- for children. My father later on was placed in another barrack. It's called the [NON-ENGLISH]. And my mother was in another one, where she lived with I don't know how many women, in three-story beds. And she had hers on the bottom, I remember. And I had mentioned my father was a pharmacist. So he got a job to run a pharmacy. They didn't have any medication. But the people who came, all this thousands of thousands of people, had medication in their suitcases, which they confiscated. And so they dispersed it in this-- in this pharmacy. So, I don't know, it wasn't much there. Maybe it was aspirin, it was-- whatever it was, he was able to-- to give it out for-- it was not major-- they didn't have penicillin that time, anyhow. So mainly, probably, aspirin and-- whatever. Whatever he had. So he was doing that. And my mother worked, too. They took her like a-- it's almost kind of a police, ghetto police, that they-- when people stood in line for-- for getting the food, they had to keep 'em so that-- you know, they had to take care of themself, that-- that-- Theresienstadt was a self-ruling-- I mean, the-- the-- the SS had-- was-- was the important people. But they wanted them to self-rule themselves. And there were leaders there. There were all kinds of-- of people who-- who took care, make sure that everything is running right, you know? 
INT: Mm-hmm. TR: But again, Theresienstadt was a camp not where you went to stay. You came there to be sent away. This was-- this was-- most of the people came, were sent away. Like us.  INT: Mm-hmm. So your mother and father were both working. How about your brother and yourself? TR: OK. Me, I lived in that youth home. Most of the children went out and worked in the-- in the gardens. I mean, like, in-- like farmers, they were cutting the grass outside, and all kinds of things. I opted, like I-- I figured I-- at least when I'm there already, maybe I'll learn something. So I went into the-- where the seamstress, you know, where they-- what we did, we opened up old clothing. We completely disassembled and opened up all the seams. And then they showed us how to cut new ones out and then we sewed them again. So that's what I did. So I-- I-- I-- I stayed in the home and I sat and I was sewing.  INT: And how about your brother? TR: And my brother worked-- I don't know. Either he was doing something in the-- it-- it's like in a-- with wood. He was carrying things. You know, they put him to work, whatever he did. Whatever was necessary, sometimes to carry the dead people, you know, they had to carry them out. Whatever was necessary to do, he did.  INT: Describe your sleeping arrangements at Theresienstadt, in-- in the children's-- TR: In the children's. 
INT: Yeah. TR: OK. We were into-- we were in a room, I would say maybe it was 18 by 18, let's say, or 20 by 20 feet. And all around the wall, you had three story-- whatever you can-- bunks there. Bunk beds. And so you have, if you're lucky-- and always two people sleeping together. You know? Two and two and two and two. And then-- it went--  INT: So you'd have six. TR: There were-- yeah. It was--  INT: Stacked. TR: Six stacked. But it went all around the walls. And in the middle, we had-- we had a table. And we had washbasins, like, five or six washbasins. This was always the-- the funniest thing in the morning. It was not funny. Because whoever grew-- woke up first, they said, I'm first. So the first five could take a washbasin, took a little water. Wash yourself. You know, we had-- that's how we washed ourselves.  INT: Right. TR: They always told me I was always the first one [LAUGHS] who called, I'm-- I am the first. Because I wanted to also get it over with. And then I had to go to work. And-- and we got to eat. We-- we got very, very little to eat. We got bread. We got a portion of bread. And then we got-- we had to stand in line for some kind of a soup. And once in a while, we got, like, something baked, something-- you know, that was a special thing. I remember-- and a piece of little margarine. And sometimes, a little sugar. And we all collected these things. And we made a cake out of it. We took the margarine and the sugar and we mixed it up. And we put it on the bread and another bread. And then we cut it and we pretended this was bread. And we liked it so much that they said, even if we ever come into freedom, this will be our favorite cake. [LAUGHTER] The-- the margarine sugar. But always hungry. Always hungry. That-- that was-- I know when I came to my parents, what did my father give us from-- you know, when you have diabetes, you get kind of a-- it's called [NON-ENGLISH]. What is it called-- 
INT: Insulin? Or-- TR: Not insulin. It's called-- something you made out of grapes-- of-- of-- of-- of grapes. I forgot the name of it. But it's like a little [INAUDIBLE] and you-- you break it off. And you drink it. You can drink it. Because it-- it tastes sweet.  INT: Mm-hmm. TR: So he-- we broke that up and we drank that. He had this in his-- in his pharmacy.  INT: Right. TR: But that was-- it was an existence. You know, it was-- Theresienstadt was bad. But, it's coming worse later. You know? We had-- I don't know, in 1943, I think it was when they had the-- or was it '44? When they had the assassination attempt on Hitler. They took us all into a big place. Everybody from Theresienstadt had to go there. And I remember, they set us up all in hundreds. Hundreds, hundreds, hundreds. And the-- the police were standing-- or the SS were standing here with guns. And at that time, the rumor went around that we are supposed to get killed there. They're just waiting for the-- form Berlin, that they have to let them know what to do. Couldn't go to the bathroom. It was-- it was awful. And it got dark. And all of a sudden, they said we can go. We can go back to the camp. And can you imagine? It was dark. And they were, like, maybe 60,000 people trying to get into the camp. It was pandemonium. It was terrible. But we made it. And I think this was, either it was in '44-- I don't know, whenever the assassination-- somebody was assassinated. Maybe Heydrich was assassinated. There was a reason for them to do that. And-- and that's it. And life then went on. But then they started already people were taken. This one had to leave. And this one had to leave. And this one had to leave, until it was our turn, you know? 
INT: Mm-hmm. You-- you mentioned you in a-- in a girls', you know, children's-- TR: Dorm, yeah.  INT: --bunk, or dorm. Did you have any particular friends or people you were close with-- TR: Yes.  INT: --at this time? TR: Yes. Yes. I had-- I had, because what kept us really going is we were very Zionistic, very, you know, for-- for-- for Palestine, that time, there was no Israel. And our dream was, and I remember telling my parents, my parents-- my parents that-- that time they could still have children. I said, George and I will go to Palestine. So if we should get-- get out of here, we go to Palestine. So we-- I was in a group-- they called it the [NON-ENGLISH]-- with eight boys and four girls. And we met either they came over, or we went to their-- that was in my-- where my brother was, were the boys, and where we were, were the girls. So we had-- so-- a kind of a [INAUDIBLE]. So what we did is basically, they taught us Israeli songs. And we were-- you know, we were kind of very enthusiastic about it. That kept us going. There's a certain-- and we even learned Hebrew from the people who knew. So there was one day that we said, we can only speak Hebrew to each other. I mean, we couldn't, but we-- we tried to. And I tell you, it helped me when I went to Israel. [LAUGHTER] I could-- I could still read the signs and I could speak a little bit. 
INT: Right. TR: And-- but that kind of-- you needed this, to-- to-- to just keep you going. And-- and because people kept leaving. People get-- kept dying. [SIGHS] My-- you know, my parents, they got skinnier and skinnier. It was-- it was kind of a-- and then-- we just existed there. And waited, whatever happened to us. You know? It was, like, two years that we spend here.  INT: What else did you do to try to keep yourself going and to-- to occupy your time? TR: Well, like I said, we had-- we were singing Hebrew songs. There were also, in our home, we put on-- up shows. You know, there were very talented kids there. And we put up shows and musicals, and so we sat together, and they were singing. And me, with my accordion, I was playing. And then I gave it to someone who played better than I, so they could also play the-- the songs. And we-- we [INAUDIBLE] that. They didn't know that we had-- that I had an accordion. They would have probably confiscated-- I mean, it stayed there anyhow. I mean, I lost it anyhow.  INT: Right. TR: Didn't take it to Auschwitz. And if I took it, I didn't get it. So, we just, you know, like, I worked. And then at-- at night, we-- there was nothing much to do. You know? So we-- we were always with girls together so we told each other stories. 
INT: Mm-hmm. Were you able to see your parents with any kind of regularity? Or-- TR: I wouldn't say regularly. But at least, once-- once a week. We-- we met in my father's little cubicle where he had the pharmacy. And we met there. And so we saw them. And once in a while, they came and visited me at the home there. But not too often. We couldn't get together too often.  INT: OK. We'll end tape two here and pick this up with tape number three. TR: OK.  INT: Thea Rumstein. It is October 4, 1996. When we left off, you were mentioning that you got to see your family fairly infrequently? TR: Infrequent, yes.  INT: Maybe once a week. How did you try to arrange these meetings, and what did you talk about? TR: Well, we arranged-- first of all, I think we didn't work on Sundays, so this is when we made it that we visited the parents. My brother came, and I came. What we talked about, I'm hungry. I'm hungry. Is there anything to eat? And also, you know, I wouldn't say we were not-- we tried to keep everything-- my parents did, you know, not to frighten us because nobody knew what's going to happen. We lived from one day to the other. We didn't know what's going to be tomorrow. We sit together. And I guess we just sat there, and we talked, and then we went back home again. And everybody did their own thing. And-- but there was always so much friction and things going on in Terezin, because she always said, did you hear this one has to come in, and this one has to appear. This one left. So it was a constant, you know, who is going to be next? Who is going to be next? And this is-- this was the life there. And in between, like I said, we-- we were mostly kids together, and we tried to make the best out of it. Once in a while-- once in a while, we heard planes going over, very high over Terezin, and then we said, oh, maybe. Because we didn't know what was going on outside. We had no idea. How come there are planes there? Maybe these are foreign planes. Maybe they are-- they're fighting. Maybe the war's coming to an end. So there was always that kind of hope. There was always a hope there. 
INT: What stands out in your mind most about your time at Theresienstdat? TR: Most of the time-- most stands out, first of all, that I was together with my, you know peers, with girls, which I had very good friends there. And [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] what can I tell you? I can only talk about Terezin, how it stands out, if I think about what came afterwards. While we were there, it was-- there was a constant dying going on. There were epidemics there. There where-- people had encephalitis, which is an inflammation of the brain membranes. People had jaundice, yellow, which I had, too. So don't forget this proximity of people living together. One got it, everybody else got it. There were no medication there, very little. So whoever got well, got well. Didn't get well, died. Especially the older people. Older people, they died like flies. And what stands out? We were still together. The parents were still-- and we wore regular clothes. Even though it was old, and it was no good, but it was-- and we had our hair, and we looked like human beings. That's-- that stands out.  INT: You mentioned you had jaundice at some point? TR: Yeah. This was, you know, you your head down, and you got yellow in your face, and your eyes got yellow. And somehow it was maybe-- it was an epidemic. And most of them had it, because it's very contagious. But it somehow went away. 
INT: Were you given any medication at all? TR: I don't remember that we got some medication because I don't even know if there's anything around for that. I guess it takes its time. Either it gets worse, or it gets better. Again, we really young kids, so maybe we had a little bit more resistance.  INT: Was there a hospital anywhere in Terezin? TR: There was, yeah. There were hospitals called [INAUDIBLE]. This was like a Czech name for that, where people got-- but again, how they were treated, if they had medication, I don't know. I was not in a hospital. I know friends of mine who had encephalitis. They had to go to the hospital because they were act like, you know, they were out. Some died, and some came back.  INT: What was the worst thing that you saw there? TR: In Terezin? Well, the worst thing was, basically, that-- that one day [INAUDIBLE] where we were collected, and we thought we're going to get killed there. Everybody thought. They were standing there with the guns just waiting to shoot us. They're waiting for from Berlin, and we were told they're waiting for something from Berlin what to do with us, because what are we going to do, like 60,000 people standing around there? What are they going to do with us? And then like I said, all of a sudden, in the evening, is they're back again, and it was like a horde, all the people. I don't know how we found our way back all together. That stands out especially, and of course, saying goodbye to friends who were sent away where we didn't know where they are going. But it went on constantly. 
INT: Was there one person who you were like best friends with? TR: Yeah, yeah.  INT: Who is this? TR: I still am, I still am. She lives very close by here. She was-- I met her in Judenschule in Vienna, because she lived a different place, and I lived in different place. And we became best friends when we're 10 years old. And she also was sent to Terezin, but later, because she got diphtheria in the hospital-- or was it scarlet fever, or whatever-- she got in the camp, so they sent her away. And her parents and her sister came to Terezin, and she came in January, '93. But while we were in Vienna, we spend all the time together. She came to my house, I went to her house. Went to the cemetery, working there, she was with me. Always together, always together. And then when she came to Terezin, we were in the same room, and always best friend. And then when we went to Auschwitz-- I will tell you that later-- I met her there again. She lost everybody. Father, mother, sister, nephew. Everybody went right the same day into the gas chamber, and by-- by, I don't know, miracle, she walked in in Auschwitz, when we were already in Auschwitz. And my mother saw her, and says, Gertie, where are your-- she says, I'm all by myself. So she says, come-- come here, stay here. They didn't know we were standing in line. So from that time on, we were always together. 
INT: And her last name? TR: Her name was Gertie Taussig, T-A-U-S-S-I-G. Now she's Gertie Meltzer. She used to live in Levittown. That's the reason that I moved here from Forrest Hills. And so that I didn't have anybody else here, so we were always very close, and still are.  INT: When the two of you were together at Terezin, how did you help each other? What did you talk about? TR: Well, you couldn't help. You couldn't help. Just by talking, just being there, just knowing that there's someone that from before. And you made other, new friends, but this was something that goes way back, and it still goes way back. And we still see each other, and we still go together to the opera, so we have kind of a-- it was like people think, most of the people think, we are sisters because she always said that we are sisters. We didn't want to start telling where are your parents, this one was killed, so we just said we're sisters. Most of the people here, when they see the tape, they'll find out we are not. [LAUGHS] I'm not going to show it to anybody who doesn't know. But that gave her a complete different outlook on life because she was not alone. And for me, it was good, too.  INT: Tell me about what happened when you finally were deported from Theresienstadt? TR: Well, again, there were constant transport, and one day, my father and my brother were called to go to a different labor camp. Didn't say what it is. This was the first transport of men at that particular time, because that-- most of the people were sent away. This was in September, '44. And so, we said goodbye to my father, my brother, and then we heard that in the second transport, people, women, can volunteer to go, too, without being called. And my mother and I, right away. We went right away, and we said we want to be where my brother and my father is, so we volunteered to go on the second transfer. That was half women and half men. 
INT: Now when your father and your brother left, do you remember the last time you spoke to them before they left? TR: Yeah. While we were sitting with them together-- they were sitting on a heap and waiting to be called to be put into the wagons-- and we were with them. We said goodbye, and you know, we actually, like I said, my father thought, everybody thought-- they said we are relocating the people to another labor camp, not knowing where they're going. I mean, we volunteered the next [INAUDIBLE]. We had no idea. We probably would have been called. Maybe yes, maybe no. Maybe we would have stayed back, maybe not, because it was like a lottery. So when they left, I think like when we volunteered maybe two days later, my mother and I volunteered, and we went also. They sent us to wherever we got to. You know, we went into wagons, and-- and looked around. There was just a little hole on top of the train, and we said, where are we going, where are we going? Nobody know where we're going. But then when they opened up the doors, I mean, I just say this was like three days of agony. There was no food, no bathroom. I don't know where we went-- wherever we were, we went. And all of a sudden, they opened the doors, and we saw [GERMAN], and we saw Auschwitz, you know? That was the station. And if I see this train things, that gives me the-- it's terrible. And then they made us jump, you know, jump out there. [SPEAKING GERMAN], and stand-- you know, stand in line there. And I remember we had a can of sardines. My mother had a can of sardines, which she took along. Sardines which we got once, I don't know when. It was like gold, you know? I remember mother opening up the sardines, said Thea, eat, eat, eat, eat. You know, like this is gold. Eat it up before-- before they take it away from us. 
INT: Right. TR: And I resisted, but I ate it. I remember that. And then we were waiting. And the people here, you know, they were already Polish prisoners there. They were with the striped uniforms there. And [SPEAKING GERMAN], you know? I mean, yelled at us. And then we stood in line, and then the selection started, you know? Again, we didn't know what it is about. We saw Auschwitz, but we didn't know. A row of SS, you know, was standing there. And then I heard in the middle was Mengele, Dr. Mengele. He was part of the selecting people. And then of course, then through a loudspeaker, they said, the camp is far away. I mean, we were three days in this miserable situation. The camp is far away. Old people, young people, people who are sick or are very tired and cannot walk, can be on a-- what do you call it? A truck. Can go on the truck, and we take them to the camp. [SIGHS] So most of the old people and the people with little children-- that's how Gertie's sister and her little boy got killed. She was only in her 20s, and she walked in, and-- And then it started. Left, right, left, right, left, right. And when they came to my mother, he said, [GERMAN]? I mean, are you healthy? She says, I have a cold or something. My mother was that time 43 years old or something. So he sent her to the left. I don't know. It is a dispute. I thought it was the right. People when I hear now, they say left. I thought they sent her to the right side, and the people to stay alive stayed on the left side. So he sent my mother that way and me that way, and when I saw all these people going-- all the people. The people-- even somebody was 40 was old. And so behind them, I just instinctively grabbed her arm-- grabbed her arm-- and started running this way. And I said, I don't go where the old people go. Just instinctively, we walk. And I started running with her, and that saved her life. She was already on the other side. I didn't know that. This was just instinct. It was just God made me do it. I don't know who made me to it. And-- and then we started walking. The first thing I saw, people were were not supposed to be outside. Not even put their head out. You know, there were these barracks there. The first thing I saw that a woman put-- looked outside, and somebody shot her in the face. And I heard that shot, and I saw the blood.
And my mother said, Thea, don't look, don't look, don't look. So I looked, I saw it, but I kept running. And then we came-- you know, then we came into a big room, and they said strip. We had to strip everything completely. And that was the first thing. The second thing, we had to sit down and get shaved all over, you know? Hair and everything, completely. And then there was a heap of clothing there, probably from people who died or something, and said take a dress and a pair of shoes. That's all we could take, and that's what that we took. Funny part is that you didn't-- I didn't recognize hardly-- I didn't recognize anybody. You know, when you shave the hair off, you don't recognize anybody. Somebody said, you know, you look good with that. But you know, it was kind of a-- I don't know, we were just numb. Numb like an animal, you know? Like a sheep that got shaved off. And then we're standing there, and with the clothes, and then we were marched into one of these barracks. You probably saw it already. And we got into one of these bunk beds there. Just there were rows and rows and rows. There was no mattress on it. There was no blanket on it. There was just rows and rows of bunk beds. There used to be stables, you know, horse stable, those things. There was in the middle was like like breaks, and left and right. And there we were, sitting and waiting. Of course, then they come again, and you had to come off these bunk beds. And then you have to stand and get undressed, and they selected again. Anybody who had any kind of sign on the body or any scratches. People get-- in Theresienstadt, that was the most terrible thing. They got like infection, like pus-- pus all over. Young people, especially. I had a friend, she had it all over. She didn't survive. Because when they saw that, boom, that was, of course, already a reason to-- to kill them. And then, of course, they started the appells. You had to go, they-- to count you. To go out and count you early in the morning, like 5:00 in the morning. Somewhere music played, you know? They had like a orchestra there. Played music, and you were standing there shivering. It was October, and it was in Auschwitz. It's Silesia. It's [INAUDIBLE]. It's Silesia. Cold and muddy. It was hell. And again, they counted, and people collapsed there. And I remember when people collapsed, there were kapos there, Jewish kapos. I couldn't believe that these are Jewish people, but they were elected to take care of all these people. So if somebody collapsed, they came with cold water and poured over so that they came to, and they could get up again. And again, selections and selections, and sleeping there. We slept like a whole row of people, like the sardines. And if once turned around, all the rest had to around. And then once in a while, I mean, we got like a terrible cold thing, something black in the morning to drink. And we got like pumpkin soup. It was awful. It's called [NON-ENGLISH]. Like sweet potatoes. Pumpkin soup once a day. And this was our existence there. And selections, and selections, and standing in line. And it was-- that was until we were sent away to Germany, but that went on for like two, three weeks. 
INT: So you arrived in Auschwitz when? TR: It was October, '44. It was right after Rosh Hashanah. October, '44, arrived in Auschwitz. And then we found out. Then the people told us already that where are the other people who didn't make it, didn't come with us? Oh, they are already gassed. They are already burning. They are all-- everybody showed to the chimneys, you know. They were always smoking. And that's also when Gertie came the next transport, and she stayed with us, so she was with us already together. So my mother, Gertie, and I, the three of us. Until one day, they said, again, we are supposed to take a shower. Now we thought that's it, again, you know? But it was we took a shower, and we got other clothing. We got a coat. Again, we took a coat, we took a dress, and we took a pair of shoes. There was all heaps of you didn't know. You grabbed whatever you could. And I can grabbed a pair of men's shoes, two different kinds, and everybody envied me for those shoes. Because they were big, you know? And they were flat. Because Gertie got high heeled shoes. She had to walk all this time with the high heel shoes, and it was terrible. And then we were sent-- we were put it into wagons again, cattle wagons, and didn't know where they're bringing us again. And we finally arrived in Freiberg, which is Saxony, in a factory. We had to work in a factory. And they assembled us there. It was maybe, I don't know, 200, 300 people there. Women, only women. They were not even finished with our barracks. They we're building barracks. After a couple of weeks, they took us from the factory to sleep. This was cold. There was no heat. It was still wet, everything, and it was bitter, bitter cold there. We didn't have underwear or nothing. I don't even remember how we went to the bathroom, honestly, what we did. I think we tore out the lining of the coat to clean ourselves. And this-- this was it, and we were in Freiberg. 
INT: What was it like at Freiberg? TR: Freiberg was a town, a small town, which belonged actually to the concentration camp Flossenburg. This was the concentration camp, and this was a side camp. It was a small, peaceful town where people went to work and saw us marching in the morning, and nobody even threw us a piece of bread or anything. They knew what was going on, and we were [INAUDIBLE] in a factory there. It was an airplane factory. They just made wings for airplanes.  INT: And specifically, what did you do? TR: I worked on those wings. I can remember there was a whole bunch of people holding up, and they were soldering, welding their wing down. I don't know the name for it. Is is, you know, I don't even think they ever got finished [INAUDIBLE]. But we were holding those things, and somebody was working on it. And we did this like maybe 15 hours a day. We marched in the morning to the factory, worked there, and marched back.  INT: So what would a typical day be like? What time would you wake up? What-- TR: Well, the day-- I just know-- I remember that I was always terrible afraid, always like anxious and afraid. They woke us up like at 5:00 in the morning. Get up, get up, get up, get up. Trying to think if we could wash some place, because everything was like ice, ice cold. I know there was like a latrine there, which when you went there, you had to go out barefoot into the snow, into the latrine, and then back. And then we put on our dress, and I think the soup we got at the factory. I mean, the coffee, like drink there, whatever. And a piece of bread that we kept until, you know, either ate it right away-- it's just once a day we got it. So we had to line up, and we lined up. We had to walk to the factory quite a-- quite a distance. I know we walked a little faster. Gertie and I, I remember, we walked faster. And you know what it is, when you walk in the snow, it built up on your shoe. And all of a sudden, we had like we were so high because it was like wet snow, and it built up on your shoes. And we turned around, and we didn't see anybody. I mean, we walked too fast. So we were standing there waiting for the other people to catch up with us because we had no place to go. And in the factory, we started-- and there was like a very bad supervisor, SS guy, and a lot of SS women, supervisor with that gray uniform, with the whip, with dogs, you know. And so, they frightened us tremendously. Tremendously. And that was our-- were our days. There were a lot of bed box we had. We each got one blanket, and we-- there was a straw mattress, just a straw. So I slept on one small bed together with my mother. So that was a kind of good because we slept one head was here and one head here, and we warmed our feet this way. You know, I held her feet, she held mine, so we could. But people who slept with strangers, you know, they put themselves in a blanket and the other one in a blanket. And these were our days in Freiberg, Freiberg in Saxony. 
INT: You mentioned that these SS guards, they were intimidating, that you were frightened by them. TR: Yes.  INT: Was there any-- were there any incidences you can recall or cruelty? TR: Oh, yes. I remember that when we walked once, we walked in-- my mother walked into a door where she was not supposed to. I don't remember if it said something on top, but she walked in there. And this-- this SS guard came, and he hit her so badly. Just this, you know. And you're not supposed to go through this door, and he really hit her bad. She was bleeding. But that-- that was in my memory. And the women were very bad, too, you know. Any time you walked where you're not supposed to, they let the dog loose on you. So it was pretty bad.  INT: Was there any way at all to get additional food? Did people smuggle food in? TR: No way, no way, no way. Nobody-- we worked with non-Jewish Germans. Don't forget it was 1944, and they took the younger one, already, into the war. They needed every man [INAUDIBLE]. So there were older guys there. Not one-- not one gave us anything, or even told us. Maybe they were afraid, but they could have told us that the war's coming closer, and it's going to go to an end, or give us any kind of hope. Nobody did. Nobody did. The only thing that we remember that was-- was also when you asked me what February 15, 1945. See, there were air raids constantly there, and they locked us on the top floor of the factory. So if the factory would have been hit, we would be the first one. That was my other-- I was so afraid. I was always telling my mother, what is if we are not dead right away? What is if-- if we are just wounded? They'll send us back to Auschwitz and gas us. So this-- this is what I mean being afraid. And then also in the factory one time, you know, I had like oil here from whatever we worked, and I rubbed it. And my hand got inflamed. I got metal poisoning. My arm was from here to here I couldn't feel it, and it was just hanging there. And there was no medication. There was nothing there. And I didn't know what to do, but the one day, I don't know, this thing opened up, and it started draining and draining. And again, this was my luck. I mean, it could have been, it could have not been. I could have been completely poisoned. So that got better, and then in February-- in February, 1945, they had the big air raid on Dresden. I think people know about it. And we were-- we saw everything. We were between Chemnitz and Dresden. 
INT: OK. We'll stop tape number three here and pick this up with tape number four. TR: OK.  INT: It is October 4, 1996. So, Mrs. Rumstein, when we left off, you mentioned that you were able to see the bombing of Dresden from a certain-- TR: Right.  INT: --distance. TR: Right.  INT: What, what did you see? And-- TR: Well, we, we were in the factory. And instead of bringing us on top of the factory, they brought us first in the basement. And from the basement, the people who worked in the factory went into-- that's called-- what do you call, A [GERMAN], that's where they had the bomb Keller.  INT: Like a cellar? TR: A cellar, yes.  INT: Right. TR: So they didn't let us in. They put us out-- put us out right in front of the factory. And as we were out, it was a cold-- it was February 15. We saw the-- we saw fire. The sky was, was red. And we saw the, you know, the dogfights and the fights and, and, and the flag, you know. They're shooting at the-- we saw airplanes coming down. That's when I was so afraid. And oh my god, if something wouldn't happen? What is it we are not dead? And what I'm trying to say-- so it was-- it was-- afterwards, people still are very upset that the British bombed Dresden at that time and that so many people got killed. A lot of Germans got killed. And not knowing when people say that-- meanwhile, they had a camp right close by where people got killed, innocent people. I'm sure there were also innocent people who got killed. But this was our hope that we knew that something is going on, that we were happy to see that there was a fighting going on, that something is going to happen, that, that the war is coming closer. So we were kind of terrible afraid but happy to see that something is happening, that not-- nothing is too far away anymore. And so we were out. And we saw all the-- we saw the-- Dresden burning. The sky was, like, red. And that's-- after that, you know, we were put-- we were-- went back, back to the barracks and back to work. And one day in-- I think it was end of March, they, they gathered us together from the barracks, line up, and got us to cattle wagons again, put us in there. We didn't know where they wanted to bring us. Later, we heard they want us-- to bring us to the main camp, which-- Flossenburg, that was full. Because there, they still-- there, I saw heaps of dead people lying there when we-- when we go-- went through.
And we were on the road, on the-- on the train for at least maybe, maybe two or three weeks. They didn't know where to bring us. And what they did in-between, they loosened up the, the-- you know, they opened up the train, disconnected it, and put, put other trains in-between with soldiers and with ammunitions because it was kind of a camouflage. Because the fight, they were-- constantly were planes going, fighting. I remember we had those little things where we got our soups in. It was like metal-- [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] I wouldn't say that's a plate. But we used to put this on our head. We were hoping, like, this would help us. And so in-between, we were going-- we were going. We went through Czechoslovakia. I remember we stopped in Pilsen. Because we didn't get anything to eat. I remember we got, like-- in that plate, we got a, a, a, a little bit soup of something. I tell you, they didn't know where, where to bring us. We were hoping, since we saw we were in Czechoslovakia, that they might bring us back to Terezin. But they didn't. They brought us to to Mauthausen. And it was March, beginning of April. Again, no food, nothing. They let us out occasionally from the trains to go on the-- underneath the train to have your, your functions. And I remember there were cherry blossom trees-- cherry trees, you know, on the side of the train. And we went-- we ate the cherry blossoms. We ate grass. And whatever water there was, we took and we drank it, whatever, whatever. So we figured, you know, it's good for the animals. It'll be good for-- I mean, good for us. We, we needed to have something. Until we-- all of a sudden, we looked, and we saw Mauthausen. That-- the train went into Mauthausen. Well, we knew about Mauthausen coming from Austria because Mauthausen was one of the oldest concentration camps in Austria. It was a quarry. And a lot of [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] political prisoners were there already long before and a lot of criminals, murderers. It was like a, a, a-- in a prison. And somehow, somehow, we thought, maybe-- oh, we are in Austria. Maybe it won't be so bad. As we lined up-- as we lined up the road there to go into the camp, all the locals were standing left and right, laughing and saying, well, that's a good place for you. There you will-- you will find your eternal rest here. That's what they told us. This was-- these were the Austrians, the good Austrians that-- they say they didn't know-- like, the surrounding people who didn't know that there was a camp.
And we went up there, terrible afraid. We were concentrated in one area. And it says, we're going to take a bath. We're going to take a shower. And I started crying. I was like, I mean, everybody-- but I was like-- I was hysterical because I thought, that said, now, go in a shower, and we're going to be gassed. And as I was crying like this, one guy came to me. He was a guard in-- was a guard. He used to be in the army. And I don't know, they sent him back there as a-- as a guard. And he asked me in German, why do you cry? I said, because we are going to get gassed now. And I'm so afraid. And he said in German to me, he says, no, you won't. Don't forget, this was April-- end of April-- end of April. And he said to me, no, you-- you're not going to be gassed. You're not going to be gassed. He says, where do you come from? I said, I come from Vienna. He was-- he said he's from Munich. And he says, wait here. And he went. And he says, who, who are you with here? I said, well, my sister and my mother is here. And he brought us something to eat-- I forgot what it is-- which we-- [LAUGHS] which we ate very fast. And he disappeared. He disappeared-- didn't see him until later. And all right, I was a little bit-- I told the other people-- I said, I heard from this guy we are not going to be gassed. We're just really going into the shower. And we got some in the shower. And he gave us-- they gave us some men underwear which, which were full of lice already. But this is what we had. Don't forget, we were on the train for three weeks. We were, like, smell-- smelly and dirty. You cannot imagine. And then, after we stayed there for a while, they took us into the gypsy camp. There is a big quarry there. People is on top. And there's a valley. And a valley-- and they-- stairs going down there, like very, very high stairs, and people used to be-- steep. I mean, the whole thing is very steep. People used to have to carry from downstairs those heavy stones up. They didn't make it? They threw them down there. I mean, this was constantly going on. But with us, they just put us down into this gypsy camp. It's called gypsy camp because most of them were gypsies they had down there, gypsies and Jews, of the, the most-- of the underworld, the under people. And there we were, lying sick, [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] just waiting, whatever happens. And-- but we heard in the distance already for a-- for a while, like, cannons, and-- you know. But we still don't know what it is. We didn't know what it meant. 
INT: So there was artillery fire? TR: Artillery fire, fighting--  INT: Mm-hmm. TR: --going on, but in a-- in a distance, you know. And we were there. I wouldn't say-- we had no feelings whatsoever, just lie there and wait. Again, they couldn't-- because there were a lot of air raids going on, we didn't get any food again there, nothing. And that went on for, for quite a while. And people were dying. And I could see them. You know, they put them in, like-- in rows, this way, this way, this way, like heaps of dead people there. But our feelings were like-- we were completely numb. And one day in May, I saw a jeep-- a jeep. Some people were saying it was the British. I think it were-- it were the American that came. I'm almost sure. Because later on, I learned there's a lot of-- it was not the Russians. It were the American who liberated us. And again, there was no joy. There was no happiness. It was just-- I can't say resignation because we were completely numb after all this time. And, and that was actually-- this was our liberation. The only thing we did-- we saw that the, the, the gypsies, kind of-- maybe they were stronger. Maybe they were there longer. They went out. And they came back with chickens--  INT: [LAUGHS] TR: --afterwards, you know. They had chickens-- and with food, and with this. And Gertie and I-- the last strength we had-- we said, look, we are in Austria. Maybe we-- maybe there are farmers around there. So we went. We knocked at every door. We said, we are Austrians! We are Austrian! Can we have something to eat? So one of these farmers opened the door and let us in. Mind you, it was like a day or two after the, the liberation. And he gave us a glass of wine. [LAUGHTER] We were sitting there. And before we even drank it, two guys stormed in with guns. And he saw us sitting there. And he says, what are those Jewish bitches doing here-- [SPEAKING GERMAN], you know, Jewish bitches doing here? Out of here! And he held the gun. He didn't shoot us. But we started running like crazy. We ran back to the-- to the camp without food. [LAUGHS] Just-- we just laid there, ready to die. And this was the-- this was our liberation. What What happened after your liberation? How-- TR: After the liberation, like I said, my mother was very sick. And they had some, like, either was it Red Cross cars or something going around, collecting people who were-- you know. So I made sure that my mother should be up. They should take her up to the main camp. Didn't know where they're taking her, but take her up because she was-- she was ready to die. Gertie and I, we were lying there. She was, like, over there. And I was over here. And I couldn't even crawl over there. I couldn't. I said-- I went-- once a day, I visited her. I went back. And I said, I have no strength. And there we were lying there maybe for-- then we got something to eat, which was very bad because whatever we got to eat, we got diarrhea. You know, they gave us whatever the American rations were. It was like beans-- bean soup or something. And that was-- that gave us duress. And [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] one day, we said, how long we are-- may be done? Nobody's-- cares for us. We're just down there. So we decided to go up there to the, the quarry steps there-- that's the only way you could get up-- and look for my mother. 
INT: Right. TR: And so we attempted that. It took us hours. I thought I have a heart attack every time I was [LAUGHS] going up one step. I said, Gertie, I can't. So she hit me. And when she couldn't go on, I hit her. I just, just-- we have to go. So we made it up the stairs. And I went from place to place. And I called, Mama, Mama, Mama? Once I heard her call, Thea!  INT: [LAUGHS] TR: So I crawled through the window. This was already-- she was in the infirmary there. And that's where we stayed, in the infirmary for another few weeks. Then we were already liberated. And that was the-- this was it.  INT: After you left the infirmary-- TR: Yeah.  INT: --the three of you stayed together? TR: We stayed together, yes.  INT: Mm-hmm. TR: We stayed together. I-- we had nothing to wear. We, we had lousy underwear. Even the infirmary, there was-- you know, they didn't have all the facilities to take care of the people. We found some tablecloths there. And we made, made us each-- I was-- because I learned how to sew and my mother could sew, we, we cut it up. And we made us each a little dress and a little satchel. And we said, we have to go back someplace. It can't be forever-- it was already-- it was already end of May. It was beginning of June already. I mean, the war ended in-- May 7. So they put us into trains to go to Vienna. But we didn't get far. We got to the Russian Zone. They made us get out of the trains, sprayed us with DDT, you know. We had to go that. And we had to start walking. Now, my mother couldn't walk anymore. So as we got into this little town in Austria, it was all Russian, swarming with the Russians there. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] There was one bakery there, whatever it was, a store. And my mother and I went in there. And two other women with us. Gertie was also going, but she kept going. We couldn't-- my mother-- my feet where there's her feet, where this. And so we were in this bakery. And there we got something to eat from the Russians. In fact, this was officer. Well, I don't if I tell this story. But after we were finished eating, he took me. And he took me into a room and throw me on a bed. And, of course, I knew what he wanted to do. And I start pushing him. And I ran outside. I ran outside and ran on the street. And I was crying-- crazy. And I told my mother we have to leave here. I can't stay here. And the women said, look at her! What she thinks they did to her. I mean, they couldn't believe it. I mean, the way I looked. And I was in the middle of the street, crying. And again, it was a miracle. A soldier came towards me. And he says to me in Yiddish, [SPEAKING YIDDISH]. So I told him. I said, I was just released. We just came from concentration camp. And this and this happened. So he says-- he took me around. He says, my, my-- meine Schwester, my sister. Are you are alone? I said, no. I have my mother there. He said, get your mother. He was a Polish soldier who joined the Russian-- was in the Russian Army-- Jewish soldier. And he says, don't worry, I will protect you. Because these things were going on left and right, you know. The raping that was-- I didn't know that. But when I find it on my own, you know, then I found out. So he took my mother and I. He brought us in one of the houses. And he gave us a room. I remember there was big pillows and big, you know, Like the down pillows, and things like this. And he says, you're going to sleep here. And I'm in the next room. I'm sleeping in the next room. He says, if anybody bothers you, you just knock, knock at the door. And I said, I will see that I can help you get to, to Vienna. And there he fed us with the pork they were making for the soldiers there, all kinds of, of, of mishmash there. But we ate it, you know-- anything we could. I mean, meanwhile, we had terrible diarrhea. And we ate this and ate this. We were-- we were terrible sick. But we had to eat. We felt we had to eat. And then one morning, he, he put us on a-- on a-- what do you call it? Again, a, a wagon-- not a car, a truck. It was a truck. 
INT: Right. TR: And he put us on a truck with Russian soldiers, women soldiers. And they drove us to some kind of a station. And from there, we got a train to go to Vienna. And we arrived in Vienna early in the morning. And where the railroad station-- I know the street very well. We have been back since. Now it's a beautiful shopping street. But everything was bombed out-- bombed out. Everything was, like, flattened. And we walked, and we walked. And we set into the open store just to rest up. And I had a little bread and things in that satchel that I made in, in, in, in Mauthausen. And we walked all the way down. I remember we met somebody that we knew. And we ask him. He said, oh my god. [? Gutie, ?] you and Thea, you came back, you know. Where's [? Jule? ?] Well, he's not here. And George? We didn't know where my brother was. We didn't know that he survived. And we went straight in a Jewish hospital on the Malzgasse. And there we stayed for weeks until we-- me, I recuperated much faster. And that was the end of our trip from, from Mauthausen. And we stayed in a hospital. I was out already. My mother was still in the hospital. And we had no place to live, no place to go. The-- there was nobody, actually that looked out-- the American Joint came a little bit later. So we had that maid that I mentioned that worked for us. She became a superintendent of a-- of a-- of a house. And she had a one-room apartment. And she took us in. My mother slept together with her on one bed. And I slept on an ironing board. That's how, how we survived. 
INT: Mhm. TR: And then, you know, it got slowly better, you know. We got to eat. We recuperated. And then my relatives from Budapest, my grandparents, they also-- they went through their own horror. But they survived. And they told us to come, come for-- so we could recuperate. And so we went to Budapest, stayed there for a little while, got to eat, and went back to Vienna, then, afterwards.  INT: When you find out that your brother had survived? TR: That was a long time later. My father-- we heard in, in Hungary. We-- they told us. They said, you know, [? Jule ?] did not survive. And George, we don't know. When we came back to Vienna, I walked on the street. And I met a fellow that I knew from Theresienstadt. And I said, do you know anything about George? He says, yes. George is alive. He's in a hospital in Germany. He has something-- he got very sick with his lungs. He was liberated in Auschwitz. And he's in a hospital. So it took us a while to, to get in touch with him. But finally, we got in touch with my brother. And he came to Vienna, like, in '46, '47. It took him a long time to recuperate.  INT: How about your mother? How did she fare after the war was over? TR: Well, she was pretty sick. She was sick in Vienna. And when we went to Budapest, my relatives there, they were all doctors-- my uncle. So he took her in the hospital. And she stayed there. Most of the time that we were in, in, in Budapest, she was in the hospital. She was very sick, undernourished. And, and, you know, and you're a little bit older. When you're married in your 40s, you, you couldn't take it as good as when you were in your teens. But finally, she recuperated pretty good that we said, we want to go back to Vienna, see if George, whoever, you know, we find. And don't stay there-- we're going to go either to Palestine or to, to America. Who would want to stay there? 
INT: So what happened? TR: What happened is that we couldn't come here again. We had to-- well, I met my husband, then, in Vienna. We were friendly with them. That's another story. But that becomes too long. We were living in the Russian Zone. Where the-- where the superintendent was, she was in the Russian Zone. And when you lived in the Russian Zone, you couldn't-- you couldn't come to America. I don't even know if I had an affidavit yet, but even to try. So, so we stayed in Vienna. And I went back to school. At first-- at first, I took typing and shorthand so that I could make some kind of living. And-- because we had nothing. And then I was lucky. I got a [INAUDIBLE] with the American Joint Distribution Committee. And I worked in the office there. And they have-- they didn't get money. But we got food, food packages every week, which we could use and we sold, you know. On the black market we sold, whether we had sugar or margarine or spam, or something. And whatever we got for it, we bought for the house, for the-- oh, we got an apartment. My mother got us an apartment. Our old-- where we lived was completely bombed out. And, and that's where we lived.  INT: How long did you stay in Vienna? TR: I stayed in Vienna until 1954. I came here. I went to school there. I did my-- I finished up. And I went two years to the university. And Gertie came here-- 1949. And so I came here for a visit in '54 to visit her. And that's when I met Jack again, my husband, whom I met in Vienna. He came back from, from the camp. And we were friendly again in Vienna. But he left already in '46, '47. And I went to school. So he-- we met here again. And the whole flame started again. And we decided to get married here. May 28, 1955, we got married here. 
INT: And so then you were able to stay in this country? TR: I had a hard time staying here. First of all, I had to go back anyhow. I-- my mother couldn't-- still couldn't come here. But I arranged it. I went to Washington. I went to-- that time, was-- our senator was Javits-- intervened. And finally, they told me, the only one that can help her come here is the consul in Vienna. So I went to Vienna. And I had connections in Vienna. I knew the mayor of Vienna. And I went to him and asked him to write and, and vouch for my mother that she is not a communist or she is not a-- and so then my mother could come here, too. But she never immigrated here. She stayed in Vienna until she died. She came here a lot for a visit. But she never decided to stay, yeah. And this is the story.  INT: Right. Do-- TR: It's a long story. [LAUGHTER]  INT: Do you and your husband have any children? TR: Yes, we do have one daughter, Julia. And she has-- she's married. And she has three children-- Brian, Gregory, and Alex, 12, 9, and 6. And, and this is our life. She lives in Connecticut. And we are happy with them. We are happy with the grandchildren. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] And this is 'so far. And I hope it stays for a while. [LAUGHTER]  INT: Right. How, how do you feel that your experiences in the Holocaust affected your life after the war was over? TR: It affected me a lot. First of all, you appreciated life much more, much more. And also, [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] worthly goods, as nice as they are, they come and go. I mean, if you have a bigger car, a smaller car, a bigger house, a smaller house, and this, it never meant much to me. I'm not saying that I don't like it. But it doesn't mean anything to me. And my husband is the same way. Because we both went through the same situation, he even worse and longer, [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] we never-- we discussed it. We knew about each other's life, what happened. But we didn't dwell on it because it's no good to dwell it now. When we get older, we feel we have to talk about it. People tell us we have to talk about it because once we are gone, there's denial already now. But in, in 50 years, there'll be much more denial. And that's why I find it so wonderful from Steven Spielberg that he, he manages and arranges all these interviews. Even though we didn't want to do it, we find now that it was our duty-- 
INT: Mm-hmm. TR: --duty to, to the people who got killed. Because there are many who don't believe it. They say, all of these pictures and all these stories are lies. And not 6 million were killed, only 1 million. It doesn't make any difference. But there were 6 million Jews killed. There were other people killed, too. But they decimated the Jewish-- half-- I think there were-- there were 12 before the war, 12 million Jews in the world. I think now may-- might be 14. And that that's-- so they decimated us.  INT: Right. OK, we'll stop tape number 4 here and pick this up with tape number 5. TR: No! [LAUGHTER]  INT: Interview with Mrs. Thea Rumstein. You-- you had mentioned earlier that material things are-- are not necessarily important to you-- TR: Right.  INT: --partially as a result of your experience-- TR: Definitely.  INT: --in the war. TR: Definitely.  INT: What is important to you, then? TR: What is important? My family. My closest friends. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] My health. Our health. That's very important, that we stay around for a while and live every day. Live every day. It's easy to say don't worry about later. Don't worry about what was. Live now. And if you want to do something now, do it. Don't let [INAUDIBLE]. Never push it for later. If I feel I have to do something, I do it. I think this was part of it, because you never know what tomorrow brings. Even when you are younger, you don't know what tomorrow brings. So if you're really-- and it has [INAUDIBLE] to do that-- it has to do-- you have to be wealthy to do it. If it's something you want to do, you should pursue it. 
INT: You mentioned your husband is also a survivor. Was that important to you when-- when the two of you were getting married? Did that-- TR: That he was a survivor?  INT: That he was a survivor also? TR: No, it wasn't important. But it-- it was our-- we have the same background, you know? I knew his mother. We've become-- we're, like, related. We come from the same background. And we have the same thing in common. And we have the same values. That was very important for a marriage that lasted, so far, 41 years-- [LAUGHS]  INT: Right TR: --because sometimes, you know, if this doesn't go together, then it cannot last. So that helped a lot. And of course, grateful that-- that we're still here and that we made it.  INT: Did the two of you talk a lot about your wartime experiences, or-- TR: I don't think so, no. We-- we-- we-- even with our-- with Julia, when she was younger, we didn't say, oh, we didn't have this or that, because even with my grandchildren now, I slowly-- because the oldest one starts learning about the Holocaust. I don't want to burden little children, you know, with-- with-- with the past. Not yet. I want to do it gradually, you know? They can-- and once I-- I had my-- my oldest grandson. When he heard about it, he says, does-- really, they-- they killed all the Jews? And why? Only because of they are Jewish? He says, what if they changed their religion? So, you know, it kind of-- if you change your religion, then you're-- you're not going to be persecuted. So I told him it didn't matter under Hitler. You had to have four Christian grandparents in order to be saved. And I don't know how many generations back. It didn't help. Whoever changed their religion, it didn't help them. So-- but like I said, I didn't-- I-- we didn't speak much because we felt it would burden a child or-- or-- later on, of course, she took a Holocaust course and-- and-- and knew about it. Now she knows about everything. And if she sees the tape, she'll know even more-- 
INT: Right. TR: --because like I said, we always felt-- we never wanted to talk about-- even with people who were not in the camp. Very few people we discussed our-- what happened, because-- and I still feel-- I know it is maybe wrong-- if you haven't been there, you don't-- you don't know how it was. I have not seen-- I'm sorry, Mr. Spielberg. I have not seen I didn't want to see it because to me, if I see it, what is it going to tell me? I know how it was. It's a re-enactment. It's for people who have not been there. Means a lot. It's a wonder. I understand it's a wonder. I mean, it won the Academy Award. It's a wonderful film, I'm sure. But I can't-- and the same thing is-- I went to Yard Vashem. But I'm afraid to go to the Holocaust Museum. I don't want to see the cattle cars. I don't want to see the-- the-- the-- all these things that will remind me of how it was. Maybe this is psychologically, I try to-- I can't forget. But I don't want to dwell on it. I don't want to be burdened, you know? That it just sticks in my head all the time. To see it, I know I-- I would get very excited.  INT: You mentioned your grandchildren. And they're still very young. You don't want to burden them a lot with-- with this right now. TR: Right. 
INT: What message would you want to leave them on this tape for later? TR: Well, first of all, they should remember their grandfather and grandmother, and that they love them very much. And also, they should be proud to be Jewish. They live in Connecticut, a very nice area-- not predominantly Jewish. But my daughter, even though we did not have a religious home-- I made Passover seder. We going to temple on Yom Kippur and Rosh Hashanah. She's joined a synagogue. The kids go to Hebrew school. Brian will be bar mitzvahed-- bar mitzvahed next May 31. And they should remember that they are-- they are Jewish. Should be proud of it. And-- and that's it. Should be just proud being-- having-- having a good background. That's all.  INT: OK. Is there anything else you'd like to add in closing? TR: Well, I-- I want to thank, you know, you guys. And I want to thank Steven Spielberg again for doing that good work. And-- and I hope it wasn't too long. [LAUGHS] Didn't speak too much.  INT: [LAUGHS] TR: Otherwise, I'm-- I'm glad that you came. And I finally-- I'm glad I made up my mind to talk about it, my past.  INT: And we'd like to thank you very much for your testimony. TR: You're welcome.  INT: Mrs. Rumstein, would you like to introduce your husband to us, please? TR: Yes, I'd like to. This is my husband of 41 years. It's going on 42. Jack-- Jack-- we call him Jackie. And what can I tell you about him? He's-- he's a good husband. He was a good husband. And we have a very good marriage for all these years. And-- JACK RUMSTEIN: We try to do the best. TR: Yeah, we do the best. And we do a lot of things. And we have common interests. And-- and that's it. I don't know what else to say about him. He's a good guy. Everybody likes him. He's a-- JACK RUMSTEIN: I hope so. [LAUGHTER] TR: He jokes-- he jokes a lot. And what do you have to say? You have something to say? [LAUGHS] JACK RUMSTEIN: Well, she told you the whole story. And we hope that people will recognize for what-- what we went through all these years. And for the future, the children and all of them should know what happened [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] in those terrible years-- TR: Yeah. JACK RUMSTEIN: --past. TR: And we feel-- we feel we are survivors. We really feel like survivors. And that makes us stronger. It made us stronger over the years, with all the things that happened from '45 to-- to '96. All kinds of things happened. But we survived it. We're still here. Hope for-- for quite some time. JACK RUMSTEIN: Hopefully. TR: Right? [LAUGHTER] 
INT: OK. Thank you both very much. JACK RUMSTEIN: Thank you, sir. TR: And you, thank you. JACK RUMSTEIN: [LAUGHS] TR: Well, this is my most precious picture because it is my father, my mother, and me, and my brother. From left to right is my mother. And I'm the little baby on her lap, so it's the day I was-- the-- the year I was born. And on the right side is my father with my brother, who is-- when I'm-- if I'm a baby, he is probably 18 months old there. And it was done in a-- in a little garden, a coffeehouse garden not far where we lived. And I really have that picture because my parents must have sent it either to my aunt in Israel or my aunt in England. And that's how I got it, because that's the only thing we got if we send it out of the country.  INT: And your parents' names? TR: This is Gusti. And Jula-- Julius. That's my father.  INT: And your brother? TR: And my brother's George on the right side. And I'm the little baby on the left, Thea. [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] This, again, is a picture that was sent by my parents to her sister-- my mother's sister in Israel. On that left is me. I was six years old. And on the right is my brother, George-- Georg. He-- he was seven. And again, these are precious pre-war pictures, which are very few that I have. So I'm-- I like them. [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] And this is a picture taken when I was 11 years old. So it was 1939. In front of a swastika because they were all over. And this was a store with a swastika. I guess I couldn't get away from it. With my girlfriend, who was 12 years old. She was a year older than I am. But I'm the taller one. I'm on the right. She's on the left. And she perished. She and her whole family perished during Hitler. 
INT: Do you remember her name, by any chance? TR: Susie Shanker. Yes, her name was Susie Shanker. [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] This is my father, Jula-- Julius. And this was taken in 1943 as a kind of passport picture. And he perished in 1945-- '44, excuse me. In October 1944. And I loved him very much. It took me a long time to get over his death.  INT: Do you know where this picture was taken? TR: This picture was taken someplace in Vienna. I really don't know. Maybe it was taken for an identification card, because we had to take-- go around with them. So again, I got this from someplace, from either Israel or from England. [PAUSES FOR 5 SECONDS] This is my mother. This was taken approximately in the '50s, maybe '54, '55-- 1954, '55, in Vienna. And she's Gusti. Her name was Gusti. She survived together with me. And she lived to be a nice ripe old age of 86 years old. And I'm very grateful for that. She stayed in Vienna-- she-- all the time. But she came to America every year. And we spent months together. And we again went to Vienna and visited her there too, and was always a wonderful time. I have wonderful memories of her. [PAUSES FOR 6 SECONDS] This is an interesting story. Gertie-- my friend Gertie last year went to Austria. And she visited Mauthausen. And as she looked among all the other pictures she took, she saw this picture on the wall. And she recognized my mother, me, and her with these dresses that we made ourselves from these tablecloths that the Nazis, SS left behind. And my mother is carrying that little striped satchel that we all made by hand. We sat around and we made it because there was no other way we could get back out of there because we didn't have any other clothes. And it's coincidental that-- that is us. [PAUSES FOR 7 SECONDS] This is a dress that I made. Actually, we all three made it. My mother, my sister, and-- Gertie, and-- and me, when we left-- before we came back from Mauthausen, we had nothing to wear. We just wore men underwear. So we found these tablecloths, which we cut up and we made dresses for us, including that little satchel. And when you look at these dresses and that satchel, you can see on the picture that we showed before that the three of us standing with the same dress and with the same satchel. Nobody else had this. Just us. 
INT: All right. You say the dress was made from tablecloths? TR: From-- what-- we found it. We-- we found it. It might have been a sheet. It might have been-- whatever it was, we-- we used it. We cut it up. And we put-- so we had something to wear now.  INT: And the satchel was made from what? TR: The satchel-- we found this. There were jackets there, like-- but they were torn. So we just cut it in pieces and made a little satchel, because at that time, we knew when we went to Vienna, we had pieces of bread. We had something to eat already. So what-- otherwise, we didn't have anything else. So we figured if we get any kind of food, we can carry it here so we have something to eat. [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] It's all made by hand. [LAUGHS] The material we found. And I suppose the-- the needle and the thread we got already from our liberators. We asked for that. [PAUSES FOR 9 SECONDS] This is my release certification from concentration camp Mauthausen. Without that, we could not have left. And this is all the information, with my fingerprint and how long I was in the camp. And we needed to have that because we had no other papers. So these are our-- it's my-- it was my own certification of my existence at that time, before I-- I came back to Vienna. And we had to show that on every step we went, who we are. [PAUSES FOR 17 SECONDS] This picture was taken-- as you can see, we recuperated already. On the left side is Gertie-- Gertie Taussig Meltzer. On the right side is me. And we-- we're very happy with our clothes, that we had normal clothes. It was taken probably in 1900-- already-- either '46 or '47, because '46-- 1946 in the fall, something like that. And we were very young. I was-- we were 18-year-old girls. [PAUSES FOR 5 SECONDS] This is a story that I actually left out before. As I mentioned, when I came to Mauthausen, there was one guard who helped us, helped me-- or at least, he pacified me, because I thought we're going to be gassed. Now, after he brought us something to eat, he disappeared. And the next time I saw him when I was in a gypsy camp. And he came by. He took off his uniform. And when he saw me, he came towards me and he says he's leaving or he's running away. And he asked me for my name and exactly where I came from, and-- which I mentioned before, but he made sure that he remembers and he writes down my name.
And he disappeared. And after I came back to Vienna and I started working for the American joint, one day in April 1946, I-- two American soldiers came. They were looking for me. They knew my name. And they went to the-- it's called the Israelitische Kultusgemeinde, where they-- where I was registered. And they were looking for some Thea Guardsman. And they found me. And they told me that I have to appear in Dachau as a witness. Well, at that time, I really didn't know what it meant because I really-- I just didn't know. I was-- but I was young. And for me, it was kind of a-- something fun to do. And actually, it was my first time that I flew in a plane with two-- with those two guys from Vienna to Munich. And from there I was picked up and brought into the Dachau camp, which was now a camp for-- for Nazis. They had Nazis. The only thing is that they played soccer there and they get good food, because the Americans are not the Germans. So they had a better time than they had before. Well, I still didn't know what-- what they wanted. So they-- they'd showed me a picture book, book of-- of photos. And they told me to see if I recognize someone. And I went through a whole bunch of photos until I come to this picture of this specific guy. His name was George-- Georg. And I said, I know this guy. Yes, this is the guy who requested you to come and talk as a witness for the defense. Well, that made me terrible, terrible mad because I felt that, yes, he helped us. It was a few days before the war ended. He probably-- he knew he needed an alibi. And I really didn't know what he did before. But since he was a guard in the camp, he must not have been an angel. And I expressed my-- my dismay. And I said, for that, you picking me up and bringing me here so that I should say something good about the Nazi? And, well, they were very understanding. And I had to write everything about it. And I also had to be before the court. This was the Dachau court. And there were 62 of these guards that they caught. And he was among them. And I saw them. I saw them sitting there. And I told my story, just as I did now, how he helped me just for a short time and just once, with probably ulterior motives. And that's the only thing I can tell. I cannot say that he was a good person or he was a-- was not a Nazi. And this is what I told them. And I also requested to be sent back as soon as possible because I was actually embarrassed to be a witness for the defense instead of a witness for the prosecution. All ended pretty good. I read later in the paper that all 62 were convicted. But I'm sure that they came out very, very soon. And either they still live or they had a life after that without too much persecution, because not too much happened except for the Nuremberg process happened to-- to all these-- rest of the Nazis, because everybody denied to know-- that they knew what happened. And that's the story. I'm standing here. And I had to make my oath that I tell the truth and but-- nothing but the truth. [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] This is Jack and Thea. I'm Thea on the left, Jack on the right. This was taken just before he went to the United States. He immigrated in 1947, summer '47. This was taken in-- in 1946. And we liked each other a lot. But he left and I stayed back. But we met again seven years later. 
INT: Like they're sitting there, yeah. TR: This is the-- this is our pride. This is our daughter, Julia, in the middle. She is a-- she's an accountant, a CPA. Very smart girl. This is her husband, Bob-- Robert. He's a dentist. On the left side, the tall guy-- now he's even taller-- is Brian, Brian David. He's going to be bar mitzvahed next year. In the middle, underneath Julia, is Alex, the sweet Alex. He's six years old. And on the right side is Gregory. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] And he is-- he's going to be nine in-- this month. And they're all wonderful, wonderful children. And so is-- are the grownups. And we are very proud of them.  INT: OK Thank you very much. CREW: That's it. TR: This is tiresome. Well, I feel better. Hope.