INT: The date is October 7, 1996. The survivor is Irving Gromis. I'm Sherry Amatenstein. We're in Rego Park, New York, in the US. And we're speaking in English. It's October 7, 1996. The survivor is Irving Gromis. I'm Sherry Amatenstein. We're in Rego Park, New York, in the US. And we're speaking in English. Could you tell me your name and spell it, please? IG: My name is Irving Gromis, I-R-V-N-G G-R-O-M-I-S.  INT: And was that your name when you were born? OK. And when were you born? IG: I was born Horochow-- Horochow. And-- H-O-R-O-C-H-O-W.  INT: In Poland, right? IG: [NON-ENGLISH]. [NON-ENGLISH]. [NON-ENGLISH]. And the street?  INT: If you want to, sure. IG: I don't remember.  INT: OK. That's fine. And what year were you born? IG: 1916.  INT: What was the date? IG: [NON-ENGLISH]-- October-- no. [NON-ENGLISH]-- August 5, 1916.  INT: And how old are you now? IG: I'm past 80. Past 80.  INT: OK. And growing up, did you-- how large was your family? How large was your family? IG: Seven grandchildren, two sons.  INT: When you-- you and your father, and your mother, and your brother, right? IG: Yeah.  INT: Yeah. Now, what-- what's your-- what were your parents' names? IG: Efraim, the father. Midel is the mother.  INT: Could you spell their names? IG: Efraim. E-F-R-I-M. A-I-M, I guess, in English. In Hebrew, [NON-ENGLISH]. And the name Midel-- name Midel, M-I-D-E-L. Maiden name is Kovler. K-O-V-L-E-R. Kovler. 
INT: And your brother's name? IG: Was same to mine. Tevve. Tevve is like the name Tevve. OK? He has another name. It's Isaac-- [NON-ENGLISH]. But I didn't ever use it.  INT: And you and your brother were very close growing up. IG: Yeah. The brother-- the binding from the brothers-- [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH] would say, is the basic-- is not the brother we born together, but we was-- when we was hiding, he was not have the shoes. And I took--  INT: Well, let's talk about before the war-- IG: Oh, I see.  INT: --when you-- IG: That was the--  INT: --you and your brother, growing up. IG: --brother, that's-- I was binded together with him. Everything. We share together. Everything very close. With the--  INT: Did you sleep in the same room? IG: Yeah, but-- we sleep the same room. But sometimes, we slept together and my mother slept extra-- next door. Yeah.  INT: What did your father do? IG: My father's name is Efraim. Didn't I say?  INT: What-- no. What sort of work did your father do? IG: He did everything. He-- when he was young, he was in the welding business. He fix-- he makes that-- you know, you call it-- to make-- he welded, sometimes. The-- and he was putting on tin in the roofs, in the churches, basically. He was working. But he got older, when he got married-- he's-- I don't know. He went to America. With his parents-- he has a-- a father over here. He had two sisters over here and a brother. And when I came over here, I meet him over there-- over here. 
INT: You met your uncle over here. I see. OK. IG: Uncle. My aunt.  INT: Right. Right. IG: The father's older sister, which she took care on him. He was-- he-- she came over here as a little girl. But over there, she took care on him because he was the baby. And she-- she keeps him as a mother.  INT: OK. [BACKROUND NOISE] And your father and your mother didn't always live together, right? IG: They lived together. Basically, they share views together. And they are the differences between them. They dealing between the difference people with-- they know each other. They was cousins. Father and mother was cousins. And they share differences but they were very peacefully and settle down. The difference between them. And he was religious. Over-religious, I would say-- could say. He went to the rabbi always. He-- he was with the rabbi. And he came home-- Lwow. And then he moved over-- I showed the picture. He moved over with the rabbi in that little town, over there, which it says there. And he-- there, he came three times in the year home. And they were together with the-- my mother. And she say, stay another week. He say, I cannot stay. It's not good for me. It's not good for you. Basically, they share-- they share together differences in opinions and everything nicely, peacefully. Says, I cannot stay over here because she need-- you need help. And I cannot help you. My mother has a grocery store, wholesale. She lost money on it. She needs help. He couldn't help her because she wasn't religious. What I do remember, she has to carry packages home. I went from school home. Then I have to carry the packages to this lady, this lady, the night I'd carry the packages. She says, I cannot ask you to do it. [INAUDIBLE], he has a [INAUDIBLE], you know, it's-- then I have to do by myself. And he say, I'll better go back to my job. So he went back. He came three times in the year, two times in the year. But the difference in views they have together with each other, it was wonderful. I learn a lot from them. Your difference and I-- that we cannot change both of us. Whether we are man and wife, we are cousins, we are tied up together. And we-- only thing, we cannot stay together always. Stay two or three weeks. I have to go away. And never fight. And that's all the end to it. He went back to Lwow. Then they moved out already from Lwow to that city which I says there. And I didn't see him anymore. But then when the ghetto comes, I couldn't go, never. 
INT: Well, let-- let's go back, though-- IG: Yeah. Yeah.  INT: --a little bit, to when-- IG: That's--  INT: So you-- basically, you and your brother lived with your mother. IG: With the mother together. Yeah.  INT: Yeah. IG: Yeah.  INT: And how large was the town that you lived in? IG: The what?  INT: How large was the town that you lived in? IG: The town was-- we lived in was about 5,000 families. Horochow. 5,000 families.  INT: How many Jews were there? IG: Most Jews. You know, Europe was most Jewish. 90-- 90% Jewish. But they comes to a-- a-- a-- a gentile didn't sell the house, then they give him so much money for the house. You could buy a village for this house. Yeah. Which, it happened. They moved out, moved out, outside the city. And the city became only a church-- became a Polish church. That's all. And around the church were Jews. Because I was living-- going to the church. But then I-- but the Russians. And the--  INT: When you were-- when you were growing up, what was school like for you? Where did you go to school? IG: I was, the beginning, I was-- in the beginning, like anybody, in Talmud. I have a-- a picture. I have a certificate. My father was here. My mother send him. Then he says, going to shuls I don't like him to go. I-- I'll show you the-- the school. If you want to take a picture. When the marks where the teacher make it, made me. And [NON-ENGLISH]. Says, everything is going. [NON-ENGLISH]. He likes yeshiva. Then they send me to yeshiva [NON-ENGLISH]. And then I-- and eventually the Yeshiva with the Russian were nice, they says, but it's not. I know a little bit of Russian, but not a big scholar. They send me away to [NON-ENGLISH]. [NON-ENGLISH] was the Russian yeshiva. They call it, in Hebrew, [NON-ENGLISH], which is written in the books, still books today. The one from the rabbis write in-- in-- in the-- the [INAUDIBLE]. And that Yeshiva was there, well, a couple months. I have to bear payos. I have to bear tzitzits. You know the way it is. It's not-- not necessary to wear it. And I-- you have to davening exactly with the-- [NON-ENGLISH]. You know the way it is. But I accept it. But when I came home for a visit Passover, as my mother was going to her cousins, which they're very intelligent. The name-- I'll tell you the name. [NON-ENGLISH] Schechter. [NON-ENGLISH] Flom, I had at that time. And I came to there. He says, listen, a rabbi, he wouldn't be. He doesn't like it. And he wouldn't be. To-- to give him education like in the Jewish school, learn archaeology, biology, with all of that stuff with Darwin's theory about evolution, he accept it very nice. He likes it, but what's at the end of it? He wouldn't do anything. The only way, he have to learn a trade. What kind trade? Tailor, this, that, I don't like. I went to a tannery, tannery, tanning the leather. Then, Offenbach, in Germany, it was the biggest-- the biggest tannery in the world, they say. The biggest chemistry they have there. It cost, at that time, I paid 120 dollars, a passport, a this, a that. I went a couple weeks in 1932. And I went a couple weeks Offenbach, close to Germany-- to Frankfurt. I was there a couple weeks. And then Hitler came to the power. It was 1933, I guess. I don't know exactly. 
INT: Let's got back a little bit, though-- IG: I came home.  INT: --before-- before Hitler came to power, when you were younger and still living at home with your mother and-- IG: Oh, with the mother.  INT: --and your brother. Yeah. You really didn't-- you weren't that religious. You and your brother and your mother weren't that religious? IG: The-- no. We were-- the-- mom was a mother and she did the [INAUDIBLE]. Not modern lady, beautiful dress that you see in the picture, nice dressed. Plus, she came, one from the telling people when they finish university in the Russia and they-- there. And they told me the same. He wouldn't be a rabbi. He wouldn't be-- if he goes to be educated, he wants to be a doctor. He would-- a doctor, he couldn't get anyway, the-- the-- he couldn't get the diploma. Because Jewish people cannot be doctors. The only thing-- learned a trade. I went to Germany. I learned a trade. I came home. He says, yes, but the-- the government wouldn't give you permission. You have no-- you have no practice. And they called it a [NON-ENGLISH]. Permission to work for yourself. Then, anyway, I wrote to the president from Poland-- not the president. He was the head from the-- Pilsudski. I wrote him a letter, which I remember the letter, which I did wrote to him. He send me, in two weeks, a permission to work leather if I could. I had the permission, [NON-ENGLISH]. They called it [NON-ENGLISH]. In Polish, it's the [NON-ENGLISH]. And I had permission. And then I started to work leather for myself. It was also illegal for the-- for the-- to tax us, it was illegal. I didn't pay taxes. But I work-- 
INT: Before that, is there anything else you want to talk about your childhood? IG: My childhood was-- you know, what-- a childhood of-- in school, I did-- I liked the school. I learned at school. Which, I have the certificate from school. And then, when I come 16, 15--  INT: Did you belong to-- what sort of hobbies did you like to do? IG: Basically, I-- I used to play violin. I had two years of violin. And I don't know the violin. I played chess in the club. It was a-- a club from chess. You have to pay there. I paid 2 zlotys a year whenever-- this-- whenever you come in. Play chess with your partner. You take a-- a tray with the grapes. It was at that time, it was-- it pays money. You have to pay for it. And I make money on the side. You asked me a question, how did I make money? After my mother was now in the-- the business, and I carry up the packages, this lady, this lady-- after I took-- saccharin was illegal. Saccharin. Saccharin. Was illegal in Poland because you have to buy sugar. And I went to the-- this guy. They knew me a lot. Yeah, send the saccharin, I make a few dollars. Once, it happened I find American $5. I bring everything to the mother. And so on, then later on, my uncle stepped in in the business. They called it [NON-ENGLISH]. And I was standing to collect the dollar from everyone. And I make a little money on the side. Then, I went out, a name, [NON-ENGLISH], the biggest people, they need money. They need $300. And I went with them into partnership. And we made money. Couple weeks. And they says, listen to me. You are a young kid. You don't have to go with us. It's no good. We have your money. We-- money-- we-- they divided. They throw me out from the business. I went to the market again. I bought myself a cow. I haven't got in city where to keep it. I give to a guy. He kept a week. Then my brother went and get milk every week. You know, I had-- always, a cow, two cows. I bought them myself. It was $50, so a lot of money that time. $40 a cow. Now, in one time, I lost $5. My mother told me-- I'll never forget-- you're a businessman. If you're losing-- making money, you're not a businessman. But if you could lose $5, $6, then you're in the business. Don't worry about it. You'll get next week. I remember every story my mother used to tell me. Sadder stories. Which I'd remember. She was very smart. And I used to come in-- they call it the [NON-ENGLISH], advisors, [NON-ENGLISH] in Hebrew. They-- and a lady come, she have a [NON-ENGLISH]. Doesn't cost her any money. I know Midel is smart. And she says, I have two boys for my girlfriends. One is this way. One is-- they call it [NON-ENGLISH], a primitive man. It's the [NON-ENGLISH]. Basically it's [NON-ENGLISH], a-- a-- a truck driver, you know, in a-- all driver. This guy, basically, she says, if you get married, you have to expect to get a divorce. The negative in marriage. You have to get divorced. Tell them, you get divorced, he says, son of a bitch, I don't need you. You don't know-- the other guy says, listen. The rabbi calls him. He assess them. You have to divorce nicely. She's a human being. [NON-ENGLISH], he says. You have to divorce. And then you have to-- to-- to go to rabbi. And tell him you haven't got anywhere to go. He's going to do it by himself. I've been with her to the movies with my mother. She took me when I was young. was the first time. In Europe, the original theater. I see that with my mother. And at that time, we paid 2 zlotys, a lot of money. She paid 2 zlotys, and a [INAUDIBLE] for me. And we paid, and we see When I came in this country, I see Zero Mostel. It was 1948, I think, the first time it playing over here. I told them, [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]. You know, that-- He says, listen. This is-- you are on the other side. I know you speaking not English well. You know, he says, listen, why could I speak-- he says, the [INAUDIBLE] picture is different story. As Zero Mostel So then, it was 1948, I guess. A lot of-- 
INT: Well, let's go back now to-- IG: To childhood.  INT: --back when you were-- yeah. To-- IG: What I want to say-- I went to school. We each get the marks from there-- not high marks-- from the-- get for management, upperr management. Because I was a shegetz. You know, because years ago, they used to all be in the back, the-- the [INAUDIBLE] thing. I used to [INAUDIBLE] And other things like this, other things I did. Then the management was poor. But Russia, there was five-- number five. The [INAUDIBLE] was number four. So you got everything covered already. What else could I tell you?  INT: In 1937, you wound up in the army, didn't you? IG: 1937, I went back in the-- in the army, yeah.  INT: You want to talk about that a little bit? IG: Yeah, but the army-- I-- I-- You want to talk about it?  INT: Yes. Yes. Yes. IG: I went to the army. It was--  INT: The Polish army, right? IG: [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH] the second [NON-ENGLISH]. They send me down there. And I have took the map. Everybody could take the map. But the Polacks, they didn't know that much of mapping. They did [INAUDIBLE]. There was the top there. And suddenly, they give me the map and I says, take these 10 people to this block, the other block. And I knew the blocks already. The first day, I knew [INAUDIBLE] the blocks, about new-- a new development, that time. 1937. And I was there managing-- I had food, they had eat, and drink. And suddenly, 1937, then I got it off-- your-- they're playing the chess. The captain plays in chess some of the other. And I ask him permission. I have to say it-- Polish, shall I say Polish? 
INT: If you want. IG: [POLISH] Says, why, sure. His national Polish. [POLISH] And I start to look in the game. He says, you know how to play? Says, a little bit. And he start to play his own game, the second game and that's how-- Then he says to me, you going to get first bent, in the-- first line, which I had it. I lost it. I was in the first line. And the Polacks in Ukraine [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]. I take the first place in the first part. And he send me to the barber, to make my hair cut. He make me-- the barber make me the front like a little bit of hair. And he says to me, [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]. [BACKROUND NOISE] He says, don't worry about the money. Just give me the change. Whenever I left, I give him $20 and so on. I give him more and more. I don't remember exactly. But later, on, he gave me [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]. Nothing is for me to be in the army anymore. A white ticket. They call it a white ticket. And I'll be using that ticket. I went home. Either way, they send me home.  INT: How long were you in the army for? IG: I were a couple weeks, a couple-- about two months, something-- three, or-- and they send me home. And the Captain Neiman, Dr. Neiman was the-- he-- gave me the x-ray. He told me to eat that stuff before. You know, I've been told already what to do it. And they find out I have a [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]. That means a ulcer in the stomach. Then, my mother-- 
INT: When you were in the army, did you experience anti-Semitism? In the army? IG: A little bit. The feel the everything. But it's not comfortable. You know, that we feel, sure. They recognize right away. I-- then, I went to my mother, did not quiet, he says, listen. Something is there. You not feel comfortable, you this-- you go to Lemberg-- Lwow. The biggest doctor. Which at that-- I meet a doctor over here, which was that-- the student. Came to Lemberg. Dr.-- a Ukrainish doctor. Ukrainish doctor. I've-- I spoke to him yesterday. Dr. [NON-ENGLISH] Cherenesky in Lwow. The biggest doctors. And they are x-ray me. And he says, you've got a couple figures down the stomach. They are-- [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]. And my mother start to give me food. They said, the only thing give, food. And I went to the other doctor, and I meet this doctor over here, over here, which I speak to him every day, play with him in chess. He was a student. My doctor, my friend, went to-- Dr. Erlich, which his name is [NON-ENGLISH] Erlich, from Horochow. He says to her, I'll give you $10 to give my son down there. And I come there. It's very-- I had to walk up to university. And he says-- and he says [NON-ENGLISH]. And I meet this Dr. Erlich. I meet him over here. Which I could speak to him if you want me to. I'll speak to the telephone. And I spoke to him. He doesn't remember exactly, and I don't remember. But the other doctor gave me the $10. And he show me all the doctor hospital with them. And I went home. And I feel OK. I've nothing-- healthy. And I said to mommy, feel-- feel not-- because I'm not healthy. A young guy, 20-some years. And that's it. This was the doctor. 
INT: Now, let's talk about Hitler's rise to power. Hitler's rise to power? Let's talk-- IG: Yeah. When I was in-- in-- 19-- '32, I exactly remember the date. They-- and I-- I came home. Then my mother and the cousins, the mother Schechter, advised me, if you finish yeshiva and it's cost you a lot of money, you finish, you couldn't get work because you haven't got the privilege, you haven't got practice, you have to get [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH], a working card from the government. Then I wrote to Pilsudski, and as I said before, he send me a card. OK? And he send me a card. And I have the card. I kept the card all the time with me. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH] That was this place, [NON-ENGLISH]. They call it [NON-ENGLISH]. In Polish, it's [NON-ENGLISH]. This is the head from the card, which I remember. [PAUSES FOR 5 SECONDS] Know what else you would know?  INT: Well, we're talking about Hitler's rise to power? IG: No This was in 1932--  INT: Yeah. IG: --and '33. I went back to Offenbach. Offenbach is the main factory there.  INT: When did you first start hearing about Hitler's rise to power? IG: In the 1933, we start to feel there an uncomfortable. I went back down there-- and I mean, I didn't-- couldn't-- couldn't stay there. Jews run away to America here. Try to run away from all over. Why should I stay there? Then I didn't continue-- I didn't know anything. About school, I know very little about chemistry, about the [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH] I know a little bit. But, when Hitler come, later on, I start to work in the primitive style, which I was a good [NON-ENGLISH], they call it. Skinning it-- splitting the-- splitting-- the machine doesn't go it. I split by hands and make sharper knife till today. I sharp a knife, nobody else. I work with the butcher line. I can sharp the knife like any-- when I take the knife just out to tray, knives get sharp. And you could shave it with it. Then I got that same thing, to sharp the knife. And, a lot of stories about. And I make the leather by the Nazis. 
INT: Let's talk about the beginning of the war in September, 1939. Where were you? IG: 1939. Then I told you, I hided my leather because not registered. And I hide it under the floor. I knock off the floor.  INT: Wait-- talk about that a little? Sit-- why don't you sit back a little bit. IG: Oh, let me see how it come.  INT: Yeah, with the-- IG: That have come to the point--  INT: That you had to register the leather. IG: I registered. And I hided a lot of leather. Somebody-- everybody make business. You had some stuff. The money was not worth it. But you have leather. And I got potatoes, or things like this. We changed for each other according-- the-- before the war. That's were the change. Now, let me give you two examples. How did it change, it was Rosh Hashanah, Yom Kippur. I remember one guy, he has books, is fully religious. And the other guy is-- only has horses-- skin from horses and cows. They come together. They have to change. They have to-- differences from each other. Then they call the [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH] They'll come-- I was there. He was [INAUDIBLE] he was-- how could you make-- you know-- you know the difference between this. I'll just give you example. Then, comes [NON-ENGLISH]. You have to buy every-- buy every time-- every-- you have to buy something. They call up the farmer, [NON-ENGLISH]. He has the-- [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH] He says, because, he says, I only have fertilizer. [NON-ENGLISH]. [NON-ENGLISH]. That's all I could give. He says, [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH] That sounds funny. [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH] you know the way it tastes. But that time, that's was the life. Then, I'll come to the point which I'll bring you out how I come there to Lokacze. Then, suddenly, they find out I have hided leather and I make leather with a-- a little-- that machine with the hands, you know. Find it out. Who told them? You know the communists-- they told them. My mother says, you better hide yourself. Because they was looking-- three police was in this house. And they're looking all over. In middle of the night, I run away. I was already hided in the roof. And I run away to my aunt in Lokacze, in the other city. And I was hided there. A month, two, three. They bring me food into the hole. And I don't see the light all together. And suddenly, she says, listen. The-- one guy, he says, I cannot hold him. But you, I have to. Why? I want to get married. You get married with my-- with my daughter, which I know already, from years and years, since childhood. She was in 1921, I think. You have to-- I could get-- I married her, get free, and then-- no. Right away, I'll tell you what. I told the rabbi, which it was in this country. And he come in middle of the night, [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]. He came over, the rabbi Volcan. He die in America, over here. Volcan. He [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH] and we went away to Luck-- L-U-C-K. 
INT: What was your wife's name, your-- IG: My wife-- Michla. M-I-C-H-E-L. Michla. Kessel. Because the children are some-- your cousins are called Kessel. K-A-- K-E-- Kessel. double S-E-L. And-- and she ask, I got $500 American money. I'll give it to you. Says, OK. And then she gave me food. And the cousin I know was the-- she-- I'm older than her. And I no remember when she was a child even. And I got married.  INT: We'll stop here. IG: Yeah.  INT: Tape number 2. October 7, 1996. Irving Gromis. Now, we ended the last tape when-- when you got married. So let's talk about from there. You had just gotten married. IG: Got married.  INT: To your cousin. IG: And I still was hided in Luck-- L-U-C-K-- the-- Luck, you have to explain it to you. It's L-U-C-K. The river-- Luck-- L-U-- Luck is in the map. Luck in the map, and this, it was called the Slutsk. They call it 'Lutsk.' And Lokacze, also is the power. They called it Lokacze because still [INAUDIBLE] there. OK? And then, which I'm trying to tell you, how I get this thing over here, broken down. How I get this over here. Where it came from. Then I finished the leather, with the Russian passed away. Now, the Germans came over here, and Prosajner, the head from the [NON-ENGLISH], that mean the [NON-ENGLISH] like-- we have--  INT: Well, the Germans came in 1941, right? IG: Germans came in 1941, yeah. 
INT: Right. Before that it was under Russian occupation. IG: Under Russian-- the Russian-- you have the leather and the remain for the-- then we didn't know what to do with the leather. We have-- I have the leather-- everything registered. And I-- not also registered, then come the [NON-ENGLISH] head from the city, Prosajner his name. Prosajner. Came to me. He says, we have to do something with the leather. I'm the boss of the leather. Work it out. I didn't give it to him. Says, I can't do without anything. You're the boss. But you have to do it-- the Germans authority to it. He says, I don't take the leather. Just give me a little bit on the side. I gave it to him. And couple of weeks ago-- later, comes from the head, from the city [NON-ENGLISH] Poland. Big city. And that city has three, four cities and our city, Lokacze. [NON-ENGLISH], [NON-ENGLISH], and all [NON-ENGLISH], comes-- belongs to that city. And you come, you belong to us now. You have to go to the city. We give you a-- you go with me the city. I took this leather with me and go to the main office, which is Horochow. I told you. Over there is a manager, Zimmerman. The main officer is Winkler, a German from the-- from the [NON-ENGLISH], from the German government. Winkler. You have to put it on. That Winkler was the main manager. And the Jewish guy, Zimmerman, which has a parent-- relatives a lot over here. If you're going to be in the paper, you're going to read it. They probably-- they're going to talk about. Then, I belong to them. And I became the authority to make the leather and to bring them finished. Raw material, which I cannot do it, like, foxes. I couldn't do it. Then the polizei master, Gretzner, gave me couple foxes. And I took the foxes and bring to the city. And they have-- and I gave-- I didn't give him the receipt. But he says, next time, you bring me the receipt. The next time he came, he wants-- was 1942, when I feel that a Jewish has to be killed-- to give me my receipt. I say, [NON-ENGLISH]. Says, [SPEAKING NON-ENGLISH]. You speak Polish. You speak Russian. You speak a little bit German, [NON-ENGLISH]. He's in Germany. I heard from this guy, he's in Germany. He's still living. Now, today, I don't know. It's a long time ago. 
INT: Could you translate all that? Could you translate everything you just said? IG: Which one?  INT: What you just said. In English? What he said to you? IG: He says to me-- he says to me, cover up yourself. You are speaking English well-- [NON-ENGLISH], you speak Russian well, and this. And you could hide yourself. I, if it comes a time to my when I have to hided, I have nowhere to go. You could go anyplace you want to. And you know the area. He says to me-- that's what he said to me that time. Yeah. Later on--  INT: Well, let's go-- when-- what do you remember about when the Nazis first came in, when the Germans came in in '41? IG: When they--  INT: What changed? IG: --came in '41, I told you about it-- I-- they-- had a big store till I got to it. But when I got to it, they start to work leather with the head, I told you, Prosajner. And he came to me and says, work the leather. And I finished the leather, and I bring it to the city. And there, where I bring to the city, was there a sign. Lokacze, Luck. And the sign was broke down-- was wooden sign. And-- in the front of me, going two Germans. With-- we-- you know, the Germans, with-- says, where we are going, Luck or Lokacze? We are no the-- direction. Says, oh, here comes a Jude. I had a big [NON-ENGLISH]. You know, the [NON-ENGLISH]. You're a Jude. You're a Jew. You was born here? Say, sure, was raised over here. Where's Luck? L-U-C-K? Is Luck? In German, it's Luck. In English, it's Luck. But we called it 'Lutsk.' When I-- they tell me Luck, I say, so I tell you I was born here, but I don't remember where's Luck is. Then, one guy says, [NON-ENGLISH], and he hit me over here and he put me over here-- without teeth. Over here. All over. They fix me a little better. Now I couldn't talk. I couldn't do a thing. Then they bring me back to the city of Lokacze. It's 13 miles. 15 miles. I says to the guy, you bring him the leather, to the gre-- to Winkler, Zimmerman. And I'm going to go back to the-- came back to Lokacze. Then the policeman say, take him to the hospital. In the hospital, Dr. Champen. They operate. They put me on simple-- they-- as they could. They not operators. And the doctor's living someplace around here, the Dr. Champen. Because I meet him 1944 in Lodz. And we spoke to each other, and suddenly we disappear. I don't know where it is. Dr. Champen, I wrote, he's in Chicago, several-- two letters, and then-- but if I-- you look all over, only in Russia, possibly he's there. 
INT: When were you first taken to the ghetto? IG: To the ghetto, it was six weeks after the Germans occupied, they-- they make a ghetto. And they kill 10% from the Jewish people. That was the law. The city has 3,000 people, then they have to kill 300 people. 10%. That was a law at that time. I know what they say. Then you got only 285 people. And they kill them right around to the city because the city was-- the factory we were working was a little of water--  INT: This was in Lokacze? IG: --and the other side-- huh?  INT: The ghetto? In-- IG: In ghetto. Yeah.  INT: In Lokacze? IG: In Lokacze. They killed 285 has missed 15 more. They have-- they are.  INT: Did you see them doing the killing? IG: No. I-- I-- we heard it. Because it's just over the water. A little bit, we see it. But they go-- and they-- I was protected because the police know don't touch from the fact-- from the [NON-ENGLISH], anybody. I was there also between the people to kill. But they took me out from there.  INT: Who were-- who was in the ghetto with you? IG: In the ghetto?  INT: Yeah. Who were you with? IG: In the ghetto, later, was my mother, already, my brother. Let me give you explanation how did I bring my brother come from the ghetto. It was later on. I need somebody to work, more workers, good workers. I made application to [NON-ENGLISH] the-- to Winkler, to add from the factory. I could not bring a man from here. I took my brother with me. I took him out from the basement, from the cellar, which he didn't see the light altogether. Because it was after they did the killing. I took him out with the [NON-ENGLISH]-- that means the head from the city. We took him out, and I bring him to Lokacze. And we work together with-- living together. My brother. And suddenly, my mother, after three, four weeks, she couldn't stay by herself. She put down at night, 12 o'clock at night, the middle of the night. And she walked to the-- the [NON-ENGLISH]. And she came to me, my mother. We were together in the ghetto, Lokacze. 
INT: What was the layout of the ghetto? How large was the ghetto? IG: The ghetto was-- oh, Lokacze was-- the ghetto actually was 3,000 people. It was maybe 2,500-something, or 3,000 people, 3,000. The ghetto was a-- a big lot, you know, like a street, like over here is a street.  INT: One street? You said there were 3,000 people. IG: It was three, four streets. But there was 3,000-- all everybody was in the ghetto.  INT: 3,000 people in just a couple of streets? IG: Couple streets, yeah.  INT: Very crowded. IG: [INAUDIBLE] Yeah. In the front-- the front market was-- doesn't belong. But I had, in the front market windows, with the door, I marked finishing leather. I bring from the factory the leather. I work in the-- I went to the front. I-- only I could go to the front. The front. But nobody else. Now, let me give you another explanation. My mother, when-- after the killing, the-- in the same city, 5,000-- 500 people, because that city, Horochow, was 5,000. They kill-- have to kill 500. Then my mother has friends. The night where I do, she says, I going to see what could I do. That the lady steal the border, goes here and goes there. She has a husband over here and children over here. She comes in. And she says, you see my son? Oh, your son, I see. He goes with the-- with the head for the city. He goes-- he goes nice dressed. And your son is this and this and this and this. Yeah. She has a-- And when I bring leather, when I bring material, then I took material for flour or bread, I left it with my uncle over there. And over there, I gave the other friends, I gave bread. You know, bread, sugar, you know the way it is. Other things, food. Potatoes. I give five kilo potatoes. And I give their five. Because the beginning, I start to bring from here to there. Why should I gave over there? I go with them there-- swap not legal. But when I go with the two police, with the leather, see, then I steal then, the beginning, and later on, I have no problem. I-- I give to them here, and I give-- meanwhile, it's my uncle Luchon Royce. This was a rich man. At that time, was rich. And he haven't got brought to eat. I gave him bread and potatoes. And I give back them there. And then most I didn't. 
INT: How heavily guarded was the ghetto? How heavily guarded was the ghetto? IG: Regarded?  INT: Guarded. IG: Guarded, was a little wire. But nobody was going out the ghetto. But if you'd go out the ghetto, this guy over here, they was watching. When you go, he shoot. Yeah.  INT: Was there-- was there fence? What was-- what did it look like? IG: Not fence. Not fence. It was an own wire and that. So we know this is the wire. This is the ghetto. And that's it. It's divided. But in the back from the ghetto, they make the change for each other sometimes. But the last dead which I see it, was a name, Yuri Solles. I don't know the guy. I know he had a couple children. And this guy, which is over here, he was going every morning. You know, in the village, he went. He killed him right before going into the ghetto. I go to work, we see the guy's laying dead. And he killed him.  INT: Shot? IG: Shot him. Yeah. Shot-- shot is just like a fly, for them to shot a Jew.  INT: How many people lived in your apartment with you? IG: What kind of apartment I had. I had my house. I had a room like this. Was me and my mother and my brother. And the other woman living there, my mother's sister, with the sister-- the sister, and the sister's husband, and their child, in the other room. That's all it is. But-- 
INT: Where was your wife? IG: Yeah, she was-- no, before she was not my wife before. Later on-- later on. Before I was hided in the hole.  INT: When were you married? IG: I married, it was probably-- she knows. Maybe she's going to say the doctor-- what's his name? Volcan. The last day which I see her she left the city. She was-- that time I was married. Probably was by September-- don't remember exactly. October or something, October. But she is going to-- but you're going to write it. She probably is living. She's going to tell you exactly.  INT: No, your first wife, your cousin, when did you marry her? IG: This, I tell you, about September, October. I think October.  INT: What year? IG: 1942-- 1940-- no, no.  INT: Wasn't it when you were hiding-- IG: It was 1941-- '41. '41. 1941, by the Russians. 1941. About October '41.  INT: Before the ghetto, wasn't it? IG: Before the ghetto by the Nazis-- by the Russians.  INT: So weren't you living with her in the ghetto? IG: No, no. Later on, later on. When the Germans come, I was liberated. I have nothing to do with the Russians when the Germans come.  INT: What happened with your wife? Weren't you with your wife? IG: Didn't I tell you? No. Let me tell you about my wife. Saturday, was two days, three days before September-- August 26, 27. We went to work, to lunch, all the 12 people. We had to have lunch. We wanted to get out from the ghetto. Then the police-- the ghetto was already that police. No more out. Oh-- no more out. So we have to finish the leather. And the [NON-ENGLISH], Gretzner, he comes-- what's this [NON-ENGLISH] over here? He says, what's-- you know what [NON-ENGLISH]. What's is doing over here? He says, listen, Herr Gretzner, we have to finish. We are finishing the work. We started the work. Tomorrow, I go later, and the leather will get spoiled. He says, listen to me. Why don't you let all this be? What's the matter with you? He says, you're the boss. Then he goes with me, out the ghetto, and then from the ghetto out is a water, [NON-ENGLISH]. He comes to me. He says, you hide yourself because it's terrible for you. Tomorrow is going to be not for me. Right now you do it yourself. The opposite. Use your sense. I had with me a pair of soles. Had a tie on. He said give him a package, took away the package. And you know the ghetto is closed, and they're bringing-- and we see-- another 20 people, another maybe from the forest, they're bringing in the ghetto.
And you know the ghetto, Saturday is closed. We went up Saturday. We start 5 o'clock. Five people-- the other seven people remain inside. And the children, our son, is with us. I know something could happen. They are in different places. At night, their son was with us, and the grandfather and the father went away-- stealed away in the village we was born at, because we know later on. We didn't know all the time. And the son was with us. [INAUDIBLE] 5 o'clock, we have to go home. And I says, let me hide yourself. We're going up in the chimney. We had a big chimney which has got the brick. And the chimney didn't work. We made a space to live there. We put on [INAUDIBLE] everything else. Could be 10, 15 people. It's a very big chimney. But we figured in case they find out we're there, they make fire, and we're finished. Then we run away from the chimney. Other places we hide in wood. And one guy says, with their son, says I don't believe they're going to kill us-- impossible. How could you kill us? The leather-- so much leathers for this. He says, give me your name. I gave him my name. I give my this. I give him other things with the son. And then will the other guys, we're planning to go back to the forest. We didn't go back to the forest, because it was very late. We did hide ourselves. In the factory, there are big woods-- like the woods is like over here, so much wood we have. We put into the woods and made a hole, and put in water, put in bread, put pickles. We had a lot of pickles because the garden-- I made pickles for myself. We had tomatoes. We says, we could stay a week, even a month. And suddenly, he had the police-- 12 o'clock, they come to the guy. He says, where are the other people? He says, they went into the forest. But I don't know. We went in the roof. We went to this. He's showing the places. He doesn't know where he is. He's right near the woods. He shoot them. He shoots his guy right near the woods. We see that. He shoots them there in the woods, too. Then the other guy says to me, don't shoot in the wood, because this is because you could make a fire. But he says this-- then feel better. This way we had over here, they're not pain. You feel that you're drinking some bitter stone-- bitter, over here, yet so dark, so bitter in the eyes. I look in the other eyes. He couldn't see. The eyes jumping terrible. And they're going away. Sunday come. Other people up in the [INAUDIBLE], this is the place with the father and the son. At night, we start to run away from there, which is danger. We start to run away, start a new life. We go to a village, a little village. We start two guys, two brothers, Ukrainian, brothers. But-- 
INT: When is this that you're talking-- when is this that you're talking about now? IG: That was September 1 or 29 of August, because it was two days before Rosh Hashanah.  INT: What year was that? IG: This is 1942.  INT: I had asked you, though, about your wife, remember? IG: Yeah, yeah.  INT: What happened to your wife? IG: Yeah. She went out from the ghetto. A lady over here, they're planning together. I prepared her a place in the ghetto. Also, in the ghetto we lived, the factory at work. Prepared her a place with the baby, 6 months old.  INT: Your baby. IG: Yes.  INT: And what was the baby's name? IG: Nechama. And prepared her a place. [INAUDIBLE] And she could stay there, and I'm going to be-- and I'm going to be there. And she has to go with that [NON-ENGLISH], with that lady which is in New York, right here. She planned it to go with her. And she has a girl for 8, 9, years. That was 11 o'clock at night, still early, and the police didn't sleep. They got on police to board it-- up. And she said, the baby's sleeping, the-- I'm going to go and come back again. She went home, and she went over the ghetto, and she paid off the police. She went over the ghetto-- this [NON-ENGLISH]. She went over the ghetto, and she went back home to give her a drink and to sleeping. And that's what she told me over here after the war. I went in Germany. She says to me, what's happened? You have been planning with your wife. I've been planning to hide myself. And she says she has a place, by [NON-ENGLISH] the Ukrainish. [NON-ENGLISH] We was hiding in the hole which was in the wood. And this guy bring the police, and he took the leather. He was the shower. If not he, those two people wouldn't get killed. It's the guy that killed them. That brings out the point. Then in the wartime, the money doesn't mean a thing. If you give somebody-- a goy you give money, then you right away buy a death. This lesson I had from a guy, which he was very smart. He was Elze Gellar from [NON-ENGLISH]. This guy was very smart. He was a Judenrat man. And he says, you give a guy money, or leather, or anything else you buy, death. He's going to kill you, whether he's going to report to the police, and that's what happened. Other things I learned from Elze Gellar, which he says how to run away from the bullets, in case they shoot me in the back. I did. It's happened to me. And a few things, whatever I learned from him. [BACKROUND NOISE] He was in [NON-ENGLISH] progrom. They kill your parents in Russia in 1917. He tell me that story. That means you have to learn what should happen. Then later on, you're going to show it. I learned a lot from him. And how to save-- when they give you death penalty, about the leather spoiling, I didn't tell you yet. I didn't tell you yet. 
INT: When was that? IG: That was in 1942. And I got the death penalty for leather, not-- because the people was hiding in the leather. We had not give them the right material to get skin off. Then I got from the [NON-ENGLISH] city Horochow. I got death penalty. And nobody could do anything. They have to kill me. Then they kept two, three-- two and a half weeks. Then they kill me. Then the [NON-ENGLISH]--  INT: Where were you at the time? IG: In Lokacze, 1942. It was in-- it was in June 1942. And he says there, he has the death penalty, and the death penalty is on. But they didn't do it. They says, I need a new man. A man to me-- can't get a man like this. How to get it? Then the [NON-ENGLISH] said, try to get a man, because I want to kill him. But the death penalty is laying in the table that I get. Anyway, then they called 150 gypsies, 150-- forest. They brought 150 gypsies in the back of the tannery, they had a big garden, as bigger as this house. They bring-- in the garden I had pickle. I had everything there-- tomatoes, and I had trees with cherries. And they bring in 150 gypsies. They are death penalty. It was 2 o'clock. Come to me the [NON-ENGLISH] person, who says, this is death penalty. We have to go down together. Shows the order. You have to go with these. I went with the gypsies together. It was in the corner from that wall, which we have-- in the corner wall, we have a bell-- a-- a thing, hole, which you adding some leather, and we planning out 2 o'clock till 5 o'clock. I have time-- four hours to finish the letter. I didn't finish it. You know the way it is. Then they was watching me. And we're planning. That-- I'm going to be in that corner, and this corner we make all 2 o'clock at night, and we're going to get out. But right now you have to go to the gypsies. I went down there, and I was standing in the corner wall. 5 o'clock, 6 o'clock in the evening, comes out that guy over here, takes X-ray. That was the law. Take X-ray from the people before they got killed, and later X-ray when they got killed. Is the picture in Germany someplace. I was standing with a [NON-ENGLISH] with a white shirt and a [NON-ENGLISH] like this, and I was in the corner wall, which we're planning to make that all should get out. 12 o'clock-- 
INT: How did you fee-- how did you feel? IG: How feel? Over here I feel-- not the pain. I told you about. You feel [NON-ENGLISH]. You know what [NON-ENGLISH]? Bitter-- terrible. And the eyes is blanking. I feel the sun is light and beautiful. You feel just blank. And actually, we understood each other with a wire. I got on this corner. They make the X-ray-- one X-ray, second X-ray. And 12 o'clock at night comes the [NON-ENGLISH] Gretzner. He comes to change the Ukrainish-- five, six people each, he comes to change. [SPEAKING NON-ENGLISH] He says, in Danish, could I have a drink? I was very thirsty. So yeah, listen. [SPEAKING NON-ENGLISH] Hide yourself. [SPEAKING NON-ENGLISH] He yells to me, [SPEAKING NON-ENGLISH]. You know what this is? Dirty Jew. And I'm listening to that. [SPEAKING NON-ENGLISH] And I go up and hide myself. He takes away the six guys that were there, and the other one they didn't know about it. Anyway, whatever it is, he was the boss. And I had the keys. On the place where they hide it, I know they are on the top. 12:00, 12:30, I went to them. I had the keys. I went up them. We were laying and watching. In the front was-- the roof, a little two windows, we see the gypsies. But the reason we hide it because we are afraid they're going to steal us. You know that. And then comes the death penalty for me. There was the second part. 2 o'clock was the death penalty. 5 o'clock I have to go to them. Everything-- I went to them. I went with them till 12 o'clock at night, and I was hiding. And I was looking. They took the pictures from them. And so they shooed all of them out in the back. We was laying in the room. Because we're not allowed to be out, 9 o'clock at night. We're laying in the room. We're laying in the room. [NON-ENGLISH] That's all-- five people. 5 o'clock comes from the other people, and they're buried under-- not far from there, they're buried under-- all the 50 people. And the state-- then comes two of them. After the death, after they go, comes two of them. This one guy goes-- wants to shoot them. [NON-ENGLISH] says no. That's finished, [NON-ENGLISH], Ukrainish swine. [NON-ENGLISH] --because you have to make an X-ray list, and those two has the picture. Put all of this-- [NON-ENGLISH]. Let him go. They went away. They went away, and that's it. But later on, when Bandera came out with the thing to make independent national Ukraine against the Russians, against this, and the Jewish, no question about it. [INAUDIBLE] Then this guy, one from the gypsies, I meet him there to work, because I was the manager from the party, from the-- they called it-- was the boss from the tannery, and I need workers. I took this guy sometimes to work, to cut wood, something like this. I spoke to him. How did you manage it? The other one is dead, and I'm alive. That's it. Another story. It's a big story. 
INT: We'll stop here.  INT: --tape number 3, Irving Gromis, October 7, 1996. When was the last time that you saw your mother? IG: Oh, like I tell you, it was 1942, before the holidays. That was 28 or 30 or the 1st of September when the-- before the killing. I went away from the ghetto. I just reminded before. And I says my mother, goodbye. And my wife was that time with a little baby. I went-- bye. And my mother says, I hope you're going see-- you're going to see the terrible tragedy world which is today on. And I hope it's going to be a different world which I don't see after. And we share each other and came to the-- ghetto-- out. They did-- the guy let-- don't let us out. How he-- but he bring in the Jews. And suddenly, they let me out. I just have to finish the work. As I tell you before, we went out. And that's the last time I see her with my wife. And that's it.  INT: What about your brother? IG: My brother went with me together. It was five people. My brother went with me. We worked together. As I told you last time, my brother-- I, I was-- I had hope he's going to live-- he's living. But when I see this guy which I could call him up from here, another guy which was together with me also from the-- run away from the-- is-- I thought-- we were 10 people, three women and seven men. We run away. And we chart off in the bandits-- in the forest. And the front-- the free-- he was running in front of me, he took a package. I said-- I said, don't take any package. And I had my package. I didn't take it. I run after him like this. He told me, run away. When you're running away, try to get this. I run away. Other of them says, [? Simcha, ?] why don't you run? He says, I can't run. I'm, I'm finished. I run away, hide myself. This guy which is over here with me-- I could call him up-- he run away. I didn't know about them all together. And I planning to go back with the snow in January 9, 1944. I'm planning to go back. And suddenly, I see the end from the forest. And then from the forest, the other side, the, the Bandera couldn't come. Over there is Polish. I have to go on the other forest. I couldn't come. And when I see the end to the forest, I went to the guy-- this side of the forest, I went to our guy. He says to me-- he says, better go away because the Bandera, they are coming to me. Where you came from? I says, come from, from, from the ghetto. I lived in the ghetto. He says, if you want to stay, stay over here. That's no good. He gave me at least a bed, huh? I went on the other side. I didn't know where I go. I went-- straw. It was already 11 o'clock at night. I went in the straw. And I laid down in the straw. And suddenly comes Germans. And they're speaking German. If they were Ukrainish, I don't know who's this. They're taking hay, straw to the-- for the cows. And they're going, going, going deeper and deeper and deeper, close to me already. They went away. When they went away, I run away to the-- to the forest deeper. I didn't know-- I don't know where I go. I went away. And suddenly, I see another little house there. I go to the little house. It's a mother with two kids running away-- running away from me. He says-- stays with me. I was nice dressed-- beautiful [INAUDIBLE]. Then says in Polish, come away, come back. I says, that's not where they live. I want to run away for the kids. They're staying. [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH], this is a Jew. I'll pass. We could make-- you better investigate. I says, come on over here, in Polish [SPEAKING POLISH], I'm a Jew. And she come back. She give me to eat, to drink. And she says, in the daytime, you work over here with the chicken, by the herds, by that. At night, we always sleeping over there. But, if you want to go, is over there-- go three blocks-- is there Jewish people. We call it Ukrainish on the other side. And over here is Polacks. And over there is Israel. [LAUGHS] I came back there. I see a family, Shreiber, which is supposed to be over here in America-- Shreiber-- and three, four people from my town which are-- some of them is in Israel. Some I know in the [INAUDIBLE]-- 24. And they have a gun. And they have two hand grenades, you know, not big with that. I says to my friend of mine, which was in Israel-- anyway, I like-- she's got a nice place. But I don't like to stay at night over here [INAUDIBLE]. Then we went to make a place to hide ourself at night. That's-- in the daytime, we had corn, wheat-- we're-- 
INT: Let's go back. IG: --grinding.  INT: You're talking about when you were in the-- IG: OK.  INT: --partisans now-- IG: OK, then what happened?  INT: --right? Let's go-- asked you when the last time you saw your brother was? IG: My brother-- we've been together till January 9, 1944, together with this guy over here--  INT: OK. IG: --running away from the-- from the bandit-- from the Bandera with leather. And we're sitting together and talking about everything else-- 12 o'clock. We're talking about-- it was two guys. He's, he's a-- he's an [? Argentine, ?] a Jew. His name is Pesach-- Paul, Paul Diamond. Paul Diamond is-- was living in years-- 20 years ago in Baltimore. And in Baltimore, he was living. He was looking for me. He come back to me twice. He was looking for me. He came. I was working. And then I, I lost his address. And I remember his address-- Paul Diamond in Baltimore. He was a, a goy-- not-- I was-- but a-- but a-- [? Ukrainishes ?] goy. He used to come every Sunday to us. And we had lunches. And Sunday, we have a beautiful lunch, potatoes and pear-- everything.  INT: Wait. You're, you're talking about later-- IG: OK.  INT: --now. IG: Paul Diamond in Baltimore. That's the main thing.  INT: I'm asking about your brother? IG: My brother-- we run-- nine, there are nine. We run away, nine of us-- he said, 10 of us. And in forest, the bandits, they run away after us. And they caught us, all of us, sitting together. But the story when they caught us, was this guy was a Jew. And the other guy didn't know he was Jewish. Then he says to me-- used to say, the guy, which is a religious guy, and didn't eat meat. He had-- make [INAUDIBLE]. He says to me, [NON-ENGLISH] you see him. And you know how many Jewish he killed? He says, [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH], [INAUDIBLE] when he sees. And we didn't-- I, I-- we didn't tell him he was Jewish. He didn't-- we-- he didn't know. Three, four people didn't know. Because we didn't like the way they talked. But we had the secret of it. I-- finally-- then, owner is an Argentine, which she went to him. And he hide her. And she was-- and he's living in [? Argentine ?] with her brother. Do you understand? 
INT: When was the last time you saw your brother? IG: Then we went together-- all together in forest, all together.  INT: Right. IG: We're sitting together, 12 o'clock at night, January 9, 1944. The bandits are around us. And we run away from them. And this guy, which is over here, run away this side. And the other guy says, oh, [NON-ENGLISH] gave this-and-this guy. And I run after him. Before him, was-- snowed. I run after him, and he got shot. Because he was carrying-- I told him not to carry anything.  INT: Your brother got shot? IG: He-- no. Are don't know with my brother. I didn't see him.  INT: You didn't see them anymore after that? IG: I didn't see him anymore after--  INT: OK. IG: --that. I remember after that, which I told you, I had--  INT: Well, let's go back, then. After the ghetto, you were-- what happened after the ghetto, after-- in now [NON-ENGLISH]? After all that, what happened then? IG: After the ghetto when? I was hiding, no?  INT: For-- before January 1944, after you left the ghetto in '42, you were hiding for a while? And then the Ukrainians-- IG: Hiding for awhile, yeah.  INT: Right? IG: Yeah, the Ukrainians caught me. They need me for the work. And they didn't yell. They kill the-- the bosses they killed because I was waiting for the Polish, I-- but was Ukrainish.  INT: And Bandera was Ukrainians? IG: Yeah, yeah, Bandera was later on developed. We didn't know Bandera. But they are developed before. And later on, they know I'm working. And they know they're going to catch me. And then, when they killed the Polacks, they took the leather. Let me ask you something. They have-- the Polacks have leather [NON-ENGLISH]. [NON-ENGLISH] is leather, you know that. The [NON-ENGLISH] is leather for crafts. They have hided about 10, 12, inside the border-- all materials are hided and buried down, hided between them. When I took over the whole thing, [NON-ENGLISH], they call it, the whole area which belongs to me, then we find that [NON-ENGLISH], which we hided. We bury it down. And he was-- I was the manager from the leather business. I had a place. You have to give a leather, whatever. If he comes with a-- and this, this guy, I have to give out two pair leather, pair shoes, three pair soles, three pair this. Then once I had by the Bandera, [?you know?] ? We made a good living down there. But we know that they give us eat at best-- 
INT: Did they know you were Jewish? IG: Oh, sure. [LAUGHS] They know me from childhood.  INT: And it didn't matter? IG: It didn't matter. They need me. They need this doctor, which I can call him up. If you want to, call him-- the telephone. They need him. They, they kept him. They kept him-- two months after he got the Russian occupied, they kept them, still kept him. They watch him.  INT: And what town was this in? IG: The town Lokacze, in the forest.  INT: Before the forest, when you were working in the factory-- IG: Working in the factory for what? For them--  INT: With the Ukrainians, for them. IG: The Ukrainish factory was-- the factory was in two places that way. It was-- Ukrainish factory was-- [PAUSES FOR 6 SECONDS] oy, yi, yi, yi, yi. I'll, I'll remind myself.  INT: OK, when you remember-- IG: I have to check in the book. The factory was [PAUSES FOR 5 SECONDS] close to Kupiczow. Kupiczow was 3,000 Polacks with Jews together hided-- Kupiczow. And Ozeryani, Ozeryani, was a city with the girls from them. And [NON-ENGLISH], [NON-ENGLISH], [NON-ENGLISH], was the factory. [NON-ENGLISH] was the factory. But-- and, and they have problems. They have 3,000-- the Polacks, they have 3,000 people in Ozeryani there. And they have a tank. And they took a tank-- one Sunday, they took a tank with 30 or 40 or 50-some soldiers in the Wolyn, in the old village. Soldier-- how do you say the village? The village is named-- 
INT: Kupiczow? IG: Ozyerani. No, not Ozeryani. Kupiczow?  INT: Kupiczow. IG: They say the city Kupiczow, Kupiczow. But then, in the Poland, in the-- in-- got killed 90 Ukrainish. It was Sunday, July-- June, July, I think June or July-- 90, and that 14th or 15th June. But they took over the whole thing. And some Jews was down there, probably to hide them. Are you going to write this in the paper? Some Jews is alive. They could know this. The name of the-- Kupiczow was the little town, three town in Poland. They have a problem. And they took a tank with people, with all army, and they took away Kupiczow because there was right close to them. There were-- and they bring in the-- Sunday, they bring those dead people. And I was there by the funeral. Come to mother. She's telling you. 90 people, 90 dead, one on the other, which-- she was also-- the lady which I'm trying to tell you-- she also was there, all the-- all the people. And we see that. And they took her-- the whole city, Kupiczow. They took the city with-- they all-- and some from the-- after the war, I spoke to a guy. He says, I was down there. We run away. Well, they have ammunition, a lot of ammunition. 3,000 people, they have plenty of ammunition, the Polacks. Yeah.  INT: And you were working in this factory for quite a while? IG: I was working in factory-- 
INT: Yeah. IG: --since that time I'm telling you--  INT: And-- IG: --work in the factory. For he-- they was playing theater. One time, they were playing theater. And they didn't send us tickets in the play there. I said, everybody has tickets in theater, and I didn't-- me. Then this guy over here, he says, I'm going to see. I cannot go. I go, sit with them. I didn't have a seat. Stand aside because seats was like-- you're making seats in the theater, one-- about 30 seats, 40 seats. And we stand in the side like other people standing in the side. They didn't care about us. And I didn't care about them. They was playing, like, a Jew. That [NON-ENGLISH] comes in. He has two workers. And he has a wife, a family. And he has whiskey for sale. He had this for sale. And a girl comes in. I eat a piece of bread? And he take a stake, and he hit the girl. And she falls apart, and things like this. Other things they're playing. Everything to show them up. They shouldn't [INAUDIBLE]. But the end from the story comes up. We live in that world which you see over here. We try to avoid it, that kind of world. But anybody has a Jew, anybody has a Polack, anybody has something, it has to be reported. We have to watch it. Because is-- change is coming, and we know who is this. This end of the story said. And we went home. We went home. After a couple weeks later, there was a-- November, November or December, they killed everybody else. Only us is alive. And those two girls we [INAUDIBLE] there, they, they went away. They went-- run away. And we-- I thought we-- they, they are dead. But that guy-- the man that had-- [NON-ENGLISH] his name, the-- really name is [NON-ENGLISH]. He says, they're living, you know. Don't say anything. They are living. They are hided. And after the war, I met those girls over here in Lodz. 
INT: Did you feel charmed that you kept surviving all this? IG: Listen, how could you keep surviving? I lost a brother, the worst part-- which I feel terrible. But the living which I've been living, as my friend said, Elze Gellar, he told me the same stories which I passed through, putting the salt on the eyes. Did I tell you the salt, about salt? Did I tell you?  INT: No. IG: When the police, they'd have to bring us in-- into the city, then we had salt in the eyes. And I used to put the one salt. And the [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH] I said in Hebrew. And I put the salt, [NON-ENGLISH], but for the second. And I run away by putting in the eyes the salt. And no-- the, the one shot me over here on the side.  INT: When was that? IG: That was in 1942. It was before the holidays. Didn't I tell you before the same story?  INT: Not this part of it. IG: Yeah.  INT: Yeah. IG: And then we went away. And then we-- my brother run with the other one--  INT: Yeah. IG: --the guy on-- down there. And I was one-- and one caught-- they caught alive. And we meet each other at 1 o'clock at night. And we start to-- again, to work for life. It was very hard.  INT: Now how did you join up with the partisans in '44? IG: Oh, the partisans-- 
INT: Is there anything you want to talk about before we get to the partisans? IG: I don't know. But that's up to you. I know the, the-- you, you--  INT: Well, any other incidents that you want to talk about before we talk about you joining the partisans. IG: Before I go to the partisans, the-- all I'm interested-- that the, the way I got with the gypsies, the way I run away, the way they-- that's the policeman, [NON-ENGLISH]. Gretzner come. And he says, hide yourself. And I run. He said, the boy, just leave it there. They kill the-- I see. Another-- [INAUDIBLE] after the dead. They-- this guy took again a picture from them. But he has to pull with the Gestapo. And this is laying down there. And he says to them, don't shoot anymore. And that's it. What else could I tell you? I don't know. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] Every day, the daven, this time of the year, we are living the worst time-- Passover, for these holidays, one of the worst time. Then we run away in the forest, we start to hunger. May-- you know what hunger is. We start to walk in the forest. We'd eat for three days nothing. We couldn't eat. And then we lay down. You couldn't get up, couldn't walk. It's two miles in the forest, we couldn't walk. Then suddenly, one guy, which is, is a actor I told you about, Shell Perlmutter, he had a wife over here in this country. He says, you know what is there? I see there. I walk a little bit. And, and I see carrots. What? How could he see? Yeah, carrots and beets. We-- he, he couldn't walk. And we got down on our knees, you know. We had carrots and peas and everything else. And we start to eat, well, about 12 o'clock at night. We had carrots, beets-- were some bitter, you know. We eat this up an hour. And we took-- everybody took in their pockets. And we start to walk like we didn't feel anything. That juice from that beets, that juice from that vegetable give so much power, yeah, everybody start to get up. We start to walk. Oop, sorry, sorry. We start to walk. We walk to the forest. We came to the forest. It was a day after-- it was from three, four towns. It was about a thousand-- over a thousand people resided before the war was-- halls. In that halls was already over a thousand people. And the-- and they make-- the, the Germans with the Ukrainish, they kill all of them. But some-- three people, people run away.
They told us the story. We didn't know. We know everything is dead there. But three, four people run away. We come in there. We says, OK, we could stay another week or two. But it's danger. At night, we have to go away. It was November, 1942. November 1942, we go here, we go there. We get a family, which the children is in Israel, [NON-ENGLISH] [? Adem ?] with [NON-ENGLISH] [? Adem. ?] We find them there, in the forest. He says, come on to me. Sit there while you're in the hall. We have this. We have this. We have-- took bullets. And then, sit over here. They give me a potato. They give me-- I'm not so hungry because we had this one over here. We went together two days. I says, I cannot do it. We have to go look for some difference-- people. There were six, seven people in all. Then he says to me, you know, I have a friend which I, I give you. But like he says, he's looking for a tanner. They find me. I says, give me the name of him. Let me show. I'll show you. Stay where you are. I slept over a night-- the morning. And-- I'll show you. And this guy looking for me, he has leather. He started, and, you know, he's looking for me. And he heard about me. He didn't tell me. And suddenly, he find another place. And he went to another place. And the other place, right, they kept him two days. And right away, they reported it to the police. And the Nazis came, and they killed him-- [? Adem. ?] They killed him. I, I, I walked by myself. And I had that hole over here in the back. It was terrible pain. Me-- and my brother had the, the bullets over here, pain. And the pain is only-- with warm, steady temperature, that heals, heals. But at night, you go out in the warm-- and during-- gets-- be cold. It's terrible. It's pain. It doesn't heal. And over here, a little thing didn't heal. I went in a house-- Chelbourg. And I asked the guy, give me a little rag. Could you get a rag, everything? They give me a rag. They clean me up. But they put me a little-- a little alcohol. And the alcohol is brilliant for that one. And I feel better. And the same thing with him. And suddenly, we want to go out-- stays two guys. The name I remember if you need a name-- [NON-ENGLISH] and Chelbourg. Because they told me name later. He says, halt, stay! You've got bullets. You've got this.
And they checked me. I had that, that dowry which my-- $500 which my, my-- they gave me dowry, you know that. Then I had $200 for my brother over here and $300 over here. It was only $50 bill, $20 bills. American money was long-- very long. You don't know that. It was before you were born-- longer, a lot longer. They call it macaroni [INAUDIBLE]. And they started to, to count the, the-- they are five people already. And the guy hit me over here-- over here, with the stick-- with the potatoes, over here hit me. And the blood has did this-- [NON-ENGLISH] [? Chetner. ?] And my brother, they take-- one takes him in the corner. And he says to him, over here. He took out $200. He had boots. He put the $200. He says, just try to live. You've got everything. I had leather. I had needles. I had cotton. And since today, I put-- always I have cotton with me with a needle. Till today on, I had always, you see, [LAUGHS] with me a cotton with needle over here, you see. Because it reminds me that stuff-- anything, a button falls off, I've got right away with me a cotton and a needle. And they took away all the things. And they changed the money-- and they count the money, $30, $40, $10 bills-- what? Never-- not dollar bills, so $10, $15. And the-- and this guy has the $200. What do we do with the Jews? Kill them? He get me over here. He, he, he knows-- and the guy shares-- and the lady says-- yell, don't kill them in my apartment! I don't want to see-- I don't want to see this, any of this! He says to the husband-- these are strong guys-- he says, stop it, [? Bela! ?] And they listened to her. He says, no. They thought a plan to bring me, like, to the soldiers that they had from the city. They tie us up. And they put us in a wagon. And they bring me to the city-- to the place which I had on the city. It was 12 o'clock at night. One guy-- this guy goes to this. And this guy, which he took the money, he tied me up over here. He says, run. He tied me up, my-- I was naked. Well, December 6, 1942, cold-- the finger-- but we had one shoe, one sole-- one shoe. [BACKROUND NOISE] And right away, the guy told me-- which I told Elze Gellar-- you don't have a pair of shoes. One-- this is because this is dead. Then I was wearing a boots.
And he was wearing a shoe. They see I have not, not a pair. He have not pair. The shoes, they let me off. There-- I was lucky. They let me off, the shoes. And he says, run. You run. Where are we going to go naked? I mean, naked-- a little shirt-- a little shirt, torn. We run. Who-- how much could you run this [INAUDIBLE] snow, half a mile? We're going city-- going up to houses-- see houses there, going in in this-- in the backs-- in the back to the house-- not in the house, in the straw. We lay down. And the dog's barking and barking and barking. The guy comes out-- Andre. He comes out. He recognized me, you know. He said, oh, you, you, you was there last year over here, I remember. I have a couple of children. And he says-- he bring us a-- potatoes. He just add a pig fat. He bring us that fresh. I ate potatoes with fat, with meat. And we eat it up. And he says, come on in the house for awhile, for another two hours. In the house-- he has his own, own, little house. And he has a bed. And all the kids in the bed, and two-- one little babies, five years old, sleeping with them. It's early in the morning, 5 o'clock in the morning-- into the bed. And he's told the mom this story. We caught Jews. What kind of Jews? They were forced. They this, they that. Mommy, is that-- they big like a-- like a mouse, like a kitty? No, they are people. And he's laying. Suddenly, he comes up. He wants to see who's there into the bed. One guy sees up-- my end or my brother's end. Mommy, I see that. He has hands like a human, like a man. Five fingers, he's got-- and five fingers over here. She-- says the mom-- she says, yeah, he has five fingers. He's, like, human, like we are. But he killed Jesus Christ. They killed Jesus Christ. [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] The mother told me. She-- Jesus Christ, if they killed. Sure, he has to be got-- yeah, yes, they're bad-- killed. They have to get killed. The government doesn't like them, doesn't want them because they killed Jesus Christ. Finally, 6, 7 o'clock, we went out back to the place. The kids didn't see it. And they let us up in the roof. In the roof, up into the-- and, oh, we had cherries-- dried cherries and peaches and, and, you know, things like this. We eat that. We are not hunger-- you know, like this, they should give us a lunch.
And we couldn't get in bed. This day we went up in the roof. And later, we went out back to the horses, to the cows. There was two cows. It was warmer there. And I was naked. And they give me a thing to, to put up. And I took-- had a needle with cotton a little bit. Then I took-- made by myself a, a sleeve, and make by myself a hat, and tie down the hat, and take myself buttons-- from wood, I make buttons. And I make a coat by myself. And into the coat I had-- like, well, you know, any kind of junk, little rags, should be lower. And I had all covered up. And the foot, over here, I had the shoe. And he had the boots. We are complete. Then he kept us two weeks. He says, the, the Germans looking for who killed pigs. You have to go away. Where are you going to go? He went-- he went away. And we followed to that gate with these guys, they were-- run away. Yeah, he says, go. And I went to this guy, which I told you, the next door, just three blocks. I came and knocking the door. And the letter said, [? Hamka. ?] He says to me-- he says, I'm looking for this guy-- this and this guy, that [? Garber, ?] for months and months. And these people I had into my house. They was here, and I give them bread-- [? Adems, ?] I told you. And they told me they have a guy-- they have me. They know me. They're going to bring me. He says-- and the Einsatz, they're very smart. He says, look at this, what Jews are-- he's so tricky. When I says, I need you. And he says, he isn't. And I told him, yeah. He says, how would I prove it? He says, these guys-- and she wants to keep it to make the leather. She want to keep us because the other one, she let him go. And right away, they kill them, the third day, the other one. And she says to me-- I says to her this way, I remember a guy-- but the name, I don't remember the name. A guy came last year [BACKROUND NOISE] to the factory from leather, he should bring wood. He didn't bring the wood. He says, I cannot bring the wood by my horse-- cannot walk. And he bring the-- and I sign it. I have 20, 20 wagons. And he's the 20th. I'll sign it. He says, I'll bring you a chicken. I'll bring you butter. I'll bring you everything there. Next day, he bring me butter. He bring me chicken. But the next course, my name is Josef. And I don't remember the name. 
INT: We'll stop here. IG: Mm-hmm.  INT: [BACKROUND NOISE] Tape number four, Irving Gromis. October 7th, 1996. Want to keep going? You were talking about the-- about the-- IG: And Josef, this is a-- Andre, he was a [NON-ENGLISH], he and what a Russian worker. The Russian give the [NON-ENGLISH], and the daughter, Ludia, those three. When they-- [NON-ENGLISH] is the boss, the lady, the boss. When she sees, this is the right guy which is looking for him. I start to make that leather, which she does-- she put them sew-- whatever she does, she doesn't know what she's doing. Then in middle of the night, about 12 o'clock at night, only in the daytime I was hided, I sharp the knife-- we call it [NON-ENGLISH]. And I-- she is-- I start to make that leather. Yells. Gives a-- gives a whistle, because if she sharps the knife, gives a whistle. And she sees the leather gets beautiful. And I told her what to do. She buy this and this and this. And I worked that leather, and make the leather finish it. And she goes to the big city, Luck-- L-U-C-K, Luck. She goes to sell this leather, and she goes now to sell it to make sure. And a guy said, a shoemaker says, Andre this leather is-- somebody is Jewish and he make that. That is fresh and brilliant work. They look, and the Nazis looking for a-- a man like this. She says, I tell you what, I am like-- it was two months I make that leather. Where did you buy? He says, OK. I'll go home. Maybe I'll-- then meanwhile, he makes a pair of shoes. I make that leather. And she says to me, I don't know. I went, two months later. He disappeared. And I can't find him anymore. But I have a, a little bit soles, I'll give it-- sell it to you. A pair of soles, you could have a bag of under a kilo tomatoes, [NON-ENGLISH], you know. I don't know what to tell you more with that story, about Josef. Then, they gave us-- they've been [NON-ENGLISH]. At night, they call us [NON-ENGLISH] in the Russian language. The daughter comes, Ludia, later Andre come. Now December, December, the holidays. They bring us out food. And she says to me, I couldn't understand. We got so much to eggs, and you never touch eggs. Because the chickens are laying the eggs, and I never touch eggs, because why should I. Then I will give you 5-6 eggs, because you never touch it, the eggs. She knows how much eggs, how much chicken, you know, that way. I didn't know about it. But I wouldn't touch the egg. And she give us to eat. December we had a good meal. December and January-- January, I fixed the leather-- the leather. And then March comes friends all from my town. Knocks on the door, Jews. He says, he's Jewish. I want to have a piece of bread. And they give him a piece of bread. And they ask about, us, whether that they are there. He goes, we are-- he was in the forest, and we don't know where he is. She says to him, he was in the-- we've been in the [NON-ENGLISH]. He said, if you see him, you tell him that I'm looking for him. She says to this guys, she gives him the-- she gives him bread, she gives him this-- she gives him whatever he want. And they're going away, and then she comes in, and she says, come the next-- tomorrow, I'll give you again. I'm coming in the next day, and she says to me, they're coming. You want to see them? I went the other side, I'm coming in. And they've been already there. Who's this? Jews. Who is this? Jews. Oh, come on in. They come on in, we see each other from my town. We see each other, and they're telling me we have hided there, three girls there, and we are six, seven men in a hole. In the daytime, we're going away in the forest down there. At night, we come at 12:00 or 1 o'clock, we cook potatoes, and we cook, and we making fire. In the daytime, we go away. Telling her this story, then we go back. We didn't go there. He says, we're going just to look at it. I went overnight to the forest with them. 
INT: And this was in March '44? IG: March '44, March '44-- no. No, no, that was February-- that was January, I think, January or March, something like this. January or March. February or something like this. Or was it February? In February, I went to-- then I go outside to ride in the daytime. Because the-- the [NON-ENGLISH], the prisoner, which is the prisoner, they call it. He told me, they organized-- they call us to the army. They make a new Ukrainish army. We told him not to say anything about us. He didn't say anything. Once or twice, we're walk or ride in the morning, stop. They were going to shoot us. Who's there? I says, I say, I'm the tanner that make the leather. Oh, we know you. You go yourself. They let us go. They let us go. We know they looking for us. About-- in, in May--  INT: Well, in March is when you went to the forest and joined the partisans, right? IG: No, March, something like this. But then from March, not no-- I didn't join the partisans. I'm still there. I'm still there. But in May 1st or May 3rd, they make a killing for the Polacks. They kill all the Polacks. They kill all the Polacks. It was in May.  INT: Who killed them? IG: The Ukrainish, the Bandera. He kills all the Polacks. And I was there also. Daytime, I was with my Polack, making leather. And they took us out near the forest-- in the-- in the forest. And they see 15, 8, 10-- and one guy, which he was with me, says I see the a [INAUDIBLE] they kill. They took a stick, and they hit them right here. Not with bullets. Bullets are money. They hit him right here, and they fall in the grave. And then he says to me, you sit over here. We are-- nobody watches you, but don't go away, in the forest. Planning? Where are we going to go? They already won. Something is there, a new-- we didn't know about the army. We didn't know about these things. We sitting, sitting at night at 12 o'clock at night. 12 o'clock at night, they took us on the other side, in the main office in [NON-ENGLISH]. The Banderas organized with a safe. They have a safe, they have money. They have everything down there. Because 12 o'clock [INAUDIBLE] because the-- the road is already Germans, and the Germans go with the machine up front to back. About 12 o'clock, no German goes through. They have two times attacked the Germans. And they took the machines in. It was late, then we, we go away, about six, seven wagons. On the other side we come in [NON-ENGLISH]. [NON-ENGLISH] is the village name. And they put us on, and he says, listen to me. We give us all the clothes that belongs to you, everything belongs-- we're the bosses. And you organize the leather fact-- the leather. I take this leather which I find with the Polacks and Ukrainish, all the leathers belongs to them. And you organize, and we make our factory from leather. We put out all, and I-- now go, find workers. I say go to the-- they have workers, the Poland the Ukrainian, they have everything. They say we've got liberated-- everybody is liberated. Only come to us. And I find Jews. And we're working. They're digging down a big hole, and putting up to make that leather-- boots, you know, belts. And I start to make that leather, and we have two horses. And we grind the, the wood. We have to be grind it like powder. And we make that leather. And I make that leather. And the leather which I make it, then I go to the city. I could go to the Lwow and be free. I had a-- a name, a different name, a different passport, [NON-ENGLISH]. I could go to-- to Lwow, a big city. 
INT: So you did have a different name? IG: I didn't go. I didn't go. I changed my name. But I go-- I go to Luck, the big city. We had lunches down there. And we look for material. In Luck I look-- I look in the restaurant, [NON-ENGLISH] 28, the street, [NON-ENGLISH], in Luck. I see the restaurant. And the guy which is with me-- go with another guy with me-- he says to me, you not go in the front. Five Jews they caught hided, and they-- they put them to, to, to kill them. You know that. I could eat, I says. The other guy says, why don't you tell him that story. You couldn't eat break-- lunch or something like this. That's what I see. 1943, I was with the Bandera.  INT: When did you join the partisans? IG: The partisans, later. I was liberated. After the liberation, I go to the partisans. After I got liberated It was-- it was worse than ever, after I got liberated.  INT: Let's talk about your getting liberated then. IG: OK. Liberated.  INT: When was that? IG: Liberated in March 15, 1944, is liberated already. How I got liberated, I then tell you now. We went in with the partisans. They come at night. We don't know who they are. They come in Luck. We go in Luck. They arrested us, and they checked us. And they see, he says we didn't work. I didn't-- I shouldn't-- I shouldn't say that. But they forgive me. I don't know they were Bandera. Because I was different dressed than all of them. I wore good shoes, you know. I told them that. He says, next time, to captain, don't say anything. Because this is no good for you to work for them. After then, we go on Rovno free, Rovno free. And suddenly I go with two girls with Israel, Hamka Stryker and [NON-ENGLISH]. And go in there, no-- the other guys. In the back with me, comes a guy. Who's this? Dr. Ehrluf from my town. We were raised together as childhood. He remembers me. He comes in, come on to me. I come into him-- in his office. And in office, about 10-20 people waiting for him. He says, I'll talk to you. He give me cream. He give me this, he give me and the girls. And he says, come later, and we go for lunch. Well, you got plenty to do, do you? He said, I have plenty to do in the whole world. You cannot be anymore over here, because [NON-ENGLISH] is danger. I feel danger. What are you going to do? He said, I belong to the party, the Communist Party.
And I am protected. I have this, I have that. You was going outside. And I start to work for the factory in there, Rovno. Then this night I went away to another town, and over there-- six Jewish people working only in that factory. And they called-- and they took out all the Jewish, six Jewish, and they killed them. I see no life. And they're looking at all of us. I'm Jewish. But the Russian-- the Russian army already. This is no life. I went to them, I says, listen. I don't want to work. It's time to fight with the Nazis. So I says, maybe yes. But you speak Polish, you speak Russian, you speak Ukrainish. They send me away to Lublin-- no, to the forest. I come to the same place, which I did work, not to same town, just different. In the night we worked, in the daytime we went to the forest to hide ourselves. It was about 12, 13 people. Till we pull up so to Chelm, Chelm. And in Chelm, we went to the forest. And with Chelm, they went away-- I told you-- what's his name-- in the forest, everything in the forest. And they have-- and they have food from-- from the Polacks, and meals from there. And suddenly they went away. After Chelm, we went away outside, three miles, I told you before. And bring food from the-- from the village. And we bring every day, going one day, second day, and then they caught us. The Nazis caught us in the city-- I mark it down, the city-- I mark it down. You remember? They caught us, and they bring us to Lublin, in the ghetto. In Lublin ghetto, they give us Juden [NON-ENGLISH], Jewish soap, J-U-S-- R-J-U-S, Reich Juden [NON-ENGLISH], to soap up, in clothes and everything else. And the other clothes, they went away. And they start checking the [NON-ENGLISH]. One guy checked the hands. They said, you have clean hands, and strong, really strong. And everything is nice. And maybe they'll do something with me. And I said to the man, the man I do this, I do this. They send me here. They send me there. They send me to kitchen. I fix the table. Suddenly, there were-- there was glass-- I was a glass cutter. You know, I find it out. I cut glass. He says, he does everything. Keep. And they kept me down there. But half a day's work, sometimes I have to take dead people. It's terrible. I didn't like it. But the beginning, when all-- in every-- in every place you have dead people, three, four, five, six. And the dead people, go to the oven. And the oven goes like this in Lublin, oven like a chain goes. You see loaded on material, the same thing. Loaded on material, wood goes up. I only have to [INAUDIBLE]. When I see a friend of mine, [NON-ENGLISH], laying dead. Not dead, but I didn't take him. I recognized. He couldn't talk. Then I meet another guy, which I-- and years later-- a day after liberation I meet him, [NON-ENGLISH]. And I don't know, I hadn't heard from him. Because a lot, you die after this. A lot of people died. 
INT: When were you in Majdanek? IG: In Majdanek. This is in Majdanek. They took me to Majdanek. It was--  INT: You got there in May '44, right? IG: 1944.  INT: May, 1944. IG: May-- yes, May 15th, early, something like this. And I was there. I do the same thing. In June--  INT: This is where you are working with the dead people? IG: Working together with them. And then the factory there which they need me to work, they says, this guy in the factory, the Lublin factory. They need me to work. He says, I can't give out this guy. Because I need him myself. He's a guy [INAUDIBLE]. And I would work in the kitchen a little bit. I peel potatoes-- I can peel potatoes, you know, for the-- for the commissar, not for the-- for the commissar, peel potatoes and cutting meat, and sharpen knives, all of that. They kept me. We need him. Suddenly I see-- in June 12 or 13, nobody. The doors is open, big doors from the ghetto, open. And the second, the third day, and so by 13, I think-- I says, what the day. And I have-- is there a-- a place with clothes there, a lot of clothes, like two bags up, way up clothes. And I always had with me in the pants in my pocket, an undershirt with me. And I walk out from the ghetto-- from the [NON-ENGLISH]. It was 5:30, 6 o'clock, sometime, I didn't have a watch. And I walk out across the street, [NON-ENGLISH], now [NON-ENGLISH] is an outside city toilet. The toilet goes on here 2, 3, 4, and the other side for ladies, 2, 3, 4. And I go in there. I sit a half an hour, an hour. They knock on the door. They knock on the door. I says, no place. And I went in-- into there. And I hide myself in a post, and I got all this stuff in around me, all the, the, the worms crawl on me. You see, I knew-- I knew-- I figured this is the place to hide myself to live. By my friends at [NON-ENGLISH], I says, more patience and more to-- you could have chances to live over. And I figured the same thing. And suddenly about 11 o'clock at night, I go out and close the toilet. Nobody goes in, and stayed there, till 12 o'clock. 12 o'clock I took off my clothes, [NON-ENGLISH], and a shirt, it was a shirt. 
INT: It was a uniform, right? IG: A uniform, [INAUDIBLE] uniform. And I run away, [NON-ENGLISH] on the side, in the side, along on the side in the village, and run away a couple of miles, eight miles. And the Germans was already 5 o'clock, 6:00 in the morning. And Germans bombed the ones in the house, some other people also, regular, like other, any other. And they was bombed. And I was injured, some people dead. And I was injured over here in the back. And I can't talk. Four broken ribs I had. And they call-- it was already a day, Piaski was liberated. The city was liberated, and Lublin probably also was liberated. I didn't know. So eight miles. And they see I'm Jewish. And they, they call up Jewish people there living already in the city, in [NON-ENGLISH], Jewish people in the Piaski. In that city, small town. And they come and go out, and they took me away, with a wagon, four wheels, like the dead people there, they have a wagon, you know, four wheels. And they took me in, and [NON-ENGLISH] says, you know, you're liberated. Don't worry about it. We're already liberated. We have Russians over here. And there was a Jewish captain, a Jewish mayor in the city. I remember his name. You'd never think he Jewish. And they gave me a place to live to-- straw. And the grandmother, which is my father-in-law's mother, gave me cream and bread, and I eat the bread and talk. I can't talk. He can't walk. He can't talk. And my wife, she's already [INAUDIBLE]. I didn't know that. She comes, I remember she put her hand in over here. She was beautiful. 
INT: Well, this was your future wife. IG: Yeah. I didn't know her. [LAUGHS] She puts her hand. She says, he has no temperature. She says, I don't see any temperature. He called a doctor [NON-ENGLISH]. He was in the city, [NON-ENGLISH], I don't know. Doctor [NON-ENGLISH] says, he will need a strong guy. He's terrible injured four-- four ribs. And it was six weeks. I start to walk with a cane. And now, from my town, a city-- from my town passed through down there. And he comes in. A Jew is down there. He comes to me. He see me. Oy, he says to me my name. And I can't talk to him. He says, you know who is this. This guy which went in this, in this, and this. I went with him here. We know each other for a long time. He tell the story. Then they put together a bed for me from boards, two boards, straw. And I was laying in bed. And I was about two months probably. It was Passover. I try-- I work hard. I work hard. I start to talk Russian. I bring in a Russian guy with-- I sell-- I already bought leather, sell leather. I made a coat. Leather, no I bought leather. And the leather, I went to sell it. And the Russian guy comes to me, I have $100 hundred American. $100 American, $100 American. No not American-- zlotys. No dollars. [LAUGHS] Hundred [NON-ENGLISH] This is Russian. He's Russian. And I got 100, this one, I got Polish. Could you give me that leather? Five-- skin leather, he goes, yeah. But this at 500 ruble. I says, I got only 300. I say, well, OK. Give me, [LAUGHS] and I took away. I made me 200 dollars right away. But I had over here, five, six, golden [NON-ENGLISH], golden Russians. And for this case, I gave away to my wife before, before. I says, I'm satisfied. I have this and this. Two pieces I give you away. My father-in-law, I can't take it. He don't take mine was damaged. And he gave me away good ones, which is double price. Then she make two teeths over here. I remember. He don't want to accept anything from me. And I was there. And I says this way, see we have [NON-ENGLISH], [NON-ENGLISH], the president from the-- from the city, and they the police, and Jewish police. She says, I don't believe it. We have a war. I don't believe in anything. After the war, you have to be Jewish two, three years to be recognized as a human being. Right now is no good. I said, I don't want to live here. I want to go to a big town, Lublin. In Lublin I went two months. And then they went back, and they kill all of them-- [NON-ENGLISH], [NON-ENGLISH], all the Jews, the president, they kill all of them, the, the bandit. The cop, Polish army [NON-ENGLISH] they call it. They kill all of them. He says-- my father-in-law sees I'm right. Then I says, not place to live here. And I went away, and made a big business in Lodz. From Lodz I went to Cracow. I bring a lot flour here, a lot of flour there. 
INT: When did you-- when did you find out what happened to your father? IG: Oh, my father was died right away in September. It was, my father and my mother was at the same time. It was a different time. Look, he was in, in 1942, in the holidays, they kill-- all the area was killed. But our town, Lemberg, was later. My father was a week later. Just [INAUDIBLE]. Let's just forget about it. This is no question. I know that. But now we're talking about-- what are we talking about?  INT: Are you in Lodz now, after the war. And you went to DP camp for a while, in Hanover, right? IG: Yeah, then I went-- you have SS, I don't want to stay over here with that business in Lublin. And I went away. Then here, the father came in September, was the father came. He says, I want to stay with-- my wife came in middle of the day. It was in July or August. She came. I want to have with you-- I want to be with you. Sister and father says no. And is there a rabbi, which is there a rabbi in Brooklyn, rabbi-- he's there in Brooklyn. And the rabbi likes to get with the-- with the-- with the father-in-law, he say, to give permission. I says, I want to get married with your daughter. And another guy comes. And she says, she likes me. The lady, which she comes over here, I want to bring her up. You want to-- and she's going to tell you the story. She knows-- she remembers better. Because my wife told her the story. And she came to Lodz, and she said-- and to the business, the store which we had leather. I was busy. And I had in the store three people working for me, two partners and the rest people in Lodz. And I comes-- and I work in the factory. And I'm not-- and a stranger. I make $20 American money a day, the long dollars, one day. And she came, not as a businessman. She came because she had been with you. And I helped you to get well. I want to be with you. I had a girl. She's living. She's in Israel. She works for me. And I figure this way, by myself and I got sick. Every, every April I have a throat problem. In this time also, [NON-ENGLISH], she's in Israel. And I give her permission. I say, [NON-ENGLISH], I tell you what. I'm decided. I'm by myself. And I have money, I have dollars, [BACKROUND NOISE] and I have [INAUDIBLE]. Let me get married, and be my wife.
She says, I tell you what. I like to accept your, your invitation. But I have-- see the guy comes, whatever. He's a doctor. He's in the hospital. And he says, we want to get married. You know? He has a hospital, and he comes over here. We're going [NON-ENGLISH], half an hour. And I go for two hours. Sometimes she don't say anything. Because I know that. OK. I give up. I gave up the whole thing. Now wait, another 2-3 weeks, she comes-- she comes over here suddenly in the daytime. She comes over here. And she says to me, I-- like you, this and this, and this and this. And I come over and talk to my partners, and I talk to my business people. I, I, I received another letter, and I talked it over with them. And they said the same thing. This is going to be your wife. And the other one, she has him. She doesn't go with you, she go with others. But this is a good business lady. She said, oh, we need [INAUDIBLE] the business. So she signed. She knows I've got a letter. She said, I don't need that stuff. I tossed her with money, with cash, with everything else. She say, I never leave it. She says, I don't like to see that. And this lady will tell you the story, which I tried. You want her to come, she come right away over here. And she goes away, and the other one comes. She says stay over here. But I don't want to stay without [NON-ENGLISH] It was still Friday, Thursday, she called up the father. Not so easy to call up. You have to go a telephone. She called her father. Her father comes Friday, and stays over Saturday. He brings me 5 [NON-ENGLISH], about American $500 or $400, Russian money. He said, this is your dowry. And this I go-- I didn't ask him. He gave me. He says, OK. Now I says, I don't stay over here. I want to go. The world, I don't want to stay here. I says, you go back go home with your father. No. I go. I stay with you. And I went right away, September I went to Germany, September 5. September, September, the month of September. I went to Germany. I came to Germany in the Russian zone. And over there, I'm-- a few of the Jewish survivors there, Russians there. And looking for a job, I remember, they gave me a job to do. And she's pregnant already. She became pregnant, yeah. And I say it's not a place between the war-- I've heard a lot of stories about this. And I says I go to American zone, and go up to Hanover. And I recognize and I speak to the main man, Yosel Rosensaft. He's there. He's still living, Yosel Rosensaft. And by a castle, Hanover. And I says to him, and he said to me, listen what had happened. You know, you take out your card, your registration card. Because you are liberated in 1944. And don't say anything. Say 1945. I says, I wouldn't say-- I want to have the truth, the way it is, open. Comes anything to me is OK. He says I'd rather want you coming away from there. They say they are Russian. The take out their index cards. And I don't want to take out anything. I want the truth. And I was there a couple of months in Germany. Yosel Rosensaft to speak with a lager-- I lost $300 American, a big story. I lost $300 over here. I lost it. You know. I had money. I make business, you know the way it is. My wife used to say, you lost the money. $300 is a lot of money, but what? Now the lady says, somebody find the $300 there. I know. It's a big story, complicated. And I go-- from there, I go to Frankfort. 
INT: We'll stop here. IG: Yeah.  INT: --October 7, 1996, Irving Gromis. When did you come to America? IG: Yeah. I went to [INAUDIBLE], which my son asked me documents, I sended them. And that was 1946.  INT: Didn't you come in '47 to the US? IG: 19-- yeah. But in--  INT: Oh. IG: --for America, we're talking about the beginning [INAUDIBLE], which I have-- I have paperwork. And I work in [INAUDIBLE] and actually in concentration-- [INAUDIBLE] concentration camp. [INAUDIBLE] camp they call it, was a [INAUDIBLE]. [? We talked to ?] other people and we feel comfortable. And from [INAUDIBLE], a big business, I go to Poland to bring here. One time I went to Poland, I came back and [INAUDIBLE] couple hundred dollars, couple hours. That much, $200, is a lot of money. The second time I went to Poland, I should come into home. My wife is in hospital. I came the second day. She in hospital. And this lady told me that story. She said, your wife is in hospital. He is a boy. I went at the hospital. There's only one hospital in [INAUDIBLE]. And they showed me the-- the boy to the window. And I speak to my wife, was couple hours sitting with her, sitting with, eating with her. And I came happy with the boy. And I didn't bring any money. I told the her, ah, don't use the money. [INAUDIBLE] life. And I feel very healthy. I don't want to walk with you. Then we went home in a rent apartment. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] Extra-- she didn't want to stay with the apartment. This costs money. She want to stay with the bubbe, with the zaide, grandfather all together. And this lady was living to the front, this lady. But she [INAUDIBLE]. 
INT: This is a woman who was here earlier? IG: The woman [INAUDIBLE].  INT: That's who you're talking about. IG: Not this one, the other one.  INT: OK. IG: She didn't come. And she comes in. And he talks, [INAUDIBLE], friendly each other? And saw it. And she has pictures. She should bring pictures. She has pictures from-- from there. I said, you come, and you bring the pictures. Or, they tell me, I told her not to come. But when they come in, I call her, comes. And she says to me, you know, I have apartment. I have everything. And she doesn't want to the apartment. She wants to have the father with her. We slept together on the floor. She said, I want to sleep in the floor with the mother, with the father. We slept in the floor all of us. That couple of months, and I've been registered my name Rechman. No. Gromis is not. You didn't hear that I'll comes Rechman to Gromis. Didn't I tell you this story?  INT: You can say it now. IG: Yeah, I will tell you. OK. Then I am Rechman.  INT: No, no, you didn't tell the story on tape. IG: Oh. I didn't-- I have to tell you the tape. OK, then. The changes from Rechman to Gromis-- you want to cut it up, or are you [? bolting ?] to 1946? What will you do? From Rehman to Gromis, didn't I tell you that? 
INT: Not on tape. No, not-- not on camera. No. IG: What I got the death penalty in 1942 from the [INAUDIBLE] in [INAUDIBLE]. The doc-- Mr. Winkler [INAUDIBLE] from the [INAUDIBLE]. He says, I can't to [INAUDIBLE]. I'll give you two weeks later, you're going to-- I'll hold you two weeks. In two weeks, you have to get. The call the-- the-- the gypsy-- when they call the gypsies-- I tell you these gypsies? And they lead me in with the gypsies together.  INT: Yes. You talked about the gypsies. IG: And then I went out with the gypsies. I told you the why I said. I went out with the gypsies. And I was hiding in the roof. And then [? Eichman, ?] [INAUDIBLE] [? Eichman, ?] was arrested in 1941. Then send him away Siberia. And they gave me a Polish passport for 1937, Polack, with a name [? Eichman-- ?] maybe he's living-- [? Eichman ?] Israel, Jacob [?Eichman?] and I [INAUDIBLE] passport. OK? [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] I came into [INAUDIBLE] to deliver-- to deliver the goods. I says, I need to bring to [INAUDIBLE]. And to the window, it was written-- I see in the-- the [INAUDIBLE] to go into the [INAUDIBLE] had written, [SPEAKING GERMAN]. That means Jewish dogs not allowed in. Well, see, I go away. Now, since I changed my name in the-- in through the window he calls me. Gromis, [SPEAKING GERMAN]. He kill me. He recognize me. I says to him, I'm not Gromis. I'm-- [INAUDIBLE], don't talk anything like this. [? Eichman-- ?] [? Eichman, ?] this is a extra German name. Don't use that name. OK? [? Eichman. ?] This [INAUDIBLE]. I came home. He talked to the president from the Judenrat. He told me use [? Rochman. ?] Now, put out from the E, make an R. From the E, I make a R in the Polish document. And I've been registered in the Judenrat [? Rochman, ?] not [? Eichman. ?] 
INT: OK. IG: I had the Polish certificate. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] I'm [? Rochman. ?] And since then I've been using [? Rochman. ?] I keep [INAUDIBLE] me I'll keep it [? Rochman. ?] It's--  INT: And then you went back to Gromis. IG: Hm?  INT: And then you went back to Gromis. IG: Back to Gromis in this country.  INT: Yes, in this country. IG: Yeah. I came to--  INT: Let's talk about when you-- IG: --to America, [? I came as ?] [? Rochman. ?] I came--  INT: Let's talk about when you came to America. IG: Came to America. I went to the America, came [? Rochman. ?] [INAUDIBLE] was in December 12, 1947 into America. I remember, because I said my son asked me the same thing. 1947 when I came over here. I couldn't find apartment. Suddenly, I did find apartment. I've been living Rivington-- 24 Rivington Street. 24 Rivington was 1948 already. 1948, my [INAUDIBLE] wife get there. She's pregnant and having a little boy. And it was critical. But the Joint gives me to $15, $20 a month. My wife, I could manage it. She--  INT: The Joint Distribution Committee? IG: Yeah, Joint Distribution Committee, they gave me. And I, on the side, I was looking for work. I make a dollar extra, dollar here, pulling packages. Here, there, I make a $3, $4-- [INAUDIBLE] a dollar a day. It's enough, $2, $1.50. And the Joint give me the few dollars. And I rent apartment. I-- no, I give $200 already for the apartment. Years ago, it was in the [INAUDIBLE]. I got an apartment on Rivington Street, 24 Rivington Street near the matzoh bakery. I'm looking for a job. I can't find a job. Sign [INAUDIBLE] up, it's a job. He [INAUDIBLE] says, no Jewish. No refugees. You ought to go to Jewish. I went to Syracuse, New York. And she was living also down there. And I had a job down there, a Saturday, Sunday. Saturday, I work. They give me [INAUDIBLE] job in the synagogue. I read the Bible, read the Torah. I know how to read it. They give me a job in the religious-- ah, no he [INAUDIBLE]. Somebody should tell me this is no good, this is no good. I don't want that. I want to work. I went to the synagogue. They said, could you read the Torah? I read the Torah one [? time, ?] a second. And he give me a $1, dollar two. And I says to the rabbi, I don't want that [INAUDIBLE] business. They give me three and a half thousand-- $4,000 a year were not taxable payment with food, with everything.
I don't want the job. And I make the job only less. I make $0.75 an hour to work overtime. I work another place, then I make $50 a week. A lot of money was that time, $60 a week, and that's it. With my wife, I could live. Because she managed everything exactly. Yeah. [INAUDIBLE] [INAUDIBLE] job close to work, I bring home this [INAUDIBLE]. My wife make it a place. And she invited somebody [INAUDIBLE], this and this. And I had nice, very good. I work in Syracuse in the factory. Somebody works with me [INAUDIBLE] was bonded with me, was with me. I said only to the-- to the workers. And the boss says, Mr. [? Shreman ?] listen, don't bring up the European stories over here. Because I do not listen to it. You explain me to my best guy. He was a strong guy. Sure. I went to another factory. I make a $1.20 an hour. And [INAUDIBLE] says, now, [INAUDIBLE] make a union. They didn't make the union. I went back to New York. In New York, I find a [INAUDIBLE]. I know I'll know what to do and with the [INAUDIBLE]. I know experience. I went to [INAUDIBLE] company. And I worked with [INAUDIBLE] in front from the table. And they gave me also [INAUDIBLE] $70 a week. But [INAUDIBLE] to-- to the work is two hours travelling. I work an [? hour. ?] Then I went to the union in 1953. The union gave me a job. And I work since then. And I make [INAUDIBLE]. I make [INAUDIBLE]. I know everyone. Because I stayed in contact with them. I know them. And this is-- my wife said, listen, you have to get used to it. And that's it. So [INAUDIBLE] where ever you want. And I work there. And then I came back to New York. And I work for-- they called it [? City ?] Kosher-- Hebrew National in the beginning. Then I went to [? City ?] Kosher, a small place. And I worked there seven years there, 1953 to 1960. And then, working there, I says, maybe you cannot make a-- I say at that time, $15,000 [INAUDIBLE]. 15 is [INAUDIBLE]. I got a-- you want to see the records? There are the records. I bought a house. I got a-- when I bought the house, yeah, I took the house. I bought [LAUGHS] in my name. I come in here. About my daughter and my wife's name? He says, it cost you another $200. You have a wife. You have a child. And you didn't tell me. And I make everything correct. It cost you a lot of money. But I'll take your $125 to change [INAUDIBLE] you, and your wife, and your child. Then I have the copies are there. [INAUDIBLE] house and the second house, another-- this way. And I start to make money. And my children, they have to go to school. 
INT: What are the names of your two sons? IG: Edwin and Robert. Now, it's Robert. Then you have to go to school. The older one, has 86 average. [INAUDIBLE] 86 average. Then he should go in the army. In the American army, you could go. But you have to go to school. And the other, 96 average. It was the top from the city. It's top from the school. He could go to [INAUDIBLE]. He could go any place he wanted. I think they went to-- went to Pittsburgh.  INT: Did you ever go back to Europe, to Poland? IG: No. I went back to-- I been back to-- to Lodz? No. No. No. I didn't go back. I'll [INAUDIBLE] nothing do. But from Poland, I went back to my place blood. I went [? there ?] [? by ?] the Russians, they give me a statement. And I-- 10 days to go back in the Russian in the Polish to looking for families. At time, I was down there. I went three days. And I was looking to me [INAUDIBLE] bandits. They're looking for me. They give $500 in order to catch me, this and the doctor there, which I [INAUDIBLE] with me. Dr. [INAUDIBLE] over here, [INAUDIBLE] call-- call him up right now. Then I run away middle of the night. I went to the station. I come to the station, three, four people, hand up. What's this, 1 o'clock? Because the [INAUDIBLE] bandits come and go also to them. I says, I'm Jewish and told [INAUDIBLE] the office and tell them who is this. I go-- I go to-- back to Poland-- to Polish country. He says, you can't go back, because she's danger. You go back to Luck, L-U-C-K. From there, you take right away train where ever you want to go. I come to Luck. He says, how do you come over here? 
INT: When was this? IG: Luck, L-U-C-K.  INT: No, no, when? When was-- IG: That was 19-- 40-- '45.  INT: Oh, OK. Yeah. IG: 1945.  INT: OK. No, let's go back to where we were. We were talking-- IG: Yeah.  INT: --about your life in America. IG: In America, OK.  INT: When did your wife die? IG: My wife die in 1971.  INT: Yeah. IG: Which, I don't [? need ?] to talk about it.  INT: And your two sons are married now. And you have grandchildren. IG: Yeah, grandchildren. They make a--  INT: How-- you have seven grandchildren? IG: Seven. And the name-- I remember the names. [INAUDIBLE] Didn't I tell you the name?  INT: Sure, yeah. IG: Yeah, I love the name. They love me also. I have a good time. And they go-- a granddaughter was two weeks ago over here. Says, [INAUDIBLE] they want to see you and play with you in chess. I play with them in chess. [INAUDIBLE] bended down. He lost a piece. I says, what are you going to to do with your hat? He bent up, he broke-- he broke off the table. He said, the way he talks is funny. Grandpa talks funny. [INAUDIBLE]. He likes--  INT: Did you ever talk to your sons about what you want through during the war? IG: Yeah, I tell them, too. But they say, you have to forget about it. We don't want to know. They listen to it. Says-- says, thing which is over. That's it. Because there it is. I can't forget about my brother, which I [INAUDIBLE] the binding from the brother comes not from birth. It comes from living-- live together. I give them the $200. I give him everything. And I saved him. And just one second in January 1944, we got this guy over here. I'll call him up, [INAUDIBLE]. He's alive [INAUDIBLE] 10, and I am alive. That is the result of that. He would live, he would find me. 
INT: Did your-- did your feelings about God change as a result of what you saw during the war? IG: What change?  INT: The way you felt about God. IG: God is a business I don't-- I don't bother with that. I tell you what. Didn't I tell you that 1939 when the Russian occupied what [INAUDIBLE] belonged, [INAUDIBLE] neutral. And now I come to America. Democrat, Republican, what ever they say, I say I'm neutral. [INAUDIBLE] say. Which I find out in the practice, I don't belong here. I don't belong there. But changes comes, they're checking for it. And they took all the-- the people that belonged to the Communist Party they killed. And the people where they are-- the Polish, you know, is no good. Religious, they don't like it. Then I don't belong to anybody. I go to Israel. I go to the synagogue. And today also, I have to put a hat, I put here, I put there. I stay with [INAUDIBLE] to get the people. And that's [INAUDIBLE] raise up. When I was young, I had my friends Polacks, Ukrainish. I used to go sometimes to the church with them. The-- it comes in. I give him a zloty. I never forget. And I-- they knew my [INAUDIBLE]. And I come to the synagogue. There's also-- they are-- respect it nicely. They like it. We talk about Bible. They learn about Bible. And that what teaching today, same thing, best [INAUDIBLE], lot of luck. I like [INAUDIBLE]. When I have to [INAUDIBLE], I go with the [INAUDIBLE]. I know don't think about. But let me stop, one thing I must to tell you. My father came from this-- came home. I was about 12, 13 years old. And I learn [NON-ENGLISH]. This [INAUDIBLE] how to make the-- [NON-ENGLISH], preparation about tefillin. And then I always talk about how all things till today I should come to the synagogue. They offered me a job again with the tefillin. I should teach it. My friend is a teacher [? till. ?] And I know better than him the story. I don't want to make money from that business. I keep it's a business. Kosher [INAUDIBLE] business. [INAUDIBLE], kosher, in my knowledge was-- kosher was [PAUSES FOR 5 SECONDS] we could call it years ago [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] part of the Jewish Orthodox, Jewish sanitary law, kosher. They call it kosher. [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH] All the meanings in between them, kosher is it. Anyway, that kosher today turns out-- it's kosher is [? bred ?] for the quality. Kosher [? are ?] [? bred ?] for the quality, are quality kosher. Could be a goy is kosher. You ever see a goy eats kosher? A goy eats kosher. Kosher is the watchman. We is a watchman. A goy likes kosher, because she watches. After three days, you're not allowed to eat it. It's only kosher you could see, not other thing. Not [INAUDIBLE] you couldn't see. 
INT: Why did you want to give your testimony today? IG: Testimony, for what?  INT: This. Why did you want to tell your story today? IG: The story basically, I just told the story which I said the-- the [INAUDIBLE] is German. And probably is Jewish. We could find it out [INAUDIBLE], because of the way he comes. Because the guy which told me that says, I can't tell you the story right now. It's 1942. Since he took over the city, it was in June 1942. Was no killing, no murdering.  INT: Which city? IG: Lokacze.  INT: OK. IG: He took over, was the [INAUDIBLE] there. [INAUDIBLE]. There's no more killing. But the Jewish-- the Jewish police, they watch it anyway. The Ukrainish police watch it, nobody should make business. This I want to know. I cannot find it out. I don't remember. I had two children. He had two-- the other guy had two children. The other is not Jewish for sure. But he was saved me. And I want to know if he asked-- only thing I had for me, I gave faxes to work out for them. And I gave them back the receipt. It was 19-- September 19-- in the beginning of 8 of August. He came to me. He took away the receipt. If he has-- If he has the faxes-- a couple fax in a row. You have to [INAUDIBLE]. You understand? This is I'm interested to know. And I don't-- I don't want to open up that story. I don't want to-- very possible, he's living. This guy told me, he's living [INAUDIBLE]. See? Then this I'm very interested to know. Because the [INAUDIBLE] in [INAUDIBLE]. One, the two that saved my life, and that saved the city, which nobody-- only I know it. This guy was with me together. Nobody-- the city didn't know. Why didn't the city know? Because if they would know we had a [INAUDIBLE] in the city, yeah, then that story, the last Saturday in 1942, I was delivering the letter. Saturday, I was delivering the letter in 1942. And the-- but the manager, [INAUDIBLE] Grinkler-- Winkler was not there. But the manager in the corner from the business outside the ghetto-- not out-- in the ghetto, outside the ghetto he had an office. And I was eating lunch down there. I could go any place. I had [INAUDIBLE]. But I could go any place I wanted. Nobody. I could go. I had lunch down there. His family's over here. [INAUDIBLE] [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] and [INAUDIBLE] Zimmerman, too. And the wife and the whole family, we eat lunch together, have a good lunch like a normal-- normal table, a big table. It was outside the ghetto. And I told him the story which we have-- like to you. But nobody should know it. I told you the story which we have. [INAUDIBLE], he says to me, we have a Winkler is very good. And when I changed the name for Winkler, the guy says Winkler. And he sees me, and he says-- to him-- [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]. Something is there. Because I look this guy just like same [INAUDIBLE] other one. Says, they brothers. He's told them another story. He told me the story. He says, he keeps quiet. He said, don't say anything. I told you. Then Winkler says to him, don't remind anything I told you about it. Forget about it. See that? 
INT: OK. Thank you. IG: He told me this story.  INT: Thank you. IG: [INAUDIBLE] That's finished?  INT: Is there something else you'd like to say? IG: No, that's Winkler. Now, the story, which I've been telling you about this. I was very interested to know when you're gonna see in the paper, you're gonna have advertised in the German papers, he's going to talk. If he's living, [INAUDIBLE] Winkler, [INAUDIBLE]. He remembers exactly. Because he remembers they have the guy [INAUDIBLE]. This guy, they keep seven days in the city. And they pulled him around. All over, he went to the city. And the guy is very-- he could run away probably. If I would be, I would run away. [INAUDIBLE] here there. Why they keep him seven day? He showed [INAUDIBLE], he shows [INAUDIBLE]. He [INAUDIBLE]. He [INAUDIBLE]. Show him everything.  INT: Thank you. IG: OK. This picture was taken probably-- not exactly-- but 19-- some-- '18 or 1919, '18-- 1918, '17, I don't remember.  INT: And who's in that picture? IG: It's me.  INT: And where was it taken? IG: They're taken Horochow with the name Muni Bregman.  INT: Oh, that's who I took the picture. And how did you come-- get this photo and the other ones we're gonna see? IG: I went to Israel, which was my cousin by the name Hula Schechter, my mother's cousin. She went to Israel on kibbutz. She went-- and went there home. [INAUDIBLE] is a-- [INAUDIBLE] was her-- her husband. And they gave me the picture, also others. 
INT: OK. IG: This picture was taken in 1931 or '40s.  INT: And who's in that picture? IG: '39 or 1940, something like this. '39 or 1940.  INT: And who is in the picture? IG: The picture's me, and my mother, and my brother.  INT: Could you say everybody's names? IG: Sure. My mother's Midel Gromis. And my brother is Tevve Gromis. And my name is Israel Tzvi Gromis.  INT: OK. And who's in this picture? IG: This picture? My brother Tevve Gromis.  INT: And do you know when this was taken? Do you know when this picture was taken? IG: This was picture in 1937-- 8, '37, '38.  INT: OK. IG: This picture of my wife Chana Gromis with the older son Edwin Gromis-- was taken around 1937 in July, August in New York City.  INT: You mean '47? IG: '47.  INT: Right. OK. IG: '47. And Third-- in the Third Street, Broadway.  INT: OK. IG: This is my younger son, Dr. Robert Gromis. On the left side is Alana Gromis, Julia Gromis, and Michael Gromis.  INT: When was this photo taken? IG: Oh, this taken probably last year.  INT: In '95. IG: '95.  INT: And what are the names of your other son's children, since we don't have their picture? IG: Edwin Gromis, he has four children. The oldest is the Rebecca Gromis. Amanda Gromis, Jonathan Gromis, and the last one is Daniel Gromis.  INT: OK. IG: This is from 19-- after the war, 1944. I meet a friend, which [INAUDIBLE] together. They [? went ?] to us with partisans. And we-- was Germans. And they was [INAUDIBLE]. And they [INAUDIBLE] him after the war. And he gave me this [? X-ray, ?] this picture. This-- I had pictures over there. He says, that's all I could do for you. I just see you one night, the other night. With-- we helped him to make some ammunition. Was-- but the-- in the forest, you know. 
INT: And what does this say? IG: This say, this was there from the army since 1942. But this is not-- not right. He couldn't give everything exactly. That's all he could make out for you. He you was in the partisans. He belonged till 1942 to the army of Ukrainish-- no-- Russian-Polish Army, Russian Polish partisans. That's all you could give it you. This, you could use it. Because you had a stamp, a [INAUDIBLE]. You get a picture down there. I've been using everything in Poland. Once it happened, I've been using this. The [INAUDIBLE] in Poland Lodz, Krakow, I was going to [INAUDIBLE] Jewish. Then I showed this over here. The other guy says in Polish, says I can't speak Polish. They took them off. And I says, over here. Says-- he says one to the other, see? I told you this is a Russian. And I took off 15 Jewish people. And I have this here. It saved my life, Krakow, Lodz.  INT: OK. IG: It's an appeal to Polacks, Catholics, we have a holiday without Jews. And at the top is written in Jewish. Want me to read it? I'll read it to you in Jewish.  INT: Sure. IG: OK. Then I have to make it lower. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] This is the [NON-ENGLISH].  INT: Why don't you tell us what it means? What-- where-- IG: This is the last appeal from the city--  INT: Which city was this from? Basically, why don't you just tell us what this was saying? IG: [INAUDIBLE] When Jewish business was [INAUDIBLE]. It's [INAUDIBLE]. The city is [INAUDIBLE]. And this is [INAUDIBLE] the city. It's a Polish, [NON-ENGLISH]. It's-- it's Polish without Jews. But the other side of the story says the picture, who's there, what kind of people this is. You know that. 
INT: Yeah, there's a picture on the other side. IG: The other side.  INT: OK. Thank you. IG: This is [NON-ENGLISH]. Holiday without Jews.  INT: OK. There's a photo on the other side I want-- can show. Photo on the other side of that proclamation. IG: Yeah. This is--  INT: And this was in [INAUDIBLE], right? IG: It's [INAUDIBLE].  INT: OK. IG: Close to the Lwow.  INT: And who are these people? IG: And these people from the city.  INT: OK. IG: 1937, '38, something like this. This is the people there.  INT: OK.