INT: Today is October 16, 1996. The survivor is George Eisenberg. The interviewer is Ellen Adler. We're in Fresh Meadows, New York, United States of America. And the language being used is English. My name is Ellen Adler. Today I'm interviewing Mr. George Eisenberg, in Fresh Meadows, New York, United States of America. And it is October 16th, 1996. May I please have your name? GE: Yeah, my name is George Eisenberg.  INT: Would you spell that please? GE: E-I-S-E-N-B-E-R-G.  INT: And what was your name at birth? GE: My name at birth was Jona Eisenberg.  INT: Could you spell Jona please? GE: J-O-N-A.  INT: And when were you born? GE: April 24, 1925.  INT: How old are you now? GE: 71.  INT: And where were you born? GE: Sasow, Poland.  INT: Would you spell Sasow, please? GE: Yeah. S-A-S-O-W. Poland, you want me to spell Poland too?  INT: That's fine, thank you. [LAUGHS] What can you tell me about your first recollections of your childhood in Sasow? Tell me about your parents. GE: Well, my parents, they were-- we lived in a-- well, there was-- where we lived was a small town. And my-- my mother was a homemaker. My father was like what it's called, a merchant. He used to go out from different places and deal with all kind of porters and so on.  INT: What were their names? GE: My father's name was Nuchim. N-U-C-H-I-M. And my mother's name was Risa. It was-- the way we spell it in Polish was R-A-S-I-A-- Risa, or whatever. 
INT: Did you have any brothers or sisters? GE: Yes. I had two brothers, no sisters.  INT: Were they older or younger than you? GE: They were younger. I was the oldest one.  INT: Can you tell me their names and when they were born? GE: Yeah. The-- my-- this-- my-- my next one after me, was his name was Hershel. And the youngest one was Aaron. And--  INT: What kind of a home did you live in? Was it a house or an apartment? GE: No, we had like, a small house. It belonged to my parents.  INT: And was there a large Jewish community in Sasow? GE: Well, Sasow was a small town to begin with. But there was, I would say, about 1,500 Jewish people before the war.  INT: Do you have any idea what percentage that would be of the whole community? GE: What it became?  INT: No-- GE: The--  INT: Was that-- were half the people there not Jewish? Or what percentage? GE: Oh, what percentage? I would say, maybe about at least 30% were Jewish people.  INT: Mhm. Tell me about your education. What kind of school did you go to? GE: Well, when the-- when the war broke out I was only, what? 14 years old. And I had-- I went to elementary school and I think I went one of two classes in high school.  INT: And can you tell me a little bit about how you celebrated your religion at home? GE: Well, we-- our family was a religious family. My grandparents lived with us. And my-- 
INT: Could you tell me their names? GE: Yeah. My grandfather's name-- I mean, this is from the mother side-- was-- his name was Zelig. And my grandma's name was [? Bella. ?] So [? Bella, ?] they used to call her. And they were very religious people. We were very observant Jews. We used to observe every holiday. We used to observe-- Saturday Shabbos. And it was a-- a very-- a very religious home, I would say.  INT: Were you bar mitzvahed? GE: Well, it-- the bar mitzvah, I was bar mitzvah. But not like they made a bar mitzvah for my grandson. Well, I remember in Sasow, when they made a bar mitzvah, they used to call you up to the Torah. First of all, you had to know how to daven. You had to know about Judaism. You had to know about chametz, and so on. They just call you up to the Torah. My grandma baked some cookies. And my father was bringing a bottle of vodka. And that Shabbos we went to shul and we made a kiddush. And my father would say, after I made the haftarah, after I said-- he would say [HEBREW]. Which means, in English, thanks, God. I'm [INAUDIBLE] since. That was the bar mitzvah. [LAUGHS]  INT: Do you remember, whether any of your friends or your parents' friends were non-Jewish? GE: Well, it was a small town. We had friends. But to be honest with you, this town there in Poland-- I mean, actually it belong to the Ukraine. And it was always antisemitic people. And they did not associate too much with the Jews. And they always used to make fun of the Jews. I mean, but we lived OK. We went along all right. 
INT: Do you remember your father ever explaining to you why the others treated you badly or made fun of you? GE: Well-- well, it never came up, that question. I mean, before the war it was OK. We used to go to school together with non-Jewish kids. And we got along OK. Just when the war started, that was the bad part.  INT: Tell me about that. GE: Well, to begin with, the-- when the World War II started out in 1939, the Russians made a deal with the Germans, that they're going to occupy the certain part of Poland. And the Germans were going to occupy. So in our town, we belonged to the Russian side. So the Russians came in, in 1939. And life was pretty good. And then the-- the Russians were with us till 1941.  INT: Did you continue going to school during this time? GE: In the Russian, yeah. But it wasn't like it used to be, you know? It was break up in classes, you know? And there was not too much going on.  INT: Did your father continue working? GE: My father, yeah. He had no choice. He had to go out and to earn a living.  INT: And how did things change when-- GE: In '41?  INT: --in '41? GE: To begin with, the Germans came in to our town, I think, in July or September-- or in August, they came in. And the first week they came in, it was OK. Then the next time, the next week, what they did, it's-- life started to be horrible. They-- I remember once when they came in. And once it was on a Friday afternoon. We had no-- our streets were not paved. No cement and no concrete or tar. It was like mud. So what they did, they gathered-- they took all the Jews, most of them, whoever they could find. And they gathered them. They took them out in-- to the place in the city, where-- on the roads, on the streets. And they told them to clean the mud with their hands. No shovels, nothing. After we clean the mud, everybody was muddy. So we went home. Then-- 
INT: Were you were involved in this also? GE: Well, I was involved, yes. Because I didn't want my father to go. So I went. And then one time, what they did-- and this was once, and a couple of weeks later-- they came up with another idea. They got it, they took all the people who had the beards. You know, because mostly the holy people, the pious people, they took them. And they took them out in the center of the town. And they told them to put their tallits on, which is the prayer shawls. And they told them to-- and then they gave them rifles. And then they told the German soldiers to go up there, against, in the opposite way, and to raise their hands, to make believe that the Jews are killing Germans. The next day, it was all over the papers. They're showing pictures that the Jews are killing the advanced German Army, and that the Germans have to take revenge on this. On a Saturday morning, while the Jews were in the synagogue, they came in. And they made a pogrom. They took out, they killed-- they took on that time, they killed between 20 and 30 people. They just clobbered them to death. Not even shot-- shoot. Then they took all the women and all the kids, I was one of them. And they put all these-- not even dead bodies. And they put them on the wagon. And we were the horses who were pulling the wagons, bring them over to the cemetery for burial. They brought all these people to the cemetery. And they told us to dig a big ditch without any show, without anything. And then they took all these corpses, all these people, some with-- their screams are still here. And they told us to cover this there. And they put all these in one mass grave. And then they said they're going to kill us too. We were maybe 20, 30 people-- I don't remember-- women and children. In the meantime, it was came to darkness, in the evening. One German officer came on a horse with his whip. And he start screaming. He says, Jews run home. Run-- run away from here. And this is how that day end. And this-- 
INT: And the soldiers did not have orders to shoot after the retreating bodies? GE: No, after-- after the-- after this officer came along, they told us to run back home. And they didn't shoot us.  INT: Had you known any of the people that you had to bury? GE: Sure, I knew them. I don't remember their name, but I knew them all, sure. I mean, it was a small town. It was one-- one know the other one. By the way, you're talking about these pogroms. I got to mention one story also. Because you were asking about the neighbors, or about the kids [INAUDIBLE]. You know, in the Jewish religion, you're not allowed to do any cooking or to light any candles after Shabbos, during the Shabbos. So we used to have one guy who used to come around in the whole town. And he was what they call him, the Shabbos goy He was the one who would go in and put on the fires. Because we had no electricity and no water. And he used to be the one who used to come in on Saturday morning and put on the fire for the stove and for the oven. And so on. And everybody, Monday, they used to pay him a few pennies, a few zloties, whatever, some food and everything. He was helping. This was going on all the time. When the Germans came in, he was the one who was that got-- he decided who shall live who shall die. When the Germans lined up all these people the first time, and they took all the men and they lined them up in the center of town, and they asked-- his name was a-- a Ukrainian name. His name was Yaska Volk. And he was the [INAUDIBLE]. He was the one, like he would tell you, this one goes on this side. And the other one goes on this side. And this one goes on this side, and this one goes on this side. He was the selector. And he's the one-- this was the thank you, what he gave to the Jews. 
INT: I'd like to go back on one thing before we go on with your story. Can you tell me a little about the synagogue that you attended, and the rabbi? who was the head of it? GE: Yeah, well, the-- we had three synagogues. And the rabbis, you know, to tell you who the rabbi was-- you know, that's-- we had a few of us. But I don't remember the-- Rabbi [? Tauv ?] was one of them, I remember. And the synagogues, you know, the synagogues, they were-- the-- the synagogues-- let me put it to you this way. The synagogues in our town was not a synagogue like in here, where it's a business, synagogue. And the synagogue in the-- they didn't ask you if you have money or you don't have money. Everybody who wanted to come here was more than welcome. We did have-- we had no professional Cantor. We had a rabbi which the-- the city, the town supported him. I mean, people who were well-to-do, we used to support the rabbi. And we had Jewish teachers for teaching Hebrew. I mean, there to bar mitzvah. And it was taken care of. And the-- the synagogue, every Saturday it was full. Ever holiday it was full. People used to come. Women used to come. And children used to come. Everybody was OK. And it was not like you have to belong to this center or you belong to the other center. It was normal thing. It was nothing which was out ordinary, which [INAUDIBLE]. And they-- the town, the people, the Jewish people, they supported their rabbi. And they supported this synagogue as much as they could. And it was OK. 
INT: Did you ever have contact with a Rabbi Leib? GE: Well, Rabbi Moshe Leib, he was-- you know, he was-- he was the one-- he was very-- the way the stories go, that he was very like, a pious. He was a very holy man. And he used to predict what things are going to be. But he was-- that was going back in the years, 1800 and 1900s. So I wasn't even born at that time. So I had no contact.  INT: During this time your grandparents were still living with you? GE: My grandparents, that's one thing-- my grandparents were living with my parents. We were three children, me and my father and my mother. And then my grandmother and my grandfather. And we all lived-- we didn't have like, a six-bedroom apartment and three bathrooms. It was small. It was-- we only had, what, about two, three rooms altogether. And we had no running water, no electricity. And no-- hot or cold-- I mean, nothing like this. It was-- it was even the bathroom, the toilet, we had to go outside. It was an outhouse.  INT: And when the-- the first pogrom , started was your grandfather involved in this at all? GE: No. My grandfather-- that's one thing I got to tell you. I remember like today, when the war started, it was in '39. And in '41, I think the-- when the Russians came in, my grandfather used to go every day-- he used to go to synagogue. And I had to make sure that I come in there every morning and every evening for the prayers. And I remember like, one time he came home. It was just a war. I mean, we didn't even expect it was going to be so bad. He came home from the synagogue on a Friday night. And he made Kiddish. You know what Kiddish means? You know the prayer, the Jewish prayer. And we started to-- this Shabbos party, the Sedar, what they call. And he said grace. And then he said to us, while we were sitting, he said, my children, let me tell you-- in Jewish, he said. He said, my children, let me tell you. I know there's a very bad time coming on us. On you people, he says. And I hope I'm not going to be around then to see what is happening. And he passed out and he died right on the spot. That was Friday night. My grandma lived with us. She was about 86 years old. Then the Germans came in one time. They made a pogrom on a Saturday. Me and my father, we were already-- this is going on and this was in 19-- in the-- the end-- I think, in the middle of '41, or '40. So they came in. And they took away mostly all the women and all the children. And then I was told that the Germans came in. And they wanted to take away my grandma. So my mother and sister, she say, you cannot take my mother without me. So they did her a favor. They took her with my grandmother with the two younger brothers. And they took them away to a ghetto. The ghetto was in Sulejow. That was about 8, 10 kilometers from our place. And then they killed them in there. 
INT: Do you know how they killed them? GE: Yes, I heard. I mean, I never went there to look on it. But I know what-- the peasants were telling us they took them out in the forest. It was-- and [INAUDIBLE], it was called. That was outside of Sulejow. And they dug big trenches. And at that time, they killed quite a few thousand people. Because it was going on for a few days. They used to line them up by the edge of the trench with machine guns. And they gunned them down.  INT: Can you locate Sasow and the place where they took your mother in the ghetto, what larger town was this near in Poland or in the Ukraine? GE: Well, I mean what-- the-- what it's near, Sasow?  INT: Yeah. GE: Sasow is near-- well, you could-- there was a big town out of town. [INAUDIBLE], that was about 30 kilometers. Sulejow was about 10 kilometers. Lviv-- Lemberg-- it was about 50 kilometers from Sasow. As a matter of fact, our-- if you had to go-- if you want to go by train, you had to go through Sulejow. And from Sulejow, you could pick up to train to go to Lviv or any other places.  INT: So when this happened with your grandmother, mother and brothers-- GE: Yeah.  INT: --did you and your father stay in the house? GE: No, no. We were-- we were already in-- in the camp, in the labor camp. That was-- 
INT: Can you tell me how that came about? GE: Well-- it was a labor camp. It was located in Sasow. And it was located in an area, it was called before, years ago-- which I don't even remember-- in Sasow was a big-- was famous for a big factory from paper. They used to make paper, pulp paper. And there was the man who the people, the family who owned the factory was called the [? Weiser ?] family. And they had a villa in the-- it was a nice place. It was outside the town. And there was a couple of big houses. And this is where the camp were. So they-- we were there. We used to go every morning. We used to go to the-- to cut the woods, the trees. Because we had a lot of forestry. There was a lot of forests nearby. So we used to go in the morning. They used to-- they used to wake us up, five o'clock in the morning. By the way, we didn't even had SS in there. There was no SS or Gestapo. The only thing, what we had in there was one Ukrainian policeman. And the other one was made up of the Jewish police, you know? The camp [POLISH]. So we used to go every morning, 5:00 in the morning. We used to go out. Then at 10, 12 o'clock, we had lunch. Which if you didn't have the-- a few hundred people, by the time-- they only used to give you like one hour. But the time they came to you, you already was out of food. You didn't have-- so you had nothing to eat. So the food was, anyhow, it was nothing to brag about. There was even-- they used to give you a 1/4 pound of bread. The soup, they used to cook from the dead horses, or from any garbage, or whatever they had in there. And that was the food. But for some reason, I don't know, people were carrying on. And then we used to work on-- they destroyed the Jewish cemetery in Sasow. We used to crush the stones to make crushed stones for roads, to build for the Germans. That was going on in the camp. I was in the camp. And it started in '42 till '43, till July, '43. 
INT: And your father was with you? GE: Yeah. My father was with me. And that's when they-- when they liquidated the camp. So you want me to tell you the story, how the camp was liquidated?  INT: Yes please. GE: Yeah. Well, that's a bad story. One morning they came down. They saw on that-- the Ukrainian with the Germans, they start onto the camp with machine guns, with tanks, like they were going in to a big battle. And they came down to us. And they woke everybody up. It started, already, like, maybe in the middle of the night. But we didn't know nothing, you know, until the morning. So they came down. And the one, the command-- [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] the-- the-- the one who was in charge, his name was Obersturmfuhrer Vlasook. [PAUSES FOR 5 SECONDS] He is the one-- he was a guy. He was a little, short guy, but a big-- a very fat one. The worst dog, the worst enemy you could ever-- for human being. So--  INT: I have to just interrupt for a tape change. GE: Yeah.  INT: --two. I'm speaking with Mr. George Eisenberg. GE: Mm-hmm.  INT: Mr. Eisenberg, you were just telling me about Obersturmfuhrer Vlasook. GE: Mm-hmm.  INT: Would you continue, please? GE: Yes. Obersturm Vlasook, he was in charge of all the labor camps and the death camps which were in our area, in [NON-ENGLISH]. He was also in charge, there was a camp, was called [NON-ENGLISH]. That was like a death camp. That was the first death camp in our area. But he was-- he-- on this particular night-- when I start telling you about the liquidation, about the liquidation of this-- our camp, he was the one who was in charge. So, he came down with all these SS men and Gestapo. And like I told you before, the camp was surrounded by German and Ukrainian police. So, and 5 o'clock in the morning-- Also, I must mention one important aspect. We had, our camp commander was a young fellow. He was the camp commander of Sasow. And his name was Muntak. He was a very young fellow. And he was a pretty good guy. He never-- he-- he would never harm anybody as bad. And he used to tell us, and when it started, when we heard-- the way the Germans-- here's another way. The way the propaganda went on, the way the Germans were getting-- executing all these Jews, it was everything so silent. Nobody knew what was going on. We were, like, 10 kilometers away from [NON-ENGLISH]. We did not know what was going on with the Jewish community. That's how it was. We had no newspaper. We had no radios. The only news we used to get, if somebody by coincident, by sheer luck, survived, or he run away from a camp or from a ghetto, he used to tell us these thing. So this guy, Muntak, used to tell us-- 
INT: Muntak was a German? GE: Muntak was a German. He was the camp commander, like I said before. He used to tell us-- in German, I'm going to say it-- [GERMAN]. Which means, the time comes, the time is nearer, where they're going to kill you all. But I'm not going to be around to witness that. And the fact was, he was not around in the-- by the liquidation of the camp.  INT: You think he knew about it before? GE: Oh, definitely. You know? I mean, he was part of the Germans. He was part of the SS. He must've known.  INT: But he could not give you any warning? GE: Well, he, this is the warning he gave us. But he couldn't do nothing. We couldn't do nothing. [SIGHS] So, anyhow, so what happened in the middle of July, I think in the 15th of July, in the Jewish calendar I observed, the [NON-ENGLISH], which is 20 days in Tammuz, which is-- which coincides with July 15, or whatever. So, they came up and they-- under the pretext that they heard that our camp is gonna make an uprise against the Germans. In order to make sure, to be sure that this thing is not going to happen, they want to search the camp and they want to search everybody for weapons and for ammunition. OK. So they took us all down. They also brought in-- we were, in that time, I would say, maybe, about 500, 600 people. They brought some people from-- remnants, Jews who were left, who-- they had another camp, from different areas, from small towns. There were another 300, 400 people. And they took us down to the ground in there, to the yard. Was a big area. And it was surrounded with a little fence. And they told us all to go inside the fence, sit down with our knees under, and to put our hands behind our backs. As the-- the Germans, the SS, and the Ukrainians surrounded us, they made a circle around us. And they said, and this guy, Vlasook, went up on top of the step, because the camp was like, two, three stories high. He went up on a platform. And he started to say, he says, well, he says, I'm going to make a selection. I'm going to search everybody. Whoever I'm going to find a weapon or ammunition, I'm going to kill them right on the spot. OK. So they called up the first guy. It was a-- a friend. It was a-- a-- a little-- a friend of mine. His name was-- what was his name? Chaim. Or whatever. I forgot.
He was-- his name was [NON-ENGLISH], I know for sure. They called him up. He was in my age. Because he was the first one to sit there. And they told him to go upstairs, to go up. They're going to search him. OK. So he went up. The minute we start to run up, we heard a shot. So we knew there's something happening in there. What-- OK. They start to call another one. They took-- they didn't call them by name or whatever. They just told them, [GERMAN], up. Go up. And, as this was going on, they had already a few people shot. My father and me-- my father was next to me. When my father heard that they're shooting these people, he said to me, he says, listen my child. I am going to sacrifice my life in order so you could survive, that you should be able to survive and tell this story to the world. I start crying. And I say, Dad-- Dad-- [SOBBING] why-- why are you doing this? And he says, this is it. I want you to-- you-- you should try to survive. There should be at least one member from our family that will survive this tragedy. My father went up. I heard a shot. And that was the end of this. And in the meantime, we saw already what happened, that nobody's gonna get out alive. So we had one Jewish policeman. He was a camp policeman. He was a big man. He took a bottle of vodka and he had an SS man over the head and he killed him. When the Germans saw this, they gave an order. They say, [GERMAN], which means, pull back and shoot. So they started to throw in hand grenades. They started to shoot from machine guns. I was hit in my leg from a shrapnel. But it wasn't too bad. And we start to run. I remember, I don't know how I got up or what I did between all the corpses. We came down to the fence. It was all lined up with dead bodies. I don't know how I got above-- over it-- over that fence, with all this. It seemed like an angel was carrying me. And I ran away. From 800 people, in that time, we are only about 50 survived. From the 50, maybe 10 survive. Because us, we went-- so we start running. You start running, let's say, to the front, machine guns. They're shooting on you. You turn right. They shooting from the right side. You turn left. They're shooting more on. So, our camp was also in a big, wooded area. So when I run away, I thought I run away, maybe, I'm away, already, maybe 100 miles. Sure enough, I fell asleep. And I found another friend of mine who was with me. And we got together. And we laid down in a ditch in the forest. And we thought, we safe, that we are a hundred miles away from the camp. Sure enough, in the morning-- it was still dark-- we heard Germans with dogs, searching for us. So I wake up my friend. I said, ah, we have to run. So we ran away. We were running for about two, three days without food, without clothes-- 
INT: Into the forest? GE: What.  INT: Further into the forest? GE: Into the forest, yeah. So, I remember like today how my whole clothing was. I had a pair of linen pants, no shirt. The shoes were from the camp, with the wooden soles, wooden shoes. And that was my possession. That was all my-- So after three days, then got-- then it started to rain, you understand. And it was coming down, such a heavy rain. Like a flood. Well, and we sitting, and you know. I had no bandages for my leg, nothing. So what do I do? We take a leaf and-- a green leaf, and put it down against it. So OK. After the third day, you know, I was very heartbroken. I was crying. I said, why did I have to run away? Why couldn't I be killed together with my father. Yeah. But-- So, finally, we came to a state where we had no choice. You had to survive. So, I-- we came into a small village. You know, like a, what's it called, a hamlet? Or a small village, where there were people in there. So, in the meantime, picked up another friend. Which, this friend, he was my-- this is, it just happens, that he was my-- the [NON-ENGLISH]. You know? My-- my-- he's my daughter's husband's father. [SIGHS] So, we were three of us. And as it got dark, we had to go in and-- to get some food. So I told them, I said, you know what, you two guys stay here. And I'll go into this house. And I'll ask for food. I'll beg for food. So I came on to that house. And there was an old Russian woman. And I tell her, I say, listen. I don't care what's happening. You gotta give me some food. Because I'm starving to-- She said, look. I know all about it. The whole town knows that the camp, your concentration camp was liquidated. And the Germans are going around and they telling, they're warning us not to feed any Jews. Because they know that some Jews escaped. So-- but, she says, you go in to my barn, where I keep my cows and my horses. And I'll bring you some food in there. But I'll have to cook. I'm going to cook some potatoes for you. So, naturally, I says, OK. But I did not go in there. Because I was afraid that she may report us. So we were staying outside and look in. Sure enough, after a little while, she gave us some food. She gave us some bread. She gave us some milk. And she cooked potatoes. 
INT: So she had really meant it. GE: And it was OK. And this woman particular, what happened, she told us, she said, look. You see, these people across the street, don't you ever go near there. Because they are collaborators. They're with the Nazis. The people two houses away, you could go in and you could beg him for food. And they'll help you. And so on and so on. So that was it. Now, I know, probably you want to know what happened to the camp. To-- after the whole thing, after they thought they killed everybody, there were some people who were hiding. There were some people who working in the camp. Like, there were tailors, the shoemakers, and, you know, and all kind of thing. And then they had the people who were cooks in there, who were cooking those meals, who were baking, who were cooking meals for the Germans. These people thought that-- while they were hiding, they thought that they'll be able to survive. Well, unfortunately, didn't happen like this. What happened, after two days, they-- the Germans found out where they are. And they gathered them together. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] And also, this friend, my dear friend Stanley [NON-ENGLISH] Safier, he was one of them. And they told them-- they-- the Germans, they always used to trick the people. They always used to take, you probably heard, where they told you, they gave you a piece of soap, and to go into crematorium to take a shower. OK? So what they did, they told them, they said, listen. What's happening, it happened already. Now, if you guys want to be-- people want to be alive, you have to stay with us. Guarantee you, you'll be safe through the war. We're going to take you to a different camp and you'll be OK. So they told them to gather all these dead bodies. Because the bodies were spread-- strewn all over, for miles. Because whoever can run, whoever could run away, run away. But you couldn't run too far, because everybody was against you. All the Ukrainians were against you. All the Germans are against you. So wherever you run, whenever they had a chance to kill a Jew, it was good. So there were bodies all over. So they were pulling all these bodies together. In our camp, there was a lot of burning wood. You know, like, in here, they call it fireplaces. Well, so we had big stacks of wood to throw them on. So the Germans did so-- they told them to, say, put one row of bodies, one row of wood. One row of bodies, and one row of wood. And then go up, pile it up, higher now, all of the bodies. And then, they put a torch to it, and everything went up in flame. They want these people, who did all this things, the Germans told them, they say they threw a big party, a big celebration party on that night. And they took all these people and they told them to go up to the second floor. They lined them up. They told them to strip their clothes-- men, women-- and line up against the wall. Line up against the wall, and they told them, they said, listen. The bullets are too expensive to spend for Jews. But, we're going to shoot. Whoever gets killed, he'll get killed. The other one will be buried alive anyhow. So it don't make any difference. So they open with a machine gun. And this friend of my-- Stanley, he was a little guy. He was about my size, even a little smaller than me. He was with his father. So you know, a father try to protect his child. So he put him against the wall, to be the first one on the wall. Because he figures, if they're gonna shoot, they're gonna shoot from the back. So he'll-- he'll be safe. Because all the bodies are going to fall on him. So, that's the-- what happened. So, in the meantime the Germans are celebrating. They're getting drunk. And they're having fun. And they torched the camp. They didn't want to have any-- for some reason, they didn't-- they're putting the building on fire. As the fire started, you know, the building start to collapse. So the floor collapsed. So this man Stanley, he fell down from the second floor, all the way down to the basement. Without clothes, naked and everything. He woke up because of the fire. He got burned. So he also, for some luck, he escaped. He ran away also. And we hooked up, the three of us, all together. We were there. 
INT: What was Stanley's last name? GE: Safier.  INT: Safier. GE: S-A-F-I-E-R. [PAUSES FOR 5 SECONDS] So that was what happened. So now you're gonna ask me what happened later. Right?  INT: Yes. GE: So, in here, it's summertime. 1943. You live-- you're not living. You got to be hidden. You hide. On the summertime, so we used to hide in the fields. We had big, high corn fields, you know. And we used to go out in the night and pick some food, you know, from the farmers, and this. And it was gonna-- also, I have one incident I gotta tell you. As my father-- like I told you, he was a merchant. He was going around and dealing with all kind of peasants and so on. So when the camp saw when the-- saw whatever happened, that nothing is, so whatever we had, he gave away to one Ukrainian family. And he told him, he says, look, he said, whatever happen, if you want to give it back, it's OK. I knew the place. I knew this. I used to go sometime with my father to these villages. And I knew where he gave all this stuff away. So when I escaped from the camp, so, you know, I needed some food. I didn't want anything. I just wanted food to-- So we were-- we were, this group, the three of us, we were like three brothers. We, you know, we were going, we were sticking all together and everything. And we used to go together. So, one day, I say, you know what? I know my father gave to this guy, he gave him all this-- our possessions. I says, you know, well, let me-- let me go in and ask him. Maybe he'll give me a loaf of bread or something. Yeah, it's a good idea. So, I go in to this guy. And my two friends are outside watching me. 
INT: Do you remember his name? GE: I don't remember-- who? My friend's names, I know. Yeah.  INT: No. The-- GE: This guy, I know--  INT: --Ukrainian. GE: Ukrainian name, all their names were [NON-ENGLISH], or [NON-ENGLISH], or so on. Whatever he was name. So, anyhow, I says, OK. Let me go in. I go in. And I tell him, I says, listen, you know who I am. I am Nuchim's son. I say, I know my father gave you whatever he had. I say, I don't want nothing back from you. Don't-- don't get me wrong. I don't want nothing from you. The only thing I'm asking you, give me, maybe you could give me a loaf of bread, or some potatoes, or whatever. He said, yeah, yeah, yeah. He says, you know what? Stay and wait for me in here. He say, I'm going to go out and get something. Sure enough, I'm staying, waiting. You know, the houses in there, in these-- there were, like, little huts in there, you know? It was very-- the windows were low. It was all made out of mud and wha-- Sure enough, I see he comes in with a pitchfork. He say, you [NON-ENGLISH], you-- you dirty Jew. He say, food, I'm gonna give you? He say, you don't need no more food. I'm gonna kill you. I was young in that time. I jumped out through the window. And I run away. We run away. But a few days later, we say, we're gonna to take care of them guy. Few days later, we came down in the middle of the night. 
INT: The three of you? GE: We put the house afire.  INT: The three of you. GE: Huh?  INT: The three of you? GE: Yeah. Yeah. We were all there. We burned up half of the village of [NON-ENGLISH]. We-- throw everything, I thought that was at least one revenge. So now, we sitting in there. So now winter's getting there. So we hooked up with another-- with an olderly man.  INT: Had you gotten any more clothing in the meantime? GE: Got nothing. There was no clothing. I mean, there-- well, I think we picked up some clothing, but-- I don't know. Because we took clothing from some people who escaped, you know? You know, and it's another thing I must tell you. There were certain people, even between the Jewish people, even our own people, who unfortunately, they were only looking for themself. They gonna-- they thought that they gonna be the only survivors in-- in this world. So, like, this one, also, Stanley [NON-ENGLISH], remember one time he was telling me, where one guy who escaped from the camp, and his name, I remember his name. He- his name was [NON-ENGLISH]. And he was, like, he wasn't the nicest man. Nobody could say anything nice about him. So he thought-- for some reason, he-- he was lucky enough to escape from the camp. And he took off, as he was cleaning the bodies-- like I told you, we were taking all the bodies together-- so he took in his possession whatever he could find. He was looking. People were hiding money, or gold, or whatever. And clothes. He took from everybody, he took clothes and clothes. He took a whole sack, of couple of sacks of clothes. And he was-- he was gonna-- he was gonna sell them. He was gonna do whatever. I don't know. So my poor friend [NON-ENGLISH], he was naked. You know, he was nude. No clothes, nothing. He says to him, [NON-ENGLISH], do me a favor. Give me a pair of pants. Give me a shirt. Let me clothe. No. No. I can't give it to you. He said, you don't have money. I can't give it to you. So, OK. He can't give it to him. So what happened? He fell asleep. He helped himself. [NON-ENGLISH] helped himself. So, all right. Now we up to where we sitting in-- on the summertime, we could survive. So now, we had another man, an elderly person. His name was Avrom [NON-ENGLISH] Parness. He was an elderly man. You know, he went through more than we knew. Were still young kids. So, we decide we gonna build a bunker for ourself in the woods. OK. So we made, we got it-- we got all shovels, and axes, and everything. And we started to build, to dig. 
INT: Where did you get the tools? GE: Everywhere. We used to go into the farms. We used to steal sometime. We had to do it. I mean, you had to survive. So, we start to build a bunker. And we build a bunker. This other friend of mine, he should rest in peace. His name was Aaron Berger. He was a very smart kid. Very smart. He was like an engineer. And he designed that bunker. We had, like, a little stove inside. You know. We used to cook in there. We had places to sleep, like, like bunk beds, you know. So we were, in that time already about-- another-- we-- we met another kid. Is-- his name is [NON-ENGLISH] Gruber. And he's-- as a matter of fact, he's still in Paris. He became a-- I understand he is a rich man. I never met him since after the war. But I heard something, I couldn't get-- that somebody-- with I didn't know if he was still alive. So he came. So we had-- he was badly wounded. And we had pity on him. So we took him in. And then we had, another woman came in with her three daughters. We took them in. And we build a bunker. And then during fall time, like now, in October, we used to go out to the fields and bring in potatoes. That's the only thing you could bring in. Potatoes. And some fruit. And so on, you know. And we had it in there. We were there. And-- and the-- and we stood there through the winter. 
INT: I'm going to have to interrupt now-- GE: Yeah.  INT: --for a tape change. GE: Yeah.  INT: Number three-- I'm speaking with Mr. George Eisenberg. Mr. Eisenberg, you were just explaining to me that as winter approached in the forest, you and your friends build a bunker, and that quite a few more people joined you. GE: Yeah.  INT: Did you ever have any scares of Germans searching for you? GE: They used to search every day and every night. They used to go out with dogs to search. But you know, it's a funny thing. If a person is in a situation like this, I don't know if I could do this again today. But you learn how to survive. We found out that a dog can not sniff anybody out if there was pine wood. [INAUDIBLE] pine, the dog cannot sniff. So the forest where we were-- were mostly like pine woods. So when they used to go out, we could hear their dogs barking and everything. They used to come down even with planes to search for us. But they killed a lot of-- I mean, the escaped, there were a lot of people who-- who escaped from other camp. But were [INAUDIBLE] also. But for some reason, you know, we managed to hide away from them.  INT: Did you, during this-- GE: Now-- wait. I'll tell you. Now, the problem was now, it comes in the winter time. Right, like I told you, we used to go out-- in the summertime, we used to go out and to gather food. What are you doing in the wintertime? How do you go out from your bunker? We had snows in there, not like in here. We had snow, two, three feet, of snow, snow banks [INAUDIBLE]. How do you go out from a place to eliminate the footsteps? Because the easiest way to get somebody in the wintertime, that's the easiest way. You just follow the track from the footsteps. So we came-- an [? improvation ?] we used to do. Take a log from a pine wood. And a pine wood has like, like needles. And attach it, tie it on, to your back. As you walk away, this one, it just covers back the snow. There's no signs of footsteps. And that's how we did it. 
INT: Didn't that make a depression in the snow, though? GE: That's what I just told you. It did not make an impression, because the impression you had, the pine needles swept it away. Like you're-- like on this wintertime, you go out there. There is a snow. If you take a broom, and you sweep it away, it leaves no impression. It just leaves the impression from the broomsticks or whatever, from the needle. That's it.  INT: Did you have yourselves organized within this bunker with special jobs for special people? GE: No, we had no special jobs. Everybody did-- well, everybody did whatever they could do. I mean, there was nothing much to do. There was no books to read. Just to eat, to sleep, and then, that's-- that's it.  INT: Did you-- GE: And look.  INT: --get any information from the outside world at all? GE: Nothing at all, nothing at all-- we had no contact with anybody. We were afraid to walk out, to make contact with anybody. You-- you had no idea what is going on. And war's going on in, and then that's it, until we were liberated from the Russians, which was in 1944. I was liberated in 1944 from the Russians. GE:  INT: What month was that? GE: That was in February, the 28th. I think it was February 28. [SNIFFS] So--  INT: Can you recall to me how that happened? GE: The way it happened-- OK, we went out. We used to go-- a few weeks before, there was some movement in the forest. We could hear a lot of shooting. And at that time, the Russians had these Katyushas, the Russian Katyusha. We could see them go right over our heads. And the Germans were also shooting with their-- I think they were telling us they were shooting with V-2 rockets. And this was going on for quite a long time. They destroyed a lot towns, a lot of villages. So, and one night-- it was before we were liberated maybe, a night before, we were-- in that time, we already made contact with another few people in the-- in the different bunkers, you know, and different [INAUDIBLE]. And then we decided to go out. It was, I remember, like today, it was a very cold night. And we all decided to go out to get us some food. Because in that time, we already-- there was a lot of killed animals, you know, pigs, cows, horses, and everything. So we knew already that something was going on. So finally, after the shooting stopped, we decide we'll go out and look for food. And we came out to this small hamlet, to this village. And there was only one house left in there. So we went in there. And this guy, all of a sudden, the Ukrainians start to become friendly. But then they saw [INAUDIBLE]. And the guy told us. He said, listen. Try to stay alive because the Russians are coming in here any minute, any day. OK, so while we were there, you know, we seen-- we-- we gathered some food. We get some-- some meat and some other food. And we put them in sacks, and we start to go out, going back to our place to our forest bunker. What we did not know was the Russian patrol, the forest-- how do you call this? The first-- 
INT: Reconnaissance? GE: That's it, the first reconnaissance, the reconnaissance were coming in. But we don't know if it's the Germans or Russians. So we started on the way and hided. And we came back. We came back to our place. Except here goes sort of my friend-- this friend of mine, this [INAUDIBLE], [INAUDIBLE]. He was the one who was left behind. For some reason, he didn't follow us. He left behind. And sure enough, the Russians caught him. He didn't know if it was Russians or Germans. So they start to investigate him. They said, where are you coming from or what? He says he's a Jew. He's hiding, [INAUDIBLE] and this, and this, he said. So where are the other Jews? They asked. He said, I don't know. There's no other Jews. You know, we were trained [INAUDIBLE] to not to give away one another. He said, there are no other Jews. He says I'm the only one. I'm the only survivor. I run in there. I'm hungry. I want to get some food, and that's all of it. So they said to him, OK, you could go. And they let him go. Sure enough, what he did not know was that they were following him. And sure enough, they found him the next day. And they came in to our bunker. They came in. And there was a Jewish officer who came up. And he said, listen. Don't be afraid. He says, you're safe now. You'll be OK. [INAUDIBLE] the Russian army-- the Russian army is going to be here tonight. And you all going to go along with us. You're liberated. Ah, we didn't believe it. Sure enough, in the night time, we could hear-- you know, I-- and [INAUDIBLE], we were mostly-- we were talking our language was mostly Ukrainian. Ukrainian to Russian is similar. And beside, when I went to school, it was a Russian school. So we knew the language was good, and we heard the Russian language. Well, we found out later, at that time was also-- the Polish underground was active, you know. There was a [INAUDIBLE] army, or whatever kind of thing, yeah. But we found out. They told us, you know, there were some other people that were elderly people. We were still so young, but there were people who were elder-- or older than us. And they joined-- the-- the Polish underground told them that they're going to take him in the underground, and the partisans. Well, we found out later, after a few weeks, was-- the next day, that we wouldn't be liberated from the Russians. There was an order to shoot us all, to get rid of all the Jews [INAUDIBLE] in the area. So sure enough, in the night time, the Russians came along. And we went along with them. 
INT: How many of you were there? GE: Yeah, on that time, particularly me and Michael, we were about 10. And that time, we were all together, we were about me, [INAUDIBLE], we were about five, six together, where we stuck together. And there was other people also. So also, one time, as we were marching, the Germans were coming in. The Germans were trying to fight the Russians, you know. They were coming in by planes, and they were bombing the Russian army. So you could see that people get killed. Horses get killed. And-- but it was no remorse, nothing. It was like, like that's the way it's supposed to be. So we marching along.  INT: Did you take any of the Russian uniforms? GE: If I took any of the Russian uniforms? No, I didn't have to take [INAUDIBLE]. Yeah, I had a-- yeah, I had a Russian uniform. But this was later on. What happened then, also one incident, which I'm-- you totally-- you were liberated. You were really free. But now, you don't know what tomorrow brings. We coming in to one little village. It's called-- I remember the name-- it was called [NON-ENGLISH]. And we going in. The Russian command was right across the street. And we start to sleep. People going to take bed. We're going to sleep in this house where there's a farmer, a Ukrainian. We had some food in the night time. You know, and the guy put-- you know, we had no mattresses sort of, but just straw on the floor. So we were laying down, falling asleep. In the meantime, some of the Russian soldiers, they get drunk. And they starting to go in, and they want to have a good time. They're looking for women. And they're looking for more vodka. Sure enough, two Russians coming in to the place where we sleep. And we're sleeping on the floor. And they're waking us up. And they say, who are you? Ah, we tell them. We-- no, no, no good, no good, you German spies. We're going to shoot you. What do you mean you're going to shoot me? For what? That's it. Let's go outside. We're going to line you up. We're going to shoot you, you German spies. They take-- I was hiding in there. I was looking in there. And they took the other three people-- [INAUDIBLE], with [INAUDIBLE], with Parness, [INAUDIBLE] Parness. I remember that's the name. They took them outside. They lined them up against the wall. And they Were turning their machine guns. They were going to shoot. When I saw this, I jumped out. And I went to-- to the headquarters, the Russian headquarters. It was like across the street. So I went in there. And I talked to the guy who was in charge. I said, listen. We Jews, we survived the concentration camp. Now, these two guys, these two soldiers are going to shoot us. He said, what are you talking about? I say, you better hurry up and go out. OK, sure enough, he goes out. And these guys having already their rifles positioned. So they grabbed them. They says, OK, away. So-- so we went-- so we decided it's not a good idea to go along with them. So we separated, and we went to [INAUDIBLE]. And we went and saw for a few days, until we come to another areas. And after a few weeks, we reached-- we came to-- where did we go after that? [NON-ENGLISH], no, we came to a different places. Although we came to our town. Not actually, we didn't want to go back to our town. But we came to a nearby town. And we were there for a while. And then after they start of-- 
INT: Had all this area been occupied by Russians by now? GE: Yeah, as they go-- as they were going along, the Russians occupied. Then we went along. Whichever was occupied area, we were there. So finally, we wound up in a place. It was called [NON-ENGLISH]. And there, we already had-- we establish. We had-- we met some other Jews, because [NON-ENGLISH] was a big city. We met some other Jews. And we were staying there. Of course, then more people came along. [COUGHS] And the Russians started to take-- even we were escaping, even we were survivors from camp, from concentration camps, they needed people in the army, in the Russian army because the war was still going on. That was in '44. So the people who were older, who were in their age, as military age, they took them away. And a lot of them got killed also in the Russian front, after they survived this concentration camp. And so they got killed later on. Also, in [NON-ENGLISH], I found out-- I found a cousin of mine who survived. His name is [? Josef. ?] And he met me. He was with the Russian army. He was also-- he's a concentration camp survivor. And he-- he was in a bad camp. He was in [NON-ENGLISH] That was the worst one in [NON-ENGLISH]. For-- lucky enough for him, he survived. And he's a very intelligent person. And he had a good [INAUDIBLE]. He was in charge of the Russian army. On this particular [INAUDIBLE] he was in charge of to supply the food. So when I met him so we already were OK. So he took me. So we went over there, and I lived with him. And it was going on OK. Until later on, we decided to go back to his hometown which is Lemberg, Lvov. We came in there, and and Lvov, already, There was already and by the end of '44 and the beginning of '44. So [COUGHS] there were a lot of Jews in there. And you know, so then people start talking about going. We still have to go, because nobody wanted to live in there. Like I would never want to go back to Sasow. So we decide. And we still we didn't know what was going to happen, so we still went. And there was still the war going on. So from Lemberg we went to Przemysl. And by the way, also in Lemberg, this cousin of mine-- actually, I could say he was the first one who, actually, was one of the first ones, who started the [NON-ENGLISH]. Which [NON-ENGLISH] means so-- flight. So being he was in charge, he was a big deal.
So like in Russia, to go from one place to another, you need a-- it's not called a [NON-ENGLISH], but it's called a [NON-ENGLISH]. Like a ID-- you cannot go from one place to another without having any kind of documents papers. So he is the one who used to sign all these papers. And that was started out in [NON-ENGLISH] with a few of the Jewish people who were signers. And they said that we have to start to try to go to get to Israel. And there, one time, some people tried to smuggle the border between Poland and Romania. And they got caught. Two or three of them got killed. And they found the ID which my cousin signed, that he's the one who gave them. At that time, I was in Lemberg, and we lived in Lvov also. So I told him that they were looking for him. So I came down. And I told him that we have to run from this [INAUDIBLE]. So we got together. And we ran. And so where did we go? We went to Przemysl. Przemysl is a big city in Poland. And you was asking before if I wore a Russian uniform. Then what happened on that time, he's the one who made papers for me and for himself that we are Russian intelligence, like [NON-ENGLISH]. And I was having-- I was wearing a Russian uniform. And he was wearing a Russian uniform. And we can came to Przemysl. We came to Przemysl, but another story. We came to Przemysl, and there was still the war going on. And they had a curfew. You were only allowed to, like, till 6 o'clock in the evening. Just like 6:00 in the evening, you were not allowed to be outside. [BACKGROUND NOISE] For some reason, I went once. I went-- I was going to visit a friend of mine. And I was on my way home. And it was early curfew hour. I was not supposed to be there. But being I was like, I had a Russian uniform, I thought I'm a big shot. Didn't work that way. Two Russian soldiers approached me. And they said to me, what are you doing in here? I said, I'm going home. The Russians were always looking for clocks, for watches. That was the biggest piece of jewelry for them is a watch. Which in Russian is called [RUSSIAN]. So I had a watch on my hand. It was, I don't know, a cheap watch at all. They said they wanted the watch. I said, well, I don't want to give you the watch. They said, OK. We have to take you down to the headquarters.
OK. So they put their rifles with bayonets. They caught a big fish. They taking me to the headquarters. Where did they take me? [COUGHS] I said, go ahead. Take me to the-- to your commander. I had papers that I work with the Russian army. And they said, OK, we're going to [INAUDIBLE]. To take me in there, what did they do? They put me in a barrack together with all these Ukrainian [INAUDIBLE]. The [INAUDIBLE], they were the ones who were killing Jews and Russians. They were the-- like the underground, the Ukrainians. They worked together with the Germans. What the Russians did to them, they-- when they caught them, is to put them in trucks and bring them right out to the front without any training like chopped meat. They were the first one in the line to go in the [INAUDIBLE]. So I've been there the whole night. There's no-- there's only standing only. You cannot sit down. There was-- the one was so packed, thousands, or hundreds, of people. In the morning, it's still dark. They coming in. They say, everybody out. Everybody out. What happened? This was where-- the jail, where the main jail was also in Przemysl. So they take the-- I seen the big trucks, army trucks. And they take these guys. They put them up in the truck. And they're putting them in there. I'm looking on. I said, to myself well, if I ever go in this truck, I'll never be alive. Better stay away [INAUDIBLE]. Well, OK, so in the meantime, I'm looking. And the guy who's in charge who's giving all this-- this commands, he said, it seems to me like a Jewish officer. I said, OK. I jump out from the line where I am. And the soldiers all looked at me. He said, where are you going? I said, I want to see the commander. So I go over to this man, who I think he was a captain. And I [INAUDIBLE]. I said, listen. I was good in Russia. I says, listen, I'm a Jewish survivor. I survived the concentration camp. I said, now you sending me with all these [INAUDIBLE] you're going to send me to? He's looking at me. He says, what are you doing in here? I said, I don't know. I said these two guys, they caught me last night. He said, where are your papers? I said, they have my papers. So he calls over these guys. He said, hey, wait a minute. Where are the papers from this guy? He's wearing a Russian uniform. Why did you-- Well, we didn't know with this. He said, let me see his papers.
He said, well, we don't have them. He said, well, he said, I'll give you five minutes. Within five minutes, you come back with his papers. And to me, he says, you stay right in here. Don't move. Don't go nowhere. OK, sure enough, they come back with the papers. The guy starts screaming at them. He says-- he said, I'm going to court martial you. You had no right to arrest this boy-- this man. He said, you had no right at all. He said, get out of my sight. And I'm staying with him. He says to me. Listen, stay here. Don't move because I'll take care of you. Sure enough, after this, after a couple hours later, he said you come along with me. He takes me up to his place where he lived. And he gives me some food. And he's telling me. He said, listen. He says, I'm a Jew. He says, the Germans killed my whole family, my wife, my kids, my family. He says, I made an oath to God. I swore to God if I come into Germany, he says, I'm not going to have no mercy on anybody. Whoever I find, and how long I have the time, I'm going to kill them like they killed my parents. OK, he said, now, with you-- he said, you here alone? I said I was afraid to come. I said, no, I have a cousin of mine. Because my cousin was already of the age to be inducted the army. I said I have a cousin of mine. He says-- he said, OK. He said, listen to me. I'm going to give you a paper. You can move all over Przemysl. You can go wherever you want. For you, for your cousin, and what I want you to do, he says, I want you to get away from here. Because we are not sure if we are going to stay in here. I said, where am I going? He said, well-- he said, I'm going to have some trucks going toward Romania and Hungary. Because that was liberated much before. So he says, I'm going to send you in there. I said, OK. So sure, we were there in Przemysl a couple of weeks. Then I used to go up to him. He used to give us all the food and whatever we needed, and clothes. And one time, he came up to me, and he says, listen. Tomorrow, I'm having a truck. An army truck is going to Kosow, which was near the border from Romania. He said, you go in this truck. I give you a paper. He says, you'll be OK though. OK. So that's what happened. So I got together with my cousin. And sure enough, we went with this truck. And we came-- came to Kosow. In Kosow on that time, there was also some Jewish people in there who survived. And they were organizing that-- and so we came into Kosow. 
INT: I have to interrupt for a break. GE: OK.  INT: Tape number four. I'm speaking with George Eisenberg. And you just told me when they took you and your cousin by truck to Krosno. GE: The Russian.  INT: What happened there? GE: The Russians. Yeah.  INT: The Russians. Yes. GE: Yeah. Yeah.  INT: What happened there? GE: Well, we were there for a short while. And then we went-- it was-- I remember it was just before Passover. From there, we went to Romania, to-- first to Hungary, to [NON-ENGLISH]. And then I was in Romania from '40-- '45-- I mean, from '40-- end '40-- '45 till, like, a half a year. I was in Romania, in a small town. We were doing pretty good in there.  INT: Did you do any work at that point? GE: No, no, no.  INT: No. GE: No. From Romania, [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] and after the war, when the war end, in 1945, we started to-- I was there with my cousin. And my cousin was in Bucharest. But I was in a smaller town. So my cousin went from Bucharest, he was the first one, he went to Israel. And then I was in there, when I came from, I, I went-- we left from-- the town where I was was called [NON-ENGLISH]. It was a small town. We went to Vienna. When I--  INT: How did you usually travel? Did you get on trains? Or walk? GE: Yeah, I used to go train with no problem. I mean, first of all, I was using-- I was using a Russian uniform, so I could go on the military train. It was no problem. When I came to Vienna-- that's another piece of the-- my life. I started-- I-- we went to a-- in that time, I think it was the [NON-ENGLISH] Hospital. The [NON-ENGLISH] Hospital. But the people who came down there, I mean, there was already an organization which is called Berihah. And they came to the-- to the Banov Station, to the-- which-- to the-- 
INT: Railroad station? GE: Railroad station. And they picked me up. And they-- and, and they told me-- they took me into [NON-ENGLISH]. And they said to me that they know that I'm-- I have to stay with them. I'm not going to the camp. I have to work. I have to join the Berihah. They heard about me, that I am capable to do these things, I have to stay. I said, OK. I was not married in that time. I had nothing to lose.  INT: Can you explain to me just what the Berihah was? GE: Berihah means flight in Hebrew. I mean, it actually was what we called it-- flight and rescue. This was an organization which-- it started out like, we the-- were the one who started out the illegal immigration [INAUDIBLE]. So when I came to Vienna after being there a few weeks, getting to know some people, so, we had to do some work. So, they gave me a mission. They told me I had to go to Lithuania to pick up a young kibbutz, people from a kibbutz to work, 26 people that time. Of course, the guy who was running the Berihah-- his name was [? Yitzak ?] [INAUDIBLE]. His wife was also one of them. So actually, what he wanted me to do, I should go ahead and bring back his wife plus these people. [INAUDIBLE] To tell you the story what have happened, I'm gonna give you some information. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] They made-- we-- they gave me papers that I work for the International Red Cross. [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] And I also had a-- I was going-- a friend of my-- I met a friend of mine. I mean, I got to know him. He was a Vienna-born Jew. So he gave me his passport. We falsified a passport that my name was [? Wilhelm ?] [INAUDIBLE]. And in that time, the transportation was very hard. I mean, the railroad connection was bad. But you could manage. So, I went on a train. And my first stop was, I came to, I mean, going from one station to the other. Finally, I wound up in Warsaw. In Warsaw, they gave me the address from Henrik-- what's it-- oh, I told you the name. Henrik Zuckerman was his name. He was the leader from the Warsaw [INAUDIBLE]. Henrik Zuckerman. If I was-- so they gave me to go to him. I came in to him. And I told him that I have permission, I have to go to Vilna, that I have to bring out some people from there. He says to me, [? Jonalah, ?] don't you ever try to go any place. The border is closed. The Russians don't let nobody in and nobody out. He says, it's-- you're gonna get in a lot of trouble. But, he says, I can't help you. I said, OK. He say, you need money? It's no problem. I'll give you the money you need. So I says, what good here am I? I say, OK. So, the only thing I could do, we have some connection in Bialystok. Bialystok is near the border from Lithuania. So, he says, go in. You go into this and this person-- forgot her name-- this woman. And see what you can do. OK. I came to Bialystok. I come in in there. And I tell her the whole story. She says, well, I'm sorry. Nothing we can do for you. OK. In the meantime, there was going on, in-- the Berihah was already-- it was going, it was popular already. People knew already, the Jewish people knew, that they're going, there's going to be a ghetto and they're going from one place to the other, and eventually, they're going to wind up in Israel. So, people were-- it was called, you know, the black market. And Russia's always a black market. There were-- people used to meet. So finally, I got in touch with one guy. I got-- became friendly with a Russian Jewish fellow. He was a sergeant. And I became friendly with him. And finally, he-- well, he told-- he told me once, he says, listen. He had trust in me. He said, listen, you know something? I heard there's going on-- there's something going on, that people are moving to Austria to Germany, and from there they go to Israel. He says, I would like to be one of them. So, in the beginning, I was afraid, you know? But finally, as we got friendlier, so I came up to him. And I says, you know what I could do? I could make a deal with you. I say, you're a Russian soldier. You're a sergeant. I says, suppose you give me your papers and I'm the one, I'm going to send you, I'll give you connections. I'm going to send you to Lodz. From Lodz, they're going to go to Czechoslovakia, to Bratislava. And from there, you'll go to Salzburg and you'll be OK. He says, OK. So-- 
INT: Do you remember this man's name? GE: No. I forgot it. [INAUDIBLE] I forgot his name. I know his first name was Israel. But I don't know his second name for [INAUDIBLE] so many years. So, he says, OK. So how are we going to work this, he says. The guy was a tall guy. I'm a little not. How the hell am I going to fit in this uniform? But in Russia, you could do it. You cut a little bit in here, you make it a little smaller there. It's OK. So, to show you how dumb I was in that time-- so, he says to me, he says, you know what? I'm going to teach you all what you have to know about it. And you have to be, like-- tomorrow night, it was on a Saturday night, he said the best time to travel. Because you had the, the [NON-ENGLISH], which is called the, the permit. Like a furlough permit. Right? That you have to be back tomorrow. Otherwise, you're gonna be court-martialed. So, he says, it'll work out fine for you. So, OK. So, he teaches me all these things. I'm putting on his uniform. And I have all his papers, all stamped, everything. I go into the train. To military. You gotta go in the military train. In the military. My Russian was good in that time. So, on a Saturday night, maybe 2:00, 3 o'clock in the morning, the train pulls in and-- to Grodno. And that was the checkpoint, in Grodno. The train pulls in, like, to a tunnel. There's only one entrance. Only one person could go. That's how now. And, in the morning, we-- it's already-- it's also on a summer day. And we coming out. And so, all of a sudden, the train stops. And, you know, I'm a little guy. So, the military trains in that time, they didn't have no seat. They just had bunks, you know, like three-stage bunk. So I climbed on the top of the bunks. I wanted to be sure. You know. So I'm sitting in-- laying in there. And the guys, the Russian come in. And they started hollering, everybody out, everybody out, everybody out. Checkpoint. Checkpoint. I make believe I don't know from nothing. I sleeping. So finally, a soldier comes in. He wakes me up. He says, hey, listen. You gotta go down to the checkpoint. I say, what. What checkpoint? Yeah, yeah, he says. [NON-ENGLISH], [NON-ENGLISH], the Russian. OK. Coming down the checkpoint, so you go down. And then you have to climb up, maybe three, four stories. It was like a-- it was a big hill, you know? And only one person could go up.
And we're coming into the barrack and the checkpoint. A Russian lieutenant is sitting in there. I'm coming up in front of him. He says to me, let me see your papers. Show him the papers. He looking at me. He say, you Sergeant so and so? I say, yeah. What are you doing in here? I-- what do you mean, what am I doing. I'm going back to my-- to my unit. Where's your unit? I said, Druskininkai. I still remember that name. [INAUDIBLE] yeah, OK. He say, you know something? You can't go in there. I say, wait a minute. What do you mean I can't go? He says, because you don't have the stamp-- you, in Russian, you've got to have-- the more stamps you have, then better you are. Then you-- a better citizen you are. He say, you don't have-- you're missing one stamp from the headquarters from Warsaw. I say, what are you talking about? I have all the stamps. He said, listen. Don't argue with me. He said, that's what it is. He say, you're going back to Warsaw. I said, no. I'm not going back to Warsaw. He say, OK. You're not going back? The soldier, he says, [INAUDIBLE], take him away. Lock him up. OK. They're bring me in and they're locking me up. Ought to give you an idea of how stupid I was. I'm wearing a Russian uniform. I'm a Russian sergeant. Underneath, I'm wearing civilian clothes. I have papers that I work International Red Cross. I have a paper that I am working-- my name is [? Wilhelm ?] [INAUDIBLE]. I have German money. I have dollars. And I have a list that I have to take out 26 people from Vilna. OK? So I'm looking around. I say, how the hell and-- how am I going to get away from here? That's-- things looks bad. Lucky I was. I was with the Russian army in there. I didn't have to take my clothes off to sleep. We were sleeping in bunkers. Because this was the border between-- between [? Lithua ?] and Poland. So there-- we had the bunkers underneath the hills. So I didn't take off no. On the third day, I says, well, that's the end of me. The third day, these two soldiers who bought me in there the first time, they come back to me. They're coming back. They say, listen. You gotta go back to headquarters, to the checkpoint. OK. They bring me back to the same guy. And the guy says to me, he said, listen. He says, there's two ways. He says, either I'm going to lock you up or send you to Siberia, or if not, you're going back to Warsaw to get that stamp. I said, well, one thing-- on that time, I didn't lose my head. I said to him, I said, listen. I'll tell you what. Under one condition I'm going back. You give me a paper stating that you kept me here for three days. Because if I come back to my unit, they're going to prosecute me. They're gonna court-martial me. Because I'm not there. I was supposed to be on Sunday. Today's already Wednesday. He say, oh, yeah. That's no problem. OK. I says, yeah, no problem? I says, you give me all the information where I have to go to Warsaw and I'll see you next week. OK. So he gives me a paper that he detained me there for three days. And he gives me some canned food. And he gives me some bread. And he's telling the guys to take me up to the train, go back to Warsaw. So they put me up on the train and I came back to Warsaw. 
INT: [LAUGHS] GE: So when I came back to Warsaw, I came back to Henrik Zuckerman, and I tell him the story, he says to me, in Jewish, you know something? [SPEAKING HEBREW], you have more luck than your brains are worth. Now, that's one story. And then, of course, I made sure-- so being I had all these papers, so I came to Lodz. I took a week, or two weeks, I took a-- like a little vacation there. Had a good time. And I came back to Lodz. They said, listen. [? Jonalah, ?] why should you waste your papers? He say, you have papers International Red Cross. They said, why don't you take another 26 people back to Bratislava? I said, OK. No problem. So I took another 26 people back to Bratislava. And I left them in there in Bratislava. And on that time, I was in Vienna. So that's how I came to Vienna. Vienna, we were there, in a [NON-ENGLISH] 2. That was our headquarters from Berihah. From then-- OK, you want to go on?  INT: Oh, sure. [LAUGHTER] GE: From Vienna, I was a couple of months, a few months in Vienna. Then, they-- the Berihah decided that we have to open a new border, we have to establish a new border, between Austria and Germany. And you the one, and two other guys, you have to go in, make connections, from Salzburg. Because Salzburg is near the border between Ainring and Bad Reichenhall, you know. And, so, so, you've gotta make connection. So sure enough, we went in there. We were like the-- the three of us, we were like the first reconnaissance group. So, sure enough, we got caught the first night. We went to the border. We got caught by the Austrian police. Came back [INAUDIBLE] the Austrian police. Of course, in Salzburg, already, was a Jewish camp in there. And we had the, the headquarters from Berihah, was [NON-ENGLISH] Strasse 25. And the camp was Camp [? Reidenburg. ?] So, when I got caught by the Austrians, told them, I said, listen, we're trying-- we're trying to cross the border because we have family I have to-- want to go there to visit. Bad Reichenhall. There's another Jewish camp in there. So, blah, blah, blah, this, this. And we took these two guys, and, and we said to them, we said, listen. Here's some food. In that time, food was scarce. So we gave him-- we had food. We gave him some food. We gave him some cigarettes. Was a big [INAUDIBLE]. And we became friendly with them. So we made out with them guys that we became so friendly, that they were looking the other way. Whenever we had to bring some people over the border, we knew exactly where they are and when they are. And we used to start smuggling these people from one side to the other. And this is how I started with the Berihah. 
INT: So the refugees-- GE: Yeah.  INT: --that you smuggled, it wasn't that all of them wanted to go to Israel. It was rather that they wanted to leave their country of origin? And go other places? GE: Well, most of them, they were under the assumption that-- I mean, we, the Berihah, was under the assumption that they gonna wind up in Israel, which eventually, they did. But also, there was-- well, if I start telling these stories, it'll be till tomorrow. Forget about it. We also have work from, from Vienna to, to [NON-ENGLISH]. [NON-ENGLISH] was the English, the British zone in there. And the British were not too eager to help the Jews. Because they were against the whole-- the whole [INAUDIBLE]. They were against it. Matter of fact, I got caught once by the British in [NON-ENGLISH]. And they brought me in front of a general. And the guy says to me, he says, listen. I know-- I know all about it, that you guys are smuggling people. And you dump 'em in our-- in the British soil. He says, I give you a warning. He say, if I catch you again, he says, I'm going to keep you in here. You'll never go back. I say, OK. All right. I still went back. He never caught me. He never-- it's OK.  INT: What can you tell me about the American officer Novinsky? GE: Yeah. Well, Captain Novinsky, he was very-- he was the number one man. He used to help us a lot. As a matter of fact, he was-- they made in-- a few years ago, they honored him, the Jew-- the Israeli government honor him as the most-- what do you call it? The most valuable or the most heroic person for the-- what he did for the Jewish Berihah. He was the one who, he used to give us [NON-ENGLISH] documents, so we could-- [INAUDIBLE]. About Captain Novinsky, I gotta tell you this story. One time, we were sending people-- also, we were sending people to all different zones. Germany and Austria were divided between three governments, or three people. It was between the American zone, was the British zone, and it was the Russian. So what we used to do, the first thing, was the main job was to bring the people out from the Russian zone. To bring them from the Russian zone, we used to bring them to the American zone. OK? One time, also, in there, [INAUDIBLE] we were-- I was bringing people over from Vienna, to the American zone. To [INAUDIBLE]. That was the border in there. Linz, near-- we had a camp in Linz. And for some reasons, the, the Americans didn't want to let any people in there. They didn't want to let in any Jews from the Russian zone to the American. So I was in the train. And, and they came on the train. And they were asking, who is the leader? Who brings you in here? One stupid girl said-- points on me. She say, he's the one. OK. So, they took me off the train. And the soldier was about 6 foot tall. And he says to me, why do you do this? I said, what am I doing? I don't do nothing. He say, they told me that you're the leader. But I say, I'm a nobody. I says, I'm the same one, like, like any other one. He say, no, that's not true. He smacked me over my face that I could still remember. [LAUGHS] That-- but still [INAUDIBLE]. So what happened? They still took off the transport with me together. And they put us in in a camp. It was called Wels. Wels, [INAUDIBLE], in this place where they kept us, it was the same place where they kept the Nazis, the, the, the people who, from the German army, who escaped. Who-- I mean, who not escape. Who were-- 
INT: War criminals. GE: --taken-- war criminals. We the one-- between the war criminals. But later on, we had connections in there, in Linz. They came in after a few days and they took us out from there. Then-- going, going further now. So this was going from Russian zone to the American. Then, we used to bring people from-- to-- from Salzburg to Innsbruck. This is after I was sent from Vienna to Salzburg, I was stationed in Salzburg. So my job was going, bringing people to the French zone, which was in Innsbruck. And to the German zone, to the American zone in Germany, which was by the Reichenhall, Ainring, Bad Reichenhall. So, one time, we were-- of course, in that time, we already-- we were working together with the Israeli brigade. There was the British brigade, there was a Jewish brigade in the British army. And they the ones who were-- well, I mean, they were the soldiers. They were government, legal. So we work together with them. So, one time, we had to bring some people to Innsbruck. So, showing up, what did they do? They sent-- [NON-ENGLISH], you have to go to Innsbruck. So I say, OK. No problem. OK. No problem. So, I'm dressed in an American uniform, as a soldier. This is 12 o'clock at midnight. On top of my uniform-- it was a rainy day-- I'm wearing a civilian raincoat. OK? I'm having with me, papers, passports. We had to bring some Israelis from the government, we had to bring them to Salzburg. So we made false passports for them. So I had about seven passports in my pocket. I had the list of the people who I'm taking. I had American dollars with me, which was illegal. I had German Reichsmark, which was illegal. And I had Austrian schillings, which was legal. Two MPs come over to me. And they said, papers. Because my English, even it's bad now. But it wasn't-- it was much worse. I didn't know much English. I knew a couple of words in there. [INAUDIBLE], papers, papers. Show them papers. Guy says, come on. Take you away. They put me in a Jeep and they bring me to the headquarters, to the American headquarters, army headquarters. OK. Bring me to American headquarters, they start searching me. They find all these goodies what I have. And they say, well, we gotta put you to jail. OK. Put me in jail. Put me in jail. I was there for a couple of days. In the meantime, nobody knew where I disappeared. This friend, this-- my boss, I mean, he was a friend and a boss. His name was [NON-ENGLISH]. He was in charge. They call in Innsbruck. [? Jonalah ?] didn't arrive in there. So they start worrying. They say, what happened to him? Nobody knows. I couldn't communicate with them, with nobody. So finally, after a few days, I became friendly with the prison guard. You know, I had cigarettes I had with me. In that time, cigarettes was a great thing. So I smoke a cigarette. I start smoking. And the guy says to me, can I have a cigarette? I say, yeah, sure you can have a cigarette. I say, I tell you what. You want to have more cigarettes? He say, yeah. I say, I tell you what. Here's the name. You go down to [NON-ENGLISH] Strasse 25 and see [NON-ENGLISH]. And tell him that [? Jonalah ?] is sitting in jail. OK. He say, OK. 
INT: I have to interrupt now, for a tape change. GE: OK.  INT: This is tape number five. I'm speaking with George Eisenberg. Mr. Eisenberg, you were just telling me that with the help of a little bribery of cigarettes, you asked a guard at the jail where you were to go to [? Abba ?] [? Weinstein ?] to let him know where you are. GE: Right.  INT: Did the guard do this? GE: Yes. He went in there. And he told him where I am. And [? Abba Weinstein ?] found out. And he start to seek to get me out. So, well, we found out, I was charged with having [INAUDIBLE] illegal papers, trying to smuggle people, [? this. ?] And it was a-- a big crime, like a court martial, or whatever you call it. We had this man, this captain, he was the American captain, Captain Novinsky. And he was real-- very nice, and very helpful. And he was the best one we ever had. Captain Novinsky came down, and he was like my lawyer. And he defended me. There was a court in there, and actually they brought me in. And the end was, I went free. Nothing-- nothing happened. That was--  INT: Can you tell me about Leon [? Fisher? ?] GE: Who?  INT: Leon [? Fisher? ?] GE: Leon--  INT: [? Fisher. ?] I believe-- GE: Leon [? Fisher. ?] He was-- yeah. He was soldier. He was one of the Americans. He was the-- he was also one of them. We had also Chaplain [? Kohn. ?] They were with them. Leon [? Fisher ?] was-- he was the American [? commandant, ?] also. There was a lot of American people, American soldiers and officers. There was a Lieutenant [? Ziburg. ?] And there was a lot of them [? there. ?] Talking about this Lieutenant [? Fisher ?] and-- and Chaplain [? Kohn, ?] I gotta to tell you one episode what happened. One time, we had to send people-- we were gonna bring people from Salzburg to [INAUDIBLE]. We decided it was cheaper, was better, faster, to bring them people-- because before, we used to transport 'em in trucks. So we-- we wanted to see how it's gonna go by train. Because by train, we could put more people in there. So, OK. So we decided we're gonna put, like, 50 people in a train and send them over to [INAUDIBLE]. OK. So they put 50 people in a train to go to [INAUDIBLE]. And sure enough-- I wasn't on that train. Somebody else took these people. Sure enough, they came to [INAUDIBLE], and they turned them back.
They came back to Salzburg. OK. So we're talking to [? Abba Weinstein. ?] He says, look. They brought back all the people. I said, [? Abba, ?] you know what? I'm going to take them across the border. Say, yeah? OK. You want to take 'em? You're-- they're here. Go ahead, take 'em Sure enough, I tell the people-- you know, we used to work-- we used to make tricks, like-- we used to tell the people, like, listen. When you get over on the other side and you get caught by the police, or by the border police, let's say, if you-- when we came, we took the people from Salzburg to [INAUDIBLE], which is Austria to Germany. And they got caught in the German side, we used to tell them, I said, listen. If you get caught, you tell that the reason you, you were going to smuggle the-- the border, you wanted to go from [INAUDIBLE] to Salzburg. So you were going to smuggle the-- you were gonna cross the border to Austria. They're gonna tell you no good, so you got to go back to Germany. OK. Then the people who we wanted to bring into Salzburg, we used to tell them, when you get caught, you tell them you wanted to go to Germany. Say, oh, no good. You can't go to Germany. You gotta stay in Austria. Good. So, anyhow, what happened on this particular day-- it was on a Sunday afternoon-- and I'm the hero. I want to bring them over to [INAUDIBLE]. Sure enough, we get a young group, about 50 people. We come to [INAUDIBLE]. In [INAUDIBLE], the Army, the American army, the soldier, the border police, they were waiting already for us. OK? So, we-- we came in. The train pulled into the station. I told the people, I said, when we put into the station-- they had no luggage, nothing-- I says, you spread, you start running all different directions. OK. Sure enough, we came in there. They surrounded us. And we started [INAUDIBLE]. Now, for some reason, they knew me. And they say, you the one who's there. You under arrest. OK. They put me in a Jeep. They locked me up. They put me in jail in [INAUDIBLE]. OK. Put me in [INAUDIBLE]. I was there for couple of days. Same thing. I told the guys in there, the guard, I said, go over to [INAUDIBLE], the camp. And tell the guys that [INAUDIBLE] is arrested and that he is in this-- in this jail. OK. The meantime, [? Abba ?] wanted to come and to liberate me. [BACKROUND NOISE] So he's coming in in there. And he's [? support.
?] He's going into the headquarters. And he's telling them, he says, listen. I'm the leader from-- we had, [INAUDIBLE] we had the-- we were called ourself, it was in-- the name of the group was CAGR. Committee for Assistance to Jewish Refugees. It was an organized group and it was legal. Of course, whether it was legal, like, if they would tell us we could bring 50 people or 100 people, we would bring 1,000 people. Because we used to go in, bring the people in there, and dump them in there, and take the papers, the documents-- that was my job-- then we go back to Salzburg and take another 50 people. That's the way it worked. So, [? Abba's ?] coming in in there. Sure enough, they lock him up. OK. Captain Novinsky finds out that both of us are in jail. Now what is he gonna do? So, we decide on a different day. So me and [? Abba, ?] we sitting in jail together. We sitting there for about four or five days. And like, maybe one of these-- [? well ?] [INAUDIBLE] they-- I was a big criminal. They were-- I was told to-- they-- they were told to give me only one meal a day. He's a very big criminal, very important criminal guy. So, oh, OK. So, Captain Novinsky decide what's he going to do? He says, OK. We gonna send Lieutenant [INAUDIBLE] to Chaplain [? Kohn. ?] And they're gonna find out-- we were sitting in the-- the jail was the German jail. [? Nothing ?] [INAUDIBLE] it was not an American jail. So, Chaplain [? Kohn, ?] Lieutenant [NON-ENGLISH], they came in. And they had-- their command was the MP, you know? But-- border police. Constabulary, it was called. The Jeep was painted with a C, Constabulary. They comin' in. And we knew when there was no army-- there was no army personnel, no Americans. And these two men go in. They say, we have an order to take out [INAUDIBLE] and [? Abba Weinstein. ?] We have to bring them over to headquarters for interrogation. Oh, [INAUDIBLE], [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]. Sure, sure, sure. Sure. [INAUDIBLE] So in the meantime, I say, OK. They have to fill out papers. I say, OK, I'll fill out papers so they'll release me. OK. So [? Abba's ?] telling me, he says, you know, you see what you can do. Take all these papers what they have in there. See if you could swipe them away so we'll have them. Because-- I say, OK. No problem. So while he is talking in there, with all these thing, and they're trying to straighten things out for our release, I swipe all the papers, put them in my pocket. I say [? Abba, ?] we all set to go. He say, OK. So we went in, got in the Jeep, and we came back to Salzburg. The Germans are still looking for us. So that's-- that's was the trick of the trade. 
INT: I have a big question for you. GE: Yes?  INT: Where did all the money come from for this? Must have cost a lot of money. GE: Well, the money came-- the way we understood, it came from the Jewish agency. And it came from the, also from the Joint, from the American Joint--  INT: Joint Distribution Committee? GE: Yeah. Yeah. American Joint Distribution [? Camp ?] it came. And, you know, I mean, it wasn't extra [INAUDIBLE]. I mean, we used to-- I mean, the Americans and the-- all these people, they had to supply the-- the DP. It was a DP. Camp for displaced persons. So they had to give us food. They had to clothe us. They had to give us food. I mean, that was part of the immigration. I mean, that was part of the displaced person. They did it-- they didn't do it only for the Jews. They did it for the Russians, too, or for the Polish, or for the Germans, a matter of fact. That's why they pay. I mean, our trucks, you know, we had 10 trucks and maybe with two, three sets of plates. And we-- we-- every time, we used to take off-- there were two plates. So, we took off one plate on one truck and one plate on the other truck. So, it was OK. We did-- the gasoline, we used to get from the army, in a depot. We used to get all these information. And we used to bring people from-- smuggle them-- bringing them over from Salzburg to [INAUDIBLE] to [INAUDIBLE] We used to drive-- I used to drive a truck. Matter of fact, the American soldiers used to laugh at me. They used to say, you know, we were ready to shoot. We saw a truck without a driver. You know, you imagine me, a little guy like this, driving a 10-wheeler, you know, with-- with 50 or 100 people in it. OK, it was [? done. ?] So, that's-- that's how it start. I mean, there's so many other stories. 
INT: There's another question I have. GE: Yeah.  INT: By 1946, you were young guy of 21. GE: Yes.  INT: Were there any women in your life? GE: Well, there were women. I mean, nothing-- [? well, ?] in 1946, I-- I met my wife.  INT: How did you meet her? GE: Oh, that's another story. Should I tell her the story? I don't know.  INT: Please do. GE: Well, what happened-- you know, like I told you, I was in-- I was in charge and-- I mean, in-- to bringing in the transports and [? so on. ?] So what happened one time, there was a transport coming in from Vienna to Salzburg. And these people, they were little trouble makers, what we call them. They were from Betar, you know? Of course, with Jews, there's always something. There's-- there-- there-- there two Jews in 20 different parties, you know. So, everybody, so, the Betar wanted to take over. And then the-- we were-- we were-- not our-- the Berihah was supposed to be none-- no preferential parties. We were for everybody. So, these-- they were going to bring these people. And we were supposed to pick 'em up on the railway station in Salzburg. So, everybody was afraid to go. I say, OK. I'm not afraid to go. I'll go. I'll meet him in there. So, OK. Wear the uniform in there. And I remember, [INAUDIBLE] we had a Austrian driver. His name was [? Hansel. ?] And we had a big truck, like a huge [INAUDIBLE]. It was a-- a Czechoslovakian-- Tatra was the name of the truck. It was like a cattle truck, you know. So I pull up in there, for the railroad station. And these big [? hills ?] are coming in there, and they're [? start ?] and this. I says, listen, I said, don't start any trouble. Because otherwise you're gonna sit in here. I say, you go in to the truck. We're gonna take you to Camp [? Mill. ?] [? At ?] that time, there was Camp [? Mill. ?] I mean, we, in Salzburg, we had three, actually we had three camps. There was Camp [? Mill, ?] I, and Camp [? Biyalik ?] So three different-- So, anyhow, they went up in the truck. And I look on this little girl. She was a cute little girl. She caught my eye. So, and these guys [? that ?] were [? giving ?] her, I says, OK. So, I tell-- I saw her. It was a real hot day. Real hot. So I tell the guy, I says, I tell to the driver, I says, listen. Pull away from there. It's too hot in there. Pull up to the shade. OK. I pull over in the shade. It was OK. And then, finally, it quiet down. They quiet down. So I says, OK. We'll take you to the camp. So I took 'em there to the [? Mill ?] Camp. Came in [? Mill ?] Camp. We-- organized, we gave 'em lodging in there. We gave 'em some food. 
INT: And this cute little girl was among them? GE: This cute little girl was among them. So she comes up to me and she says, excuse me. You with the Berihah? I say, yeah. Yeah. She says, listen, you know, I'm having a problem. I'm lost from my family, and I'm searching my family. I can't find them. Maybe you know how I could find them. I say, yeah, later on, we-- we're gonna look. We keep a list from all the people who went through. I said, maybe we'll find them. Yeah. And that's it. It started a little romance. She fell in love with me. [LAUGHS] And, you know, and we met. And then--  INT: When did you get married? GE: And after a few-- got married in August '50-- '46. And, thank god, we're married for 50 years with the same woman. No complaints.  INT: What made you leave Europe? GE: What, leave--  INT: You came to the United States. What made you decide to leave there? GE: Well, that's another thing. You know, I don't know. I don't know. I don't know. It was-- what happened, to be honest with you, lately, when I was in Berihah from 1946-- actually from '45-- till 1950, it wasn't the same Berihah what I was in there. And I got a little disappointed. It was all kind of people came in, and new people. And it was-- it was not the way it was supposed to be, what I meant to be. So-- and besides, she-- I had an uncle in here. And I had nobody. I thought, I'll come to this country. It'll be more time with the family, I'll find some family people. And it didn't work out in there, so-- my wife wanted to be in here. So I says, OK. So I decided to come in here. 
INT: How did you get to America? GE: What do you mean, how? The-- I came to the HIAS, to the immigration. I had papers, my uncle send me an affidavit. I never wanted to use it. But then, later on, when I decided to, I wanted to-- to-- then I used the affidavit. It's a matter of fact, when the-- when I decided to go to America, a lot of Israeli people were not too happy about it, the people I worked with. Especially this guy, Mr. [INAUDIBLE]. He later became-- he was a [INAUDIBLE] man in the Jewish agency. And he liked me very much. And one night, he came down. He found out that we want to go for-- to the States. And he sat down with us. And he says to me, listen, [INAUDIBLE], he said, I'll tell you what. He says, I don't care who goes, where they go. But the way, what you did, you contribute so much to the Berihah. He said, it's really a shame to lose you. He said, I'll tell you what I'll offer you. He says-- we already-- on that time, that's in 1948, when the state was born. We already had legal immigration. And we were already taking out people-- we were-- by planes. And we had air flights from Salzburg to Tel Aviv. He says, if you want to, he says, [INAUDIBLE] [? Levine, ?] which was the general consul for Israel-- I knew him personally-- every time if I needed, I wanted his car to go to a [INAUDIBLE] or something, I used to take this car. So he says, [INAUDIBLE] [? Levine ?] will give you a visa. He said, I'll give you a passport. You could go to Israel. He says, you stay in Israel. I'll give you all the money you need. And I guarantee you I'll settle you up-- you'll be-- I'll see to it that you get a good position. And if you decide later on, you want to come back to the States to go [? to ?] America, he say, you free-- free to do so. I say, no. I don't want to do this. I says, for some reason, I says, I decided I want to go to the States. And he says, it's OK. And I say, all right. That's-- it's OK with me. But in a way, when I met-- I went [INAUDIBLE] and then my friends, a lot of [? friends ?] come for me. And all, or a lot of people from Berihah, who worked in Berihah, they always telling me, [INAUDIBLE], you would have been OK in Israel. You would have a good position there because you were very famous. [? He says, ?] you would have been doing OK in Israel, too. OK, so-- 
INT: When did you come to America? GE: In 1950. February the 19, 1950.  INT: What kind of work did you do when you got here? GE: I did all kind of work. [INAUDIBLE] kind of work. I started to work in a factory. And then I-- yeah, mostly I did, like, a factory work and metal-- sheet metal, until I started my own little business. I have, like, a little-- I had-- itwas pretty good. I had a delivery service, which I started by myself. And thank god, I can't complain. I have a wonderful family.  INT: Tell me about them. GE: Well, my wife, you met. Not-- not only is she beautiful, she's also a very good woman. The best one.  INT: Do you have children? GE: Yes. I have two kids. My son is 49 years old.  INT: So he was still born in Europe? GE: Yeah, my son was born in Austria, in Salzburg. Then my daughter is, what, 42. She's born in 1954 in the United States. We have three grandchildren. And I think we-- we OK.  INT: Do you think that your background had any influence on the way you brought up your children? GE: Well, I would say it has an influence. I mean, I always insisted that my children should never get married to non-Jew. I mean, I am-- because I tell them what I went through, so much hell, only because I'm a Jew. So I want them to know what it means to me. So far, I'm lucky. My daughter is married. She's married to a nice-- as a matter of fact, she's married to one of my best friends' son. We were-- we were like two brothers. What I mentioned all the time, [INAUDIBLE] Safier. 
INT: That's one of the men that-- GE: That's--  INT: --you escaped from the camp with. GE: --the one-- we were-- yeah. We-- we were born in the same town. We lived together in the same town. We escaped, we were hiding in the same town. And he came in here, and unfortunately, died very young. Died of cancer. After going through all this Holocaust and all this thing. He could have been well-off. Unfortunately, he died. So, I think-- my son, I hope still, maybe, some of these days, he'll get married.  INT: And, if I ask you if you have any advice for your children or grandchildren or generations to come, for the future, what would you say? GE: Well, what could I say? I hope they stay-- that they good people, they don't harm anybody, that they stay in the Jew-- in the Jewish faith. And-- and to do the-- the best what they can.  INT: Mr. Eisenberg, I want to thank you very, very much for sharing your life and your experiences with me. GE: You're very welcome.  INT: And we're going to listen to Mr. Eisenberg talk about his pictures. GE: This picture was-- taken I don't know how old I was. This was taken in our hometown, Sasow. I'm the-- I'm the one who's holding the horse. And this is me. And then my youngest brother is the first one. His name was Aaron. And the-- then the-- this-- the other brother is in between me and him. I mean, the middle his name was Hershel. And what-- this picture is from my wife's family. It was taken in 1938. And my wife is that little one, that cute, the-- the smallest one, the one with the white dress. At that time, she never met me at that time. 
INT: What was her maiden name? GE: [INAUDIBLE]  INT: Miriam [INAUDIBLE]? GE: Miriam [INAUDIBLE]. You know in Jewish, [INAUDIBLE] means miracles. A miracle she married me.  INT: And where was she born? GE: She was born in Tyszowce.  INT: In Poland? GE: Poland, sure. Which one's me? I think I'm the one on the end. This picture was taken in the Italian border. We were bringing from-- while I was in Bricha. And this was in Brenner Pass, it's called. And I'm the one right in here.  INT: Could you tell us approximately where on the-- on the photograph you're located? GE: The-- the first-- the second one from the right, with the uniform, the good-looking guy. [PAUSES FOR 6 SECONDS] This picture was from Bricha, in Salzburg. And this is the type we used to use. We-- we were using all kind of trucks and cars. But this was-- and later we-- we put then, a Jewish star on it. And it was taken in Salzburg. [PAUSES FOR 6 SECONDS] This picture is taken in Salzburg, in the railroad station. I'm the one with the outstretched hand, directing the people to go in to-- to the trains. I'm the first one with the hand out. [PAUSES FOR 5 SECONDS] This picture's also from Bricha. And these are the trucks that were loading and unloading the people going different places. [PAUSES FOR 5 SECONDS] This picture is taken for a few of our workers in Bricha. I'm the one-- the second one from the left. 
INT: In which-- which row? GE: In the-- in the top row, in the second row, whatever you call. [PAUSES FOR 5 SECONDS] This picture, the most important picture, me and my wife and my daughter's dog, which her name is Molly. Beautiful dog, very good dog.  INT: --have to sit back. UNIDENTIFIED SPEAKER: Sit back. GE: This picture from my-- part of my family. Me with the blue sweater, my daughter, Rosalie, my wife, Miriam, my son-in-law, Maury, my granddaughter, Samantha. [PAUSES FOR 7 SECONDS] These are my three precious grandchildren, from right to left, with the dark suit, that's Brian, studying to be a doctor. Michael, which is a genius, a whiz with computers, and Samantha, very smart. This is Brian, Michael, and Samantha. This picture from my whole family. My son, Norman, from right to left. My son, Norman. Next to Norman is me. This is my beautiful wife, Miriam. My grandson, Michael, my daughter, Rosalie, my son-in-law, Maury, my other grandson, Brian. And then the middle one is Samantha. [PAUSES FOR 11 SECONDS]  INT: Mr. Eisenberg, could you please tell me who all is sitting on the couch with you? GE: Sure. My right side, my grandson, Michael. I'm next to him. Next to me is my lovely wife, Miriam. My granddaughter, Samantha, my daughter, Rosalie, and my son-in-law, Maury. ROSALIE (DAUGHTER): Can we also say who's missing?  INT: Yes. Who is-- who is missing? GE: Yeah, one-- one grandson is missing. He is in college, in Brandeis college. He is-- he could not attend. And my son is also missing. My son, Norman, he couldn't make it. 
INT: Mrs. Eisenberg, would you like to say something to your husband? MIRIAM (WIFE): I'll say a few words. He was so nice. I was very proud of him. You know, he was really doing a good job. And I just want to thank him for all the words he had for me. So good luck, Georgie.  INT: Rosalie, would you like to say something to your dad? ROSALIE (DAUGHTER): Yes, I would. I feel very lucky, having grown up in a house where my father always very openly spoke about his Holocaust experiences. And because of that, being Jewish has been a very integral part of my life. And what he's doing by documenting this, I think, is so important. I know that years ago, when my son was in middle school, my father came and spoke to Michael's class. And I was amazed to realize that for some of those children in the class, it was the first time they'd ever heard of the Holocaust. Here were 11, 12, 13-year-old kids that had never even heard of the Holocaust. And my father came in. And you know, that's a difficult age to hold anyone's attention. And he was speaking for about an hour. And you could have heard a pin drop. And so I realized how important what he's doing in documenting this is. And I'm really proud of him. GE: Thank you.  INT: I want to thank you all for being here. I'm sure you look forward to seeing his tape. And I thank you, especially Mr. Eisenberg, for all your wonderful information. GE: You're very welcome. MIRIAM (WIFE): It was a pleasure. GE: Right. MIRIAM (WIFE): Just meeting you both was-- [LAUGHTER] --it was our pleasure.