INT: My name is Klara Firestone. I'm interviewing Milton Werner. The date is November 7, 1996. We are in Belmont, California, USA. And the language is in English. I'm Klara Firestone. I have the pleasure this afternoon of interviewing Milton Werner. The date is November 7, 1996. We are in Belmont, California, United States. And our interview will be in English. Good afternoon, Milton. MKW: Good afternoon to you.  INT: I'd like to begin by asking you to tell us your name, and spell your last name please. MKW: My name is Kurt Werner, known as such. I became Milton; Kurt Werner when I was naturalized in the United States, being advised that Kurt Werner sounded too German in 1946. And I just took the telephone book and picked Milton, and took Kurt as my middle name. Werner-- W-E-R-N-E-R.  INT: Thank you. And what is your birth date? MKW: April 1, '09--  INT: Tell me-- MKW: 1909.  INT: Thank you. And where were you born? MKW: Born in Vienna, Austria.  INT: Thank you. Let's begin, Milton, by having you tell us a little bit about your family. Who were the members of your family? MKW: I have a very vague recollection about my father, who died when I was seven years old, and lived, therefore, with my mother and older sister. She was two years older than I am. That was the household, just the three of us, for quite a number of years. 
INT: What was your father's name? MKW: My father's name was Hugo-- H-U-G-O. My mother's name, [? E-M-M-Y, ?] [? Emmy. ?] And my sister's name, Trude, T-R-U-D-E.  INT: What was like-- life like at home for you? MKW: Life at home was, I would say, rather hard. My parents did not have money to speak of. My father was working. And when, in 1918, when the First World War ended, he wasn't alive anymore, and my mother drew a very small pension from the company he worked for, which was a, a big Schenker and Company. They had transport moving and so on. She-- my mother found a job in the Cafe [? Marie, ?] and worked many years in that capacity, earned pretty good. And we had a maid-- live-in maid, which was very common in Austria or Vienna respectively. And of course, growing older, and the times were not so good in Austria, my mother had to dismiss the help. She was-- she had to change jobs, went to a smaller company where she also worked for a number of years. But that job also ended. And with that, the well-being was no well-being anymore. My mother was a ardent bridge player, and established a clientele as [INAUDIBLE] for paying guests in different coffeehouses, bridge clubs, but they were all with-- in company with other people where they could arrange games. The times were quite hard for her, and affected myself, of course, too, and affected my schooling. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] I've had planned-- 'planned' is maybe overstated. I would-- I had hoped to go into-- to be a lawyer. But there was no chance to study for me. I had to earn money to help her. And that was my endeavor. Therefore, I, after four years elementary school, I went to a private school which was planned for eight years, Akademisches Gymnasium, which was a very good school, well-known, and still exists. But I had to decide to stay only four years in order to earn money sooner, and not to go to the university and wait many, many years. So I had to give up Greek. That was no big sacrifice for me. I had to learn Latin, of course. Made four years in this school, and then went for two years to the Handelsakademie, which was also a four-year school, actually. But after two years, I decided to quit school, and rather tried to work and help my mother. 
INT: How old were you when you quit? MKW: 16. My mother knew a man who owned a factory for carpeting and upholstery material. The factory was in Czechoslovakia, but the head office was in Vienna. And she asked if I could be employed. And he was taken right away, and was there for many years-- most of my working years in Austria.  INT: Let's still stay when you're in your childhood years if we can for the moment. Do you remember your father at all? MKW: Hardly. I mean he was tall, and I remember him more or less after-- from a photo from his brother. He looked very much like his brother, which was-- who was younger-- three years younger. And I was always told they looked so much alike, so that's what I have in my mind. My sister was two years older. And she, she went to school also in Vienna. But she did not like life at home, and separated more or less from my mother.  INT: At what age was that? MKW: I could not-- oh, she might have been 18, 19 years old. But I am not sure about that.  INT: What about life at home? Was it-- MKW: Life at home, I was very close to my mother. And it was not-- it was fairly well, because my mother could feed me. For schooling, I didn't need much money, because I got, as the son of a widow, reduction or free schooling. And [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] she made enough money to support me, let's say. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] My activities, besides schooling, was playing soccer in the afternoon when I was young. And I was a fairly good student as long as I didn't play too much soccer. 
INT: Did you have friends in school? MKW: Friends? Oh, yes. I had lots of friends in school. And I mean, as far as I can remember, I was liked. But I-- for-- mothers, mothers of my friends were friends-- were family friends. And when I was little, I remember my mother and the mother of a friend went together in the park. And we played ball or whatever. And mothers had a good talk, and we had a good game.  INT: Tell me a little bit more about what life in school was like for you? MKW: After school, or in, in school?  INT: During school, after school, your teachers. MKW: Oh, my teachers-- of course, they would take the, the blame of everything I did-- did wrong. But I was, fairly, fairly good. I enjoyed-- I enjoyed learning. Only when my outside interests overtook my time, then, of course, I neglected learning. I was very good in Latin. I was very good in mathematics. But-- and I took French and English in the afternoon. That was not obligatory. But I liked-- I enjoyed languages, and it was in, in later years to my benefit. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] My mother was very musically inclined. We had a grand piano at home. She was playing well, and a little singing to it. I took also piano lessons. And we had all, all kinds of big selection of operas. And, and I enjoyed going to the opera-- and I remember even for long Wagnerian operas. She prepared lunch for me, which I took along, and stood in line at 10 o'clock in the morning for for instance, which started only at 6 o'clock in the evening. But there was only standing room. I did not-- seats were not in my category or not in my class. [PAUSES FOR 5 SECONDS] My-- the home, we lived in-- the grand piano was in this so-called salon, or speisezimmer, which we did not heat during the winter. That was too expensive. We had one [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] heater in the bedroom which heated the bedroom and adjoining small cabinet where, where I slept. My mother slept in the bedroom in double bed. And to, to play the piano in a cold room was not my cup of tea. My mother was very, very disappointed when I quit playing, playing; when I quit taking lessons, let's say. I played around a little bit, but I didn't achieve much musically. It was a-- my teacher had a concert where I accompanied somebody on-- for a violin concert, and I accompanied on the piano. But I was not outstanding, because I did not practice enough. And in the cold room I didn't feel like practicing. Otherwise, my mother was very supportive in what I did. And we had a good life together. 
INT: Were you close with your sister? MKW: No. She wasn't close to anyone, and I would not elaborate on that.  INT: OK. Did you have any extended family members-- cousins, aunts, uncles? MKW: Oh, yes, a very big family. I-- actually, we-- I remember on Sundays my mother took me always to aunts and uncles and grand-aunts for visiting. And I recall well, I had white, high collars, which were worn at this time. And we always had [NON-ENGLISH] nice and clean. Ties, I don't know if I wore ties, but big stiff collars. And my mother had, had a sister in Vienna. Her name was [? Bertha-- ?] B-E-R-T-A; Vidor-- V-I-D-O-R. And we visited with her frequently. Also, her parents lived in Vienna. Their last name was Meisl-- M-E-I-S-L. My grandfather was Jacob, and my grandmother Ida. So Jewish holidays we spent a seder with-- in their house. And-- but they died, if I-- oh, I cannot-- can't figure it out, but when I was young.  INT: This was your grandparents on your mother's side or father's side? MKW: These were grandmothers from my mother's side, Meisl. My grandparents on father's side remained in Olmütz-- Olomouc is the city, O-L-O-M-O-U-C, today. That's the Czech spelling, which was part-- Czechoslovakia was after 1918 created. And Olmütz was then 'Czeched'-- 'Czeched' as Olomouc. By the way, Olomouc had once a bishop whose name was Kohn, K-O-H-N, which is 100% Jewish the name. But it was an oddity. And they, they-- and that uncle who looked like my father, who was-- he was a doctor, I visited frequently-- or, let's say, maybe twice a year, because it was a few hours' train ride. And when I got there I was spoiled. My grandmother prepared special food for me-- goose liver, for instance. And my auntie gave me always some money for my mother to help her. 
INT: And your-- this uncle's name? MKW: Karl Werner-- Doctor Karl-- K-A-R-- R-L-- Werner. And my grandmothers and grandfather were-- he was Josef, and her name was Anna Werner. I have a picture of the grave-- the gravestone of her.  INT: What else do you remember about your childhood? MKW: I would say a happy childhood. And of course, I was-- I, I think I was a happy child. I have no, no bad memories. Meeting friends, and then, of course, [? opera ?] [? or whatever, ?] I wasn't a child anymore per se. But as a child, I think I was happy as much I-- as I remember. As long as I had to eat and could play, what else does a child need?  INT: Was-- would you consider your family as a religious family? MKW: No, not, not at all. My mother was respecting the High Holy Days and went to synagogue. I took [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] lessons which were for Jewish children obligatory in school, in elementary only. But later, I did not observe, did not participate or partake in-- on services. That didn't change of today.  INT: OK. Can you tell me what's your earliest recollection of Vienna per se? MKW: Earliest recollection of Vienna, the geographic outlay of the city, the surrounding mountains, and the Danube to go swimming late-- but that was not childish. And I-- that was already in-- when I was a little older that I went with a group of friends swimming, and spent the days out on weekends. But Vienna, the, the geography of the city, and the, the [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] churches, let's say, the Schonbrunn, the palaces, the, the Spanish riding school, and-- 
INT: Tell me what you remember. Describe it for me. MKW: Well, Schonbrunn, for instance, a castle where the Kaiser [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] partly lived there, and where even Kennedy had later meetings. President Kennedy had meetings there. I remember the, the, the zoo, the big Tiergarten in Schonbrunn, which was very famous. I remember very well how they cut the trees there in Schonbrunn. Were high trees, and they were cut to perfection, always straight. And from the castle of Schonbrunn you saw the city, and the-- and the St. Stephan's Church, Stephanskirche, had a beautiful view from there. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] Then there was the Prater. The Prater is a big piece of land with grass, wooded partly. And people spent their Sundays on-- picnicking, playing ball, soccer primarily. And it was a [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] place where there where all merry-goes-- merry-go-around, and other little trains. And [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] that is part of outstanding in my mind.  INT: And you described the Spanish riding school? MKW: It was-- yes, I mean, it was just horses that were really well trained to performed dancing and turning and what-- things which you see in a circus here. But of course, it was a special race of horses which were apt to perform. And as a matter of fact, I found out later in-- that they originated in the northern part of Yugoslavia, the, the Lipizzaner. That is the, the race of the horses. And they were especially qualified to learn dance, lift their legs, or stand on their hind legs, and so on. 
INT: What else is special about the Lipizzaner? MKW: That was their specialty. That's, that's it.  INT: Wasn't there one other thing special? MKW: Not that I have it mind. Not that I remember. Riding. They-- I mean, there were riders, of course, who had, had special uniforms. But I, I, I, don't--  INT: What color are the horses? MKW: Excuse me? How? What?  INT: What color are the horses? MKW: Color? White. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] I don't remember if they were brown too, but they were white-- mostly white. You know, that is so long ago that-- but I, I think [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] primarily white, yeah.  INT: What was your favorite place in the city? MKW: Favorite place, depending on the age, you know. When, when I was young-- very young-- my favorite place was the park. When I was older it was Hedy's apartment or her parents' house. In between, other girls' houses.  INT: Were you a ladies' man? MKW: I wouldn't call that. I think it's just-- it's just normal that I, I had girlfriends, and, and enjoyed life. I appreciated female company, and-- but nothing out of the ordinary. That was just, my friends and I we had common girlfriends. And we went dancing and had a good time.  INT: Were you a good dancer? MKW: Yes, that's the way I met Hedy.  INT: Hedy is--? MKW: My wife, Hedy. And we went with two friends. We went out, and-- during the summer, and outdoor dancing. And two girls were sitting alone, also to, to be entertained. And we exchanged telephone numbers, and that was the end of it-- or the beginning of it. 
INT: Now, you told us that you left school early, after two years of the Handelsschule. MKW: Handelsschule, yes.  INT: The Handelsschule was for what? MKW: Handelsakademie.  INT: I'm sorry-- academy. MKW: Yeah, it was still the Akademie. There was a Handelsschule which had, had the lower grade, but I took the Handelsakademie, but quit because my mother needed-- it was hard for her to support me.  INT: And the, the Handelsakademie was primarily what type of school? MKW: It was a school oriented for general subject, but which, which addressed commercial specialties, for instance, commercial arithmetic. We learned how to add in our head, and we didn't have computers or even adding machines. We-- instead of multiplying, for, just as an example, if you multiply by 24, you would multiply 2 and 4, and then add up. But we learned to multiply 24, first 4, and then 6, which amounts to 24. You save one operation. That, that was one of the things, for instance. Then we learned-- [BACKGROUND NOISE] then we learned that geography, that, for instance, weaving was done in this part of the country. Steel was produced there. Transportation was such and such. So that was what we learned, where you-- how to-- what to be ex- or imported [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] could develop then later in life, life.  INT: We're going to break to change the tape right now.  INT: I'm interviewing Milton Werner. The date is November 7, 1996, and this is tape number two. Milton, when we took a break you remembered something that you wanted to tell from your childhood, a little more about what life was like in your apartment? MKW: Yes. First of all, my, my exterior changed, of course. When I was young I was-- I had a curly head, and my hair was almost like bristles. And I remember very well that my mother broke combs just to get through my hair. Later, I always had to wet my hair to, to put some style. And, and whenever went out, another period later I had a-- I wore a net to, to keep my hair-- to flatten my hair a little bit out. I-- they always-- I never wore a hat or a cap at that time. Something else was I think quite interesting. The living conditions in the apartment my mother had, we had a small hall. And the, the water-- the, the water was in the hall, the, the [INAUDIBLE], the, the, the faucet. And in the kitchen it was a stove that has to be heated with coal, and on top of it we had gas, a little two burner. But when we had a bath, we had-- we used a tub which was standing in the kitchen-- enormous size tub, but freestanding and no drain. So we-- a big pot of water was boiled-- was boiling on the stove and emptied in the tub. And one person, I can't-- I don't know was it my mother, or I, maybe she took-- gave me a bath first because I was a child. And in the same water she took a bath, and then the maid took a bath all in the same tub-- in the same water. And then the water had, had to be-- the, the tub had to be emptied into the toilet. Very unusual, of course, was laundry. We had [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] collected dirty, dirty laundry, and once a week-- or was it every other week that I don't know anymore-- a washer woman came. And she-- there was one big facility, one facility in-- for three floors of apartments. There were about 10 apartments in the building. And everybody had his or her day. And she made the wash. The day before the wash the laundry was soaked, and the next day she came and wash by hand on a [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] board. And then it was-- we had no wringer. The, the sheets and everything had to be wrung by hand, and was hanging up-- under the roof there was a facility on ropes where you could hang up your laundry for drying. Ironing was another thing. The first, the oldest I recall was an iron-- hand, of course-- which you put carbon in there and you had to swing it to make it burning like carbon coal. And then later, we had an iron which could be where a insert was heated on the gas and inserted in the iron. And had, had to be-- was made red glowing, and then exchange after it cooled off against another insert. I mean, these are things that are hard to, to believe today, and, and hard to imagine even. And it is-- it seldom comes to my mind. 
INT: You were telling me also no running water in the kitchen? MKW: No, we had no running water in the kitchen. Was only in the hallway. Excuse me. Which was not too bad because if you fill a pot, you carried instead across the kitchen you carry it from the hall. So there was no, no distance to cover, but of course, it wasn't handy.  INT: Was your mother a cook, a good cook? MKW: Very good cook. And when she-- where she came from, from Olomouc, or Olmütz if you want, she went to school to learn sewing, cooking, music. And I was always very interested in cooking and had my nose in, in the kitchen. And I can tell that when we-- when I got married, I knew more about cooking than my wife. Because she was working. She didn't like the cooking of her mother. She liked the cooking of my mother. And since I knew how to, I taught her.  INT: Now, you were telling, when we last left off also, the tape before, you were just graduated the Handelsakademie, MKW: Yes.  INT: --the two years, and you decided to leave early, because why? MKW: To make some money. Because my mother couldn't give-- couldn't give me spending money. And as a young man of 16, I wanted to go out. I wanted to go dancing, go swimming, go the opera, and-- but nothing was free for me. And I couldn't ask her to support my-- this kind of pleasures. So I decided to quit school and rather work and to support myself if possible. So she found a job for me, and I stayed with that company for many years. First I learned how to-- I learned about weaving. I went to a special course to learn, to understand materials. And I made sample, sample books for the-- for traveling people, for traveling salesmen from our company. I learned how to type. Knowing French and English, I was even trusted to do correspondence in-- to foreign countries. The company exported merchandise to Macy's even. As, as a matter of fact, a buyer from Macy came to us and bought in Vienna-- certain type of carpets, of course, only. And-- [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] but I wanted to, to, to make headway in the company, and wanted to travel. And was later trusted with a [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] territorial mainly of Yugoslavia where I spent quite some time in that area, but also in Sweden, Norway, and Denmark, not so frequently. But Yugoslavia I, I made at least six trips a year taking always [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] a few weeks. And at that period I was employed-- steady employed. The company also had a factory in Yugoslavia, but the Czech merchandise was better and cheaper than the locally fabricated. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] Times turned bad for the company for some reason. What mismanaged was I don't know. And I lost a steady job, and was only occasionally employed and financed to go on the road. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] Times were towards-- we learned already about Hitler in Germany, and we planned to go to Israel. 
INT: Let me just ask you first, how old were you when you quit school, when you stopped school? MKW: 16  INT: And this was what year? MKW: 16 and 9 is 25, 1925.  INT: OK, so from 1925 till about what year-- MKW: I was-- I would say about 1930, '31 maybe I was steady employed.  INT: And what, what is your earliest recollection of hearing about Hitler? MKW: The earliest recollection is when we heard and saw in-- for instance in coffeehouses [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] academics, lawyers for instance, who peddled shoelaces or pencils and pens. Then we knew what was-- we heard about it, but it didn't sink in. But we didn't realize what was behind-- oh, he, he persecuted Jews. That's all.  INT: This is what you heard? From whom? MKW: That it's hard to say. It was just a general talk. I belonged to a Jewish sports club, [NON-ENGLISH], which means strength in Hebrew. And-- but it, it was so far away from us. We did not-- it was far away from us Jews, but even further away from, from non-Jews. We just ignored it I would almost say. But then when these people came around and told a story-- stories about that they had to flee, that they were afraid to be beaten up, or, or property destroyed, then, of course, it came to our mind, it could happen here, too. That's when we planned to save our bodies and mind and go to Israel. 
INT: Do you remember any particular stories that were told to you? MKW: No.  INT: Any particular incident? MKW: No, I cannot.  INT: Did anyone come to you personally to tell a story? MKW: Not that I remember details, no.  INT: OK. MKW: I had a brother from my mother who was working, his name was Josef Meisl-- Josef M-E-I-S-L-- who lived in Berlin and went-- was a [NON-ENGLISH].  INT: That meant what? MKW: Pardon me?  INT: Explain what that-- what you mean? MKW: He knew Herzl, let's say, and was in the early Zionist movement. And he went-- emigrated to Israel. And I ask him for a certificate to emigrate, and there were difficulties to obtain that. But anyway, I decided to make a hakhsharot, agricultural hakhsharot, which I made in the outskirts of Vienna. And I was the leader of a group of about 20 people. Every Friday evening I had to hold a Oneg Shabbat, and I got the material from the organization what to talk about and, and hold a little speech or, or sermon, let's say.  INT: Can you explain to us what is hakhsharot? MKW: Hakhsharot is the [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] schooling, [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] agricultural schooling, I would translate it.  INT: Did it have a particular purpose? MKW: That we would establish ourselves-- they didn't need in Israel at that-- they need peasants, they need farmers. And that's what we tried to learn. And in the-- in Gross-Enzersdorf, that's where I had-- where I made my hakhsharot, I was working on sugar beets. 
INT: And you were conducting Oneg Shabbat, which is what? MKW: Well, celebrating the beginning of the Shabbat.  INT: And you were given materials? MKW: Yes, I read the, the, the passage of the Torah fitting the season, the approaching holidays, or-- and, and tried to give some religious feelings. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] Not that I was so much personally involved, but it was-- it was a good feeling. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] And I, I had some [PAUSES FOR 5 SECONDS] oxen to, to lead for the-- on the sugar beet fields, and had, had to beat them so they would-- beat them with my fist to move. And Hedy [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] visited with me. [LAUGHS] And one night when we slept together, I hit her with a-- with a fist in my sleep, and she woke up. I was so used to treat the oxen that way by daytime that it came back to me at night, too. Today I can laugh about.  INT: OK, so you're preparing to possibly emigrate to Israel. MKW: But then we, we were-- somehow the uncertainty was too big. We took Hebrew lessons so we are really thinking-- seriously thinking about it. But then somehow, we, we lost the guts and planned to go to France, to Paris, hoping that some legacy or, or, or embassy we could get a visa. Maybe Uruguay, maybe Brazil, or United States. Whatever would come first, we were ready to grab. 
INT: Why did you-- why would that have been easier than Israel? MKW: We were too much afraid of the completely unknown culture [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] and language, of course.  INT: Now, what is the climate like in Vienna at this time? MKW: Do you talk about 1990s?  INT: No. At, at, at, at that time. MKW: Oh, at that time? Fear.  INT: What year are we in now? MKW: It was 1938.  INT: And, and what is happening in Vienna at this time? MKW: You see, what happened, Jews were, were already persecuted. I was a Czech citizen. I had a Czech passport, and I had a insignia showing my Czech citizenship. And I was, as a foreigner, still protected by my embassy. But Jews who were not, they were used to wash sidewalks, for instance. Then, then the Austrian Nazis, they were speaking at to Jews. Coffee houses were, were forbidden. No Jews admitted. Banks and the park were forbidden for Jews. Certain were allowed, but I mean, no Jews allowed signs were seen all over. So it was a very unhealthy atmosphere, I would say. And we knew, and we saw that big trucks were taking Jews to a big hotel which was the headquarters of the Nazis in Vienna hotel, [NON-ENGLISH], which I still remember, which doesn't exist anymore, of course. And they were gone and you never heard about-- from them anymore.  INT: What year did these things start to happen? MKW: '38, '38. 
INT: That's when they started? MKW: In Vienna-- in Austria. After Hitler marched in.  INT: Which was when? MKW: March '38. But I personally, and Hedy as my wife, were still protected as Czech, as foreigners.  INT: And why did you have a Czech citizenship? MKW: My parents, when Czechoslovakia was created in 1918, there was an option for-- my parents could opt either to become Austrians or to remain Czechs. For financial reasons, they opted to remain Czechs because there was money. My mother's dowry was in a bank in Olmütz. However, the bank went broke and the money was lost, and the-- but the citizenship was kept. Which helped me in the long run to get out of Austria and to-- helped Hedy to get out of Austria with a-- with a Czech passport and not needing any visa.  INT: Now, did you hear any more about what was going on in Germany? MKW: No.  INT: So continue on in Austria now in '38. What happened next to you? MKW: What happened next to me? I was still traveling. In the evening-- in August 1938 with my Czech passport, they financed my trip, and I make money, and went on the road. Just as-- you know, as usual. But in September, I was still in Yugoslavia. The Germans occupied the Sudetenlands, the northern part of Czechoslovakia where the factory was located. They took the, [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] the-- chased the, the owner-- or I mean, paper-wise, the owner wasn't there. But they took-- occupied the factory, and I had no factory to represent and no merchandise to sell. As a matter of fact, I met my boss in Belgrade at that time, and we were talking about our uncertain future. And I decided on talking to Hedy, my wife, on the phone that I should not go back to Vienna. They were looking for me, as a matter of fact-- the SA, SA, the Nazis. That was Hedy told me they were coming into-- to the parents' house and said, where's Kurt-- where's Kurt? 
INT: Who are the SA? MKW: SR. SR, like the SS, they-- they're Nazi troops. [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] So I did not dare to go back to Vienna anymore, and we decided over the phone to meet in Yugoslav territory and go together to Paris. And hoped to find our fortune or visa there. So I went to Marburg, which was the border between the two countries, Yugoslavia and Austria, and Hedy came. And they asked for her passport. She showed her passport. And they asked for proof of baptism, which she, of course, didn't have. So they said, you can't go in. So I said, why can't she go in? I am a taxpaying traveling salesman in Yugoslavia. My papers are here, and she is my wife. No, she can't go into Yugoslavia. She can't go enter-- she can't enter. So they wrote in her passport, because she's Hebrew, she is not allowed to go to Yugoslavia. They kept us in one room under observation, and the next train going back to Vienna Hedy had to return home. But I was allowed to leave-- to, to stay. I went to my hotel, and Hedy and I had made a date with a friend. But-- at a friend's address in Paris, and she said OK, just let's meet there. You get there through Austria somehow, to France, and I make it through Italy to France. That was our-- we were on our way.  INT: This was what time now? MKW: That was September '38. In Paris, we-- I went to that address, and my friend was gone. He was a furrier, a very good friend of mine from Vienna, a very good wrestler. And we spent lots of time together. He was married, and [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] he was gone. He, he had moved. But through another refugee who was there, also Viennese, I heard where he was. Went to the new address, and so did Hedy independently by herself. So we met there. And we rented a little room with the money we had. I collected some money in Yugoslavia before leaving with the permission of my boss, as I said, I met in Belgrade. And he owed me commission anyway, so he allowed me-- he allowed me to collect some money. We rented a room in a very small hotel. Had a room the size of a-- oh, maybe [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] 8 by 10, 8 by 12 maybe. One room, one bed, one [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] chest of drawers, and a very small window which you had-- you had to step on a chair to reach that window. So there was not much sunlight coming in. On that chest of drawers which had a marble plate, Hedy was do-- did some cooking, which didn't amount to much. We didn't have the money anyway to buy. Lunch, we had-- it was arranged by the HIAS, and Hebrew organization, which was supported by Russian Jews. And we had our lunches there, at least one good meal. We pocketed some bread all the time. Everybody did. So for dinner, we had some bread and whatever was available. I-- in Paris, I [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] went to school to learn pedicure hoping in my fantasy to, to become a pedicurist in the United States. And I got-- I have a diploma that I finished the school. Of course, I heard arriving here that that would be a five year course, which I couldn't afford, of course. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] That friend of mine we met was a furrier in Vienna already. He made coats and everything. He introduced me to a wholesaler, to a jobber, who gave me some merchandise to peddle around against cash only, of course, because I had no license and no-- couldn't give credit, and didn't know who was who. So I went around to stores and tried to sell some linen, or thread, or needles, or whatever furriers need to for cutting and, and sewing. I made a little money. Not much, but it helped. That was-- that was Paris. 
INT: Did you ever do pedicure as a-- MKW: Not in Paris. Later in Switzerland, I did and made, made a few dollars. I mean, not-- I didn't get rich on that.  INT: We're going to break for a moment and change tapes.  INT: This is an interview with Milton Werner. The date is November 7, 1996, and we are on tape number three. Milton, when we last left off, you had left Vienna. The Nazis were already occupying. This is 1938, and you had arranged to meet your wife in Paris. And you met at your friend's and had gotten a job. And pick us up at this point. What happens next? MKW: Now, when the Germans occupied Danzig, then that was declaration of war. And I had the choice-- the hard choice, I would say-- either to declare myself stateless, denying my-- not speaking about my Czech citizenship and in-- or go, or join the Czech Army in France. The alternative number one-- I didn't want to be stateless, because it would have been an internment under which condition, of course, we would have no-- not known. And Hedy wouldn't have received rationing coupons. Food was rationed, of course, at that time, already. She wouldn't have received any money or allocation for my services. So I took a chance and, so-called, 'volunteered,' under apostrophe, for the Czech Army. It says on my paper 'volunteered,' but it was the lesser of two evils. And I-- I was under two operations in that same year-- an appendectomy, which ruptured and was operated again. And I told the medical officer, I'm still under pain. So he says, it will heal, but in time. Anyway, I was sent to a camp of instruction for soldiers, which was in the southern part of France on the Mediterranean. The city's name is Agde-- A-G-D-E. And I spent there, oh, maybe, three months, something like this, where we learned to handle rifles, machine guns, load, fire, marching, singing, and-- [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] till we had to go really into fighting stance. And we had to relieve French troops, for instance-- and at one point, holding a bridge, which we didn't do, because we were up against a well-organized German Army well supplied with ammunition, well protected by airplanes. And we hardly saw an English or a French airplane. So when they flew so low that they used machine guns, even. And we fired with our rifles. Success, of course, is debatable. But we were assigned, one time, for instance, to storm a house. And they asked for volunteers. I did not volunteer. I didn't try to be a hero. But we-- we fired, and there was no hand-to-hand fighting. Then that was between, let's say, maybe, February and May, or around that time. 
INT: Of what year? MKW: 1940, 1940. And then the French surrendered, and we were taken prisoner in the same action-- had to-- this-- return our-- all weapons and piled up-- and were marched towards a camp, which was in a city of-- in the city of Montargis-- M-O-N-T-A-R-G-I-S, which is about 100 kilometers south of Paris. And I-- they unloaded us. They let us off the truck. And I approached a German soldier and said, in German, where should I go? Oh, he says, you are speaking German? I said, yes. He said, did you eat already? I said, no. Come with me. So he took me to the mess hall and-- sit down and-- and we'll have lunch, now. It was noon, around noon So I was, of course, very unsure of the situation and experience. So I told him-- I don't know how to address you, but before I sit down with you, I want to tell you I am Jewish. And his answer was, you don't have to tell if you're not asked, which reminds me of the United States about gays in the army. You heard-- I wrote it to a newspaper in a letter to the editor. So that guy said-- OK, sit down and eat-- and then you speak French-- I need an interpreter.  INT: Do you remember this man's name? MKW: Franz. I don't-- that's all I know. And he, he was really good to me. And once-- he took me along on errands into town. He took me-- [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] on one of these trips in town, I went to a grocer-- on business for them-- and the grocer, on my demand, was-- volunteered to exchange letters between Hedy and me. Hedy wrote him, and then he mailed my answers or letters. And [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] one time, I said-- in-- through correspondence with Hedy-- my wife would like to visit here, can she come? And he said, yes. He said-- you can sleep outside one night, but you better be back in the morning. 
INT: That was-- the officer said that? MKW: They-- he was not-- he was, like-- like a-- a sergeant. He wasn't an officer, but he, he had a few stripes. Anyway, he said-- you can sleep with her, but you have to be back in the morning. And I did. I went back in the morning, and he-- the Germans had occupied the castle in the-- around Montargis, where they had big guns stored. They had to maintain the guns. And he took me along, because there was a crew of, maybe, let's say, 20 prisoners, who had to do the-- the work. But I was just the interpreter. And then was another visit from Hedy contemplated. And he said to me-- she can come, and I'll let you sleep in the attic, here, in the castle, but don't-- nobody is going to-- to-- don't show your face. Nobody is supposed to see you around here. And he let us sleep in the attic. In the morning, he brought us breakfast [LAUGHS] to bed. And then this-- unlikely, but it was a fact-- that he had no-- no tray, but it was just a plain board. And he had breakfast for us, and we were still in bed.  INT: What did he serve you? MKW: He brought us a-- serve you? I don't know.  INT: What did you have for breakfast? MKW: I don't-- that I don't know. He-- he bought us a blanket. That blanket I took later, even, to when we went back. Or Hedy took it back, I think. So she was with me that night, too. And then-- I mean, this-- on-- were two different trips. Then she went back to Bordeaux, again, working as a waitress. And I went back to camp. And he told me, once-- you know why I am good to you-- I am good, because maybe my two sons will, once, be prisoner of you, and you will treat them well, too. Also an incident interesting-- there was a speech of Hitler on the radio. And there was another-- I mean, I talked to the Germans, of course, in German. I worked in the office. And I said to one guy, oh, you don't listen to the speech, today. He said-- oh, the BS I heard already 10 times, it's always the same. They had confidence in me. You know, they knew I-- I was-- I wasn't kosher. So-- or I was [LAUGHS] kosher, let's say, rather. So they were not afraid of me-- to tell me the truth. I played soccer with them in the-- in the camp. There was another-- there was a German soldier-- his name was also Kurt Werner. Of course, I was always Kurt. There, at the time, I wasn't Milton yet. Now, I stopped-- yeah. Then the next important fact was that he told me-- you know, I tell you, truthfully, there will be an exchange of prisoners-- in Germany, we have Algerian and Moroccans in-- working in the fields, but they don't take the climate too well, in Germany. So they are going to be shipped back to France-- however, they have-- they need working people, so white prisoners will be sent to Germany to do the job. So that was the final straw for me and Hedy to decide-- get out of here. And then she sent-- she went to Paris. Our luggage was still there at the concierge where we stayed. She took a suit, a pair of shoes, and shirt, most likely, and sent that to that grocer who was helping us exchange the letters. I went on an errand-- went to the grocer, took the package, rented a hotel room, and changed clothes. I have to add-- before that, of course-- the decision was made, working in the office-- typing-- I took a letterhead, a German letterhead with a swastika and so on, and wrote down the prisoner of war-- a French, some French name-- I wouldn't know any more-- born such and such date is to be released from camp on account of medical reasons. And I put it in my pocket, hoping that I wouldn't be stopped. But just in case, I would have some documentation why I am released. I never had to use it, fortunately. So I took that letter and that civilian clothes, went to a hotel, changed, took the train, went to Bordeaux. And Hedy was waiting there at 6 o'clock in the morning with a man who had a car and drove us to that-- to a woman where Hedy was staying with. That was my big escape. 
INT: I don't think you told us the name of this grocer. MKW: The-- this name of?  INT: The grocer. MKW: I don't know. He does not exist anymore. Because we were in France-- I wanted to revisit old places, but he does not-- did not exist, anymore. I have no idea. They were very good, of course, because they risked their life, helping a prisoner.  INT: What would have happened to the grocer if he was caught helping you? MKW: A bullet, that's all-- maybe two, to be safe. [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] And for me, of course, the same, obviously.  INT: OK, so now you're in Bordeaux? MKW: We were in Bordeaux. I-- I had-- I had to rest. For two or three days, I didn't go out at all. And I was so-- my nerves were on the breakage point. And we had to-- there was this occupied zone where all the, where the Germans were mustered. We had to try to go in the unoccupied zone, which was the first hurdle. And somebody told us-- you go to the vineyards, there you-- you can pass in the-- on the-- no-- you take-- you take the train and go to the last station, and then you get out of the train, and there-- you can pass the border, which we-- which we tried on a Sunday. There was a soccer game. We mixed among the soccer crowds. We got out of the train without showing identification. And now, we were in-- we were still in a city of occupied territory. And we came to a-- a-- a frontier post, where there is a-- where there was only two Germans standing-- like a-- like a railroad crossing. They asked for papers. And Hedy had proper indemnification. And she showed hers. And said-- how about me? So Hedy said, oh, we just want to visit our relatives over there. If he has no, he cannot go. So we-- so we turned around and figured-- we have to go back to Bordeaux. There's no-- we didn't know what to do. We go back to the train, and there was-- it was hard to get in without being asked for proper papers. We got in the train. A German passed through. He looked at us-- and because there were other people, too, of course-- Hedy showed her paper. He didn't ask me for a paper. And we-- [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] no, no-- that-- I have to insert-- we tried to get into the train, and it was not possible. They-- they asked for paper control. So I had a-- the terrific idea. Let's walk to the next station and take the train there that-- that is not the-- not the last one.
Maybe that's easier to board the train. We walked about an hour and heard, the train is not stopping here. That's an express. It won't stop here. So what should we do? So we went back there-- one hour to the-- where we were before. And there we could, we did board the train. And they-- he did not ask for my identification-- and went back to Bordeaux. We had to be there before curfew, which was 10:00 PM, and went back to that woman who gave shelter to Hedy before, and had to rest, again, I think, one day or two-- whatever. And then she got in touch with somebody who made us a map, a sketch, how to cross the border and where, which we followed to the letter. And we came to a farm, [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] and-- which was partly French territory, partly Swiss territory. And the husband of the farmer's-- the-- the-- the man was in Germany, a prisoner of war, and the woman-- the wife of the farmer-- was still there. And she has, had a young helper. And we told her we would like to cross the border. Can you help us? You know, at that point, you just give yourself up until-- there wasn't much to lose anymore. So he told us-- you know what-- I had my only-- the only luggage we had-- my little [NON-ENGLISH], which was very small, but hopefully, financial help. He said-- you know what, you give me that piece. I hide it at some bushes there and there. He pointed it out. And you walk and-- there. Then you are-- you are safe. So we-- we did that. Picked-- picked that little [? tools ?] up, and it was raining very hard. And we passed a-- a French border post, just a little hut. And he was sitting in-- the guy. He didn't come out. It was raining too-- too bad for him. And we passed it, went under barbed wire. And Hedy tore her stockings. And-- and that way, we came in-- into Switzerland. That was-- then we took-- I had some Swiss money, acquired already in Marseilles. And we went to-- we met a guy who looked Jewish to us. Said, what should we do? So he said, I recommend you go right away to the police, because if they find you, you'll wind up there, anyhow. So we presented ourselves to police station-- no headquarters, just a station. They gave us grapes to eat. They were very nice. And they said, you'll wait till the truck comes-- with picking up people all over. The truck came and brought us to Moudon, which was our first camp in Switzerland. 
INT: And Moudon was what type of camp? MKW: It was a temporary, temporary affair. There were guards around. You couldn't go out. It was, really, under-- under control. The women had cots. Men were sleeping on straw. Couples were separated. And there were lots of refugees there-- Belgian Jews, which were very kosher orthodox. They ate only potatoes, baked potatoes, or cooked potatoes in the peeling. I worked in the kitchen and skimmed the milk we got. And we had-- the people in the kitchen, we had whipping cream. The other ones just got the milk. But-- and then we had one-- one-- one dish, which was boiled in big kettles. And people had to eat-- I mean, we ate on long tables. And we were just waiting what's going to be-- to happen to us. We were interviewed, of course. What are your plans? What do you intend to do with your life? So we said, we want to go to the-- to America. From there, we were separated then. The men were sent to work camps. I was-- I wound up right away in an office because I said I can type. And they needed people to help in the office. They needed people to-- to-- to cut trees and chop wood. But they need people in the office, too. And I was lucky enough to-- not to have-- be subject to hard labor. But food, of course, I didn't get any better than the rest. 
INT: Now, the camp was strictly for? MKW: Refugees.  INT: And it was run by whom? MKW: Swiss, Swiss civilians who didn't have any idea about-- very, some of them, very primitive-- could hardly write. I mean, they were just watchdogs. But some were very nice, I must say. The Lagerleiter, the-- the-- the Chief of the Camp, mostly, was, mostly, an intelligent and well-educated person. The other ones-- Swiss, helping him-- were just peasants. But I worked myself up there from second-- [NON-ENGLISH], second detachment-- the Chief of Detachment, let's say, to first, where I got a little better pay, a few more cents. We had-- every six weeks, we had a vacation-- I think, six weeks or two months. I really don't know anymore for sure. And I could meet Hedy. And I went to Bordeaux-- to Moudon and met her there. And a woman who owned a-- a cheese and milk place let us sleep there. And on one of these-- one of these vacations, that my older daughter was created. [LAUGHTER]  INT: Now, you stayed in Moudon how long? MKW: I didn't stay too long. I-- maybe, two, three months, maybe. And then I went to Bonstetten. That was the first camp-- B-O-N-S-T-E-T-T-E-N-- also, office work.  INT: Now, you were paid for this work? MKW: Very little, yes. I mean, negligible. From there, I went to a so-called punish-- camps where people were punished. That was Granges. That was in the French part of-- oh, that-- this was, also, actually, French part. No Bonstetten-- Moudon was French. Bonstetten was German part. And Granges was, again, French part. I was shipped there, again, for office work. I wasn't punished. But the people who were there had to do some-- to make good for some misdeeds. They might have been minor, but-- 
INT: Also refugees? MKW: Yeah. Only refugees were there, nothing but.  INT: What would have been something they could be punished for? MKW: Don't-- not making their beds right, for instance. And we had to keep clean. Not obeying orders-- going to pick up the mail, someplace or the-- bring some bread from the bakery or-- minor infractions, I would say. The punishment wasn't severe. It was not that you were-- they were restricted in-- in their movements, let's say, in-- inside the camp.  INT: OK. And from there, where did you go? MKW: Another camp, and another camp. And then when our daughter was born, I-- I heard that Champery-- that's going to be the biggest camp-- biggest camp was about 750 people, I remember-- was to be opened up in an old hotel. And Mr. So-and-so-- I know the name-- [NON-ENGLISH], a Swiss name-- would be the Chief of Camp. So I-- and I worked with him in another camp. So I phoned him. And I said-- Mr. [NON-ENGLISH], you know me, do you have already a chief for the office in Champery? And then I-- he said, no. So I said-- if you want me, I-- I'll go. But my wife has to come with me and my child. So he told me, I want you, but no children. So I said, then I don't want to go. He said-- just go and they will follow you, but first, the camp has to be organized. So I went there alone with two others-- one for cooking and one for housekeeping to-- to be overseen. And I installed the office, instructed-- schooled Swiss, Swiss so-called Lagerleiters to-- to-- to assist the, the Chief. And then they make-- made also, room for babies and women. So Hedy came to me, and we had one room together. 
INT: We're going to break for a moment and change tapes. MKW: Good for you.  INT: We are interviewing Milton Werner. The date is November 7, 1996. And this is tape number four. Milton, when we left off at the last tape, you are at Champéry camp. And this is where? MKW: That is close to Mont Blanc, territory of Mont Blanc, close at the-- not at the lake, but not far from Lake Geneva. And--  INT: In what country? MKW: Switzerland. That was the, the biggest refugee camp. There were several buildings. And there was one building for mothers with babies-- or babies alone, rather. The mothers were in main building. There were nurses to take care of the babies. And during the winter, Hedy, my wife, had to walk through the snow to, to nurse the baby. But it was just one, one of the things you had to take. In there, I also worked as first man in the office, as boss of the-- of the refugees [LAUGHS] in the office. And food was bad. We were on the rationing of, of prisoners, not prisoners of war, of [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] criminals. We had the same rationing of fat, and X, and so on, which was very limited. And I made, somehow, the acquaintance of a smuggler.  INT: Of a? Repeat again. MKW: I made-- I made the acquaintance of a smuggler, of a Swiss, who went over the mountains to France bringing cigarettes, from Switzerland to France, and butter, from France in return, butter from France to Switzerland. So I was sort of a middleman. I provided the cigarettes, bought them with money people gave me. And we met at the cemetery behind a tombstone, because it couldn't be done in public, of course, in the evening. And he brought butter from France, which he got from farmers. We made a trade. And I went back to camp. But I couldn't go in the front door, of course. So in the back, there was a wall. I threw it over the wall, and they-- my friends called it in-- caught it inside. And then we cut up the butter among us and-- and had a little extra nourishment, which was a unusual thing to do, too, but it was lucky we did it. So from Champéry, Hedy was liberated after a few months. She was set free. They didn't need her there. And I was-- asked for a transfer to be near her, and was transferred to Clarens, C-L-A-R-E-N-S, which is on the lake not far from Montreux-- Montreux, M-O-N-T-R-E-U-X-- which is very known place, vacation resort. There I was in the office where all the Dutch refugees were. But I mean, it didn't make a difference to me. I was to-- I was to-- I was close to Hedy and the baby. And after-- that was the last camp I was in. Then I was also liberated. That was already in '40-- must have been end '45, or beginning '46. I don't-- I'm not sure of. 
INT: 1945? MKW: End '45 or beginning '46.  INT: 1945? MKW: Yes. And then, when I was liberated, we-- Hedy, I mean, with the three of us-- moved to Geneva. And I went to the HIAS and asked to be employed, which they did. I have a letter of when, after I-- that was my final employment in Switzerland-- or in Europe, rather. I have a letter of commendation. And they-- they gave me a little clock as a goodbye present. And we went to Belgium to board the ship. Hedy's brother-in-law sent-- bought the tickets and sent us there-- bought the ticket, and, I mean, paid for it. And we boarded a Liberty ship, on which we were, all together, I think, 12 passengers. Hedy and the baby had a nice cabin. I, I had a lousy crossing. I was in the-- it was stormy. Instead of New York, we landed in Boston. They couldn't make it on account of bad weather. But that was minor.  INT: Let me just go back for one second and ask you. Your wife was liberated before you? MKW: Yes.  INT: In what year? MKW: Must have been '45, sometimes.  INT: Do you know when during the year? MKW: No. If you have a chance to look at my papers, when I get to it, I, I could provide better-- a better timetable.  INT: And where did she go when she was liberated? MKW: To Clarens. There, at least, she was near me, because I was in the-- in the Dutch camp. 
INT: And what was she doing during the time you were in the camp? MKW: Nothing. Taking the baby for a walk.  INT: She-- how was she living? MKW: So that's a good question. I don't know. Well, I, I think the-- I think the HIAS supported or sent some money. Because what I-- my salary in-- working as-- in, in the office as a refugee was hardly enough to, to eat. But these, these things really are very hard to, today, to pinpoint.  INT: And who is HIAS? MKW: HIAS.  INT: Who-- what is HIAS? MKW: Oh, HIAS. Hebrew Association. A Hebrew [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] Immigration Association. I am-- I--  INT: What did they do? MKW: Help, helping to immigrate to, to, to America.  INT: Was that the purpose of the organization? MKW: Pardon me?  INT: Was that the only purpose of the organization? MKW: I think so. Helping refugees.  INT: Now did you see your wife during the time that you were still in the Dutch camp in Clarens? MKW: Oh, yes, yes. I, I saw her. I mean I was-- I was free to go out-- in and out. It was-- that was not a camp where you-- where-- it was a camp where people could flee-- I mean, run away. But there was no, no purpose, because you still had to-- to do something to have outside help. So we were all hoping that the end of the war would be near, and they could have an orderly exit. 
INT: OK. So now you've boarded a Liberty ship. Why was it called a Liberty ship? MKW: They, they were used for troop-- for troop transports during the war. They were modified freighters. And the food was good, but it didn't amount to anything, because I was always seasick. Only our daughter was, was well.  INT: So you arrive in Boston. And what happens next? MKW: Our brother-in-law-- Hedy's brother-in-law, actually, picked us up, took, took us, by train, to New York, where another cousin and her parents waited for us. The parents took us into their apartment, gave us a bed to sleep. We were looking for a job-- for jobs, of course. And I found a job in a furniture factory as a packer. It was light furniture, and so it was not-- I had to work my, my, my 50 hours to make about $40 a week at that time. And later, another cousin, who was in the diamond business, loose diamonds, said I, I can take Kurt to San Francisco, and I can give him a job in my office, which he did. I learned the diamond-- I learned diamonds, how to handle diamonds. And I was typing, of course, too. I did office work. Later, this cousin and the, the big boss, who lived in New York, who was the actual importer of the diamonds, split up. And I stayed with the big guy, and I went on the road in-- with loose diamonds. And I covered Oregon-- I mean, in Oregon I didn't-- there wasn't much to cover. There was Portland and Albany. And I went to Seattle and Denver, Pueblo, Las Vegas. That's it. I didn't work in San Francisco. That's because that was kept for the other guy who went away. But there was too much traveling for me. I wasn't happy with being on the road all the time. On the other hand, there, there was too much money involved for the boss. The, the merchandise had to turn. So I, I quit. He wanted me nine months of the year on the road. And this was not my-- I am too much of a family man. So I quit, and bought in company with somebody else, with a woman, a dry-cleaning agency, which I operated till to my retirement. She passed away and I bought her, her part. Then Hedy worked with me. And we worked long hours, but we made a fairly decent living. We didn't make big money. But we, we, we did all right. 
INT: Now you have how many children? MKW: Two-- one born in Switzerland, and one born in, in San Francisco.  INT: And the one born in Switzerland, what is her name? MKW: That is Sylvia. She was born in 1944. And she is a counselor, and-- marriage and child's counselor. But she didn't do so well on her own marriage. She could only counseling other people. And she has two sons. The younger one, born here, lives in Bend, Oregon, where she works for the state. And her husband is a land-- in irrigation, landscaping irrigation. They have no children.  INT: What is her name? What is her name? MKW: The older one, living in the East Bay, is Sylvia. And her last name is Fisher, F-I-S-S-H-E-R. The younger one is Elanor Seibold-- S-E-I-B-O-LD. Her husband is Martin, M-A-R-T-I-N, who is in landscaping.  INT: And one of your children has-- one of your daughters has children? MKW: The older one has two boys.  INT: And what are their names? MKW: One is married and works for Pacific Bell, and is a composer. He-- he gets tapes. It make on the-- on the synthesizer music.  INT: What is his name? MKW: Joel Fisher.  INT: And the other one? MKW: The other one is Mark Fisher. And he has a warehouse job in-- close to Portland. Not married.  INT: OK. Before we take a break and have your wife, Hedy, join us, is there anything that you wish-- any final thing that you forgot to tell us, that you would like to tell us now, or any message that you have for the people who will watch this tape 50 years from now? MKW: Message? Can-- I can only tell, tell everybody, you have to have a little mazel. 
INT: Which is? MKW: Luck. Sometimes you make the right decisions. Sometimes you don't. But mazel is the, the key word, I would say.  INT: Thank you. We're going to stop for a minute and have Hedy join us. MW: OK.  INT: Hedy, thank you for joining us. HEDY WERNER: You're welcome.  INT: I know you're-- you will be interviewed as well. But what do you think about your husband giving testimony? HEDY WERNER: What I think about?  INT: Mm-hmm. MKW: That's the-- the truth. [LAUGHS]  INT: You two, now, at this point, have been married how many years? MKW: 61, going on 62. HEDY WERNER: 61 and a half. MKW: No, 61 already. 1935. You have-- HEDY WERNER: And what did I say? MKW: OK. HEDY WERNER: OK.  INT: What's the secret of keeping the-- the love affair going-- HEDY WERNER: Oh.  INT: --as I'm watching you two? MKW: We make-- try the best. The best years are over.  INT: Do you think that having had to go through the experience that you did-- HEDY WERNER: Uh-huh.  INT: --was part of the reason that you became and remained so close? HEDY WERNER: Yeah. I think so. MKW: Definitely. HEDY WERNER: I think so. MKW: It's a much closer tie after the common experience. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] It's too-- we have so much in common that other people cannot, cannot have and should never have.  INT: And what do you think the, the overall effect of your experience had on, on both your lives? HEDY WERNER: Try to [PAUSES FOR 5 SECONDS] accept and respect [PAUSES FOR 6 SECONDS] most of the things in life. That I would say. 
INT: Is there any other final words you would like to give us before we end. MKW: I would-- I would thank you for the time and effort you put in. And we are-- we hope that our experience will never be shared by anyone or experienced by anyone else. I mean, we were, as I said before, we were lucky. But-- and we came away all right. But it took a lot out of our life. Lots of years were lost. And that can't be-- can't be remade. HEDY WERNER: But I think we came closer through the experience we had, through living in fear, through running for life, [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] brought us even closer. MKW: I think for that I can give you-- her a kiss. HEDY WERNER: [LAUGHS]  INT: I think-- I think you should. I, I think you both are just a wonderful inspiration for the world. MKW: Thank you.  INT: And I thank you so much for sharing, sharing this, this with us. We're going to break now one more time, and we'll be showing some photographs. HEDY WERNER: OK. MKW: Thank you.