INT: The date is November 7th, 1996. This is an interview with survivor Marianna Glazek, [BACKGROUND NOISE] last name at birth-- Seeman. The interviewer is Susan Schreiber. And it is taking place in Ann Arbor, Michigan, United States of America. And the language of the interview is English. The date is November 7th, 1996. We are in Ann Arbor, Michigan. My name is Susan Schreiber. And I have the privilege of interviewing Marianna Glazek. Could you please tell us your name? MG: My name is Marianna Glazek.  INT: Could you spell that? MG: The first name? Both. First name is M-A-R-I-A-N-N-E-- or-- or A. And Glazek is G-L-A-Z-E-K.  INT: And your name at birth? MG: Was Seemann, the last name-- S-E-E-M-A-N-N.  INT: And when is your birth date? MG: February 10th, 1922.  INT: Which would make you how old? MG: Well, I have to calculate that one-- 75, 74.  INT: And where were you born? MG: I was born in Hungary-- Budapest, Hungary.  INT: And-- you were-- what was your family like? What are your earliest recollections? MG: Well, my earliest recollections-- there were two-- two children in the family, my-- my sister and I. My father was a doctor. And we had our-- our-- we lived in the same place where he had his office. So we always lived on the main street right on the-- what they call a ring. It's a big part of-- of-- of the city. It's a circle in the city. And when we were little, when we were smaller, we had a-- a-- a governess. And then later, we had a German governess. And so we learned German and Hungarian at the same time. And when we were-- we lived in a apartment house-- not like here. These people live in family houses. We lived in apartment house. And we went every day out for a walk to-- to the park. And there, the-- we were sitting-- the governess was sitting and waiting for us. And we were talking with the other ones. And we were playing. Then later, I started school. Then we-- we didn't have a governess anymore. But a lady came in every day to take us for a walk in the afternoon. And when we were even older like that, then somebody came who talked English to us. So we learned Hungarian, German, and English all at the same time. MG: What was the language spoken in your home? MG: Hungarian. It was Hungarian. 
INT: Were your parents both from Budapest? MG: Yeah, they both were born in Budapest. Yeah.  INT: And grandparents? MG: They also were born in Budapest. They-- they were all Hungarian, actually. My grandparents-- I really didn't know much of my grandparents. My grandfather, my father's side, had a small grocery store. And when I went to school, I went by the store, and somebody came to pick me up and took me across the street. And then I walked by myself to school at that time. Children walked alone to school. And when-- and my other grandfather got married the second time. And he married his wife's sister. This was kind of a-- a custom in Jewish families that they married the sister who was also-- whose husband also died. And so I just I remember going to her once in a while. She lived on the Danube in a beautiful apartment. And on New Year's-- on St. Stephen's Day, when we have the-- the fireworks, we went to her house, and we watched the fireworks. So every-- every St. Stephen's Day was spelled with watching the fireworks-- except one time. She had a-- she had a parrot. Papa got a parrot. And the parrot bit the maid, I think. The maid collapsed. And I was afraid that I must have done something. I never told anybody until they called the maid, and they realized that she wasn't around. She was collapsed. It was pretty scary kind of thing. And-- and so my other grandfather also remarried. He-- the family was very much against it. So he didn't really-- we didn't really meet his wife very much. But he came to us every Saturday afternoon, visited my father. And that was usually on Saturday afternoon. And my mother was-- insisted on sewing when he was coming. She knew that that's going to irritate him a lot. So she just did it. And then he died later, too. My-- my grandfather, my mother's father, when his wife died, he moved in with us. And he took actually my parents' bedroom. And they lived in-- they stayed in the dining room. And I got another room. So it was quite complicated. 
INT: Was it a large apartment? MG: Yeah, it was very-- it was quite large. It was the apartment-- it had an office, a doctor's office. And it had a reception room. That was also the doctor's reception room. So those two rooms we really didn't use, and then into the dining room. And actually, my parents slept there. They-- and then it had one bedroom or two bedrooms-- one bedroom. And then there was another bedroom at the end of the hall. This was actually the maid's room. But then when my grandfather moved in with us, she was sleeping somewhere in the kitchen. They fixed up a room for her. And I slept in the maid's room.  INT: Why would it irritate your grandfather that your mother was sewing?  INT: Because it was the Sabbath, and we weren't supposed to sew. And my mother was not very religious. And she just liked to do it to irritate him, I guess. And every Saturday, he said, do you have to do that today? Can't you do it some other time? Of course, she could have done it. But she didn't want to.  INT: Was-- was your family religious? MG: We were-- we were religious in the way that-- at school I went to-- and everybody had to have religion classes in school. So I went to the Jewish religion class. And we-- and we went with the school-- sometimes we went to the synagogue on Friday night. And on the big holidays-- Yom Kippur and-- and New Year-- we-- we went to synagogue. But we were not-- we were not kosher or anything like this. So he-- my grandfather never ate at our house, as far as I remember. 
INT: He was religious? MG: He was religious, yeah. But that was my father's father, not my mother's father.  INT: Was your family political? MG: In the way my father belonged to the Social Democratic Club. That was considered quite political. That was about it. But I think everybody in that club was Jewish. In Hungary, there was not much anti-Semitism-- there was anti-Semitism. But it was not so-- so apparent. And most places where I went or my family went, there were only Jews. The Jews were very separate from-- from gentiles. It was not really openly, but it was more a subtle-- subtle kind of way. And so even my friends were-- most of them were gentile-- were Jewish. They were-- really, in school, I-- there were gentile students, and we were very friendly with each other, but not privately.  INT: Was-- was your neighborhood Jewish? MG: No, no. We didn't have-- we actually didn't have a Jewish neighborhood. Maybe just Orthodox Jews did.  INT: What [INTERPOSING VOICES] part of Budapest did you live in? MG: That was the main part. They have what they call-- [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] like circles, ring. I don't know what they call-- what they call them in English. But it's a big circle that goes around town. And those where the stores are, and the main streets are there. And so we lived on one of the main streets, very close.  INT: As a child, do you remember experiencing any kind of anti-Semitism? MG: As a child? Yes, [INAUDIBLE] it was-- we kind of grew up with it. Certain places we didn't go. We were not invited to big-- to balls or so on or big dances. And certain-- we were not invited to any place that is especially reserved for-- for gentiles. And that-- we knew that, and it-- nobody ever really talked about it. But it-- it was like common knowledge, general knowledge, that you had a certain place where you stayed. Excuse me. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] That was one-- just one part of-- of anti-Semitism that was subtle. Actually, it wasn't so subtle. It's just that we knew our place, and we didn't try to force ourselves on anybody else. Of course, as a child, I never did it very much, either. But my father belonged to a club that was a doctor's club. And they met every day in the coffee house. The coffee house was a very important gathering place. And in summer, they met every day at a-- in a swimming pool on the Danube. This was also very important. And they-- and they discussed medical things there. But I don't think that any gentile doctors belonged to that. So it-- it was quite-- it was not very mixed. 
INT: And then do you remember when things started to change in Hungary? MG: I-- I can't remember exactly that it changed very much, because Hungary was one of the last countries that got influenced by-- by the Nazism. And so the style of life didn't really change. But we heard all kind of rumors. And lots of people, actually, already left the country and-- and immigrated to Israel or to the United States. But I did not notice anything as far as anti-Semitism in everyday life-- just maybe a few.  INT: Did-- did any of your family leave? MG: No, no, no. My family didn't leave. But that was already taught. The aunt, when I told my father that the family I have been teaching-- I-- I used to teach. My-- my childhood, I went away and gave private lessons to students and helped them with the school work. And [? that ?] my family was-- [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] was not involved in that. But I told my father that-- that the family I was teaching, that they are planning to leave. In fact, in a few days, they also left. And they went to Israel. And I asked him, you know, why don't we go? And he said, why should we go? He said his-- his patients are all here. And he's used to the people here. He wouldn't be happy somewhere else.  INT: What year would you say that was? MG: That was already in-- in '43. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] It must have been '43. 
INT: And you had-- by '43, you had completed schooling? Or what? MG: No, no. I-- I completed-- let's see. No, in '43 I did. I completed schooling in 1940. And so this must have been earlier, then. Because at one point in '36-- in '36 I went with that family, where was tutoring, to Switzerland. They wanted me to come, because when more people went, they got more money. So we went there. And I had to come back, like in the middle of it, because there were some problems. And that, in 1930-- and that was the year when there was the Anschluss. That's the Austrian-- Austrians asked the Germans to come in to the country and take over.  INT: You had--  INT: That was in '36, I think.  INT: You had gone with the family that you were tutoring to Switzerland? MG: Yeah, to Switzerland. And then I came-- I came back in the middle of the vacation. But they were also-- [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] and that was the year when-- when Austria was taken over by Germany. So we knew what was going on. But we always thought that all this won't come to Hungary. I don't know why we thought that, but that was like-- we were really convinced of that.  INT: When did you first hear about it coming to Hungary? Not to Budapest, but--  INT: With whole-- slowly. You know, it approached Hungary. Austria was just like three hours from-- or like Vienna was three hours from Budapest. So we knew that something was going on there. And so we knew that-- that something is going to happen. But we didn't believe it. It's very hard to explain how-- how that was. I remember-- I  went to a German school. And I-- I remember that the German children went to-- were called to the assembly room. And they had like a celebration, because they had this Anschluss. Austrians called the Germans in, and the Germans actually took over everything in Austria. And so they were celebrating. And that was the first time that I really felt very deeply depressed, so to say, and felt that it's like a shadow that is coming closer and closer to us all the time. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] Actually, that was '38, I think. 
INT: And then what happened? MG: Well, I still went to school. And I finished. In 1940, I graduated. And then afterwards, I understand later, I found out, that my sister graduated two years later. And everybody-- and that was about the last year that the students openly graduated. Because in 1940, [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] Hungary joined the-- the-- the people who were against-- who were against the Allies, were with Germany. And-- but they didn't have to go in yet. And all this in Hungary went very slowly. And my sister graduated in 1942. And that time, it was already quite apparent that the Germans are taking over everything in Hungary, too. They actually did not come into Hungary. They did not take Hungary as their own until 1944. They were kind of allowing Hungary to do it on their own. Hungary was always a very anti-Semitic country. But this time, it was even more anti-Semitic.  INT: In-- in what ways? Well, there were lots of laws that they brought against Jews going to the university. Even before, the university was a kind of a privilege for most Jews. They only took what they called [NON-ENGLISH]. Just so many Jews were admitted [INAUDIBLE] university. So after 1940, there was what they called [NON-ENGLISH]. No Jews were admitted to university. And then many-- many professions, also they would not even take any Jews. So most Jews tried to take something, to do something that was done by hand, that was like a craft. Because they thought they going to survive this Nazi terror just with a skill of their hands-- the skill of their-- skin of their teeth, so to say. And they-- they learned how to do certain things that they were not very good at. I learned how to do leather work. And I went out and did some leather work. I could not go-- and I graduated in 1940 but couldn't go on to university afterward. So from then on, my life was just like waiting for something to happen. And every day from then on, every day you-- the main purpose of life was to escape danger, to escape being taken into custody, to being taken into-- [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] taken by the Germans, taken by the Hungarians. So you lived in a country that was-- an enemy of yours. You-- you were an enemy of the country that you were considered to be their ally. My father in the First World War was a lieutenant in the army, because he was a doctor. And so he was a lieutenant in the army. The Second World War, he couldn't have even have dreamt to get any kind of position in the army.
My father was so proud of being a Hungarian that when a German-- when a-- a woman, a German woman came to-- a peasant woman to sell us some eggs-- because around Hungary, there were several German settlements where people were still talking German, in spite of the fact that they were born in Hungary. So they were coming and selling eggs. And my father, who usually did not go out in the kitchen, went out in the kitchen and asked the woman why she doesn't talk Hungarian. She said she doesn't know how. And he said if he-- he asked if she's not ashamed not to be able to talk Hungarian in spite of the fact that  she lives in Hungary. And that was a time when I realized that he was very much a Hungarian at that point, I guess. Then in 1940, things started falling apart. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] I don't even know who they-- who they took into the army. But a lot of young-- they started taking people in the country, who were living in the country, they started taking them and shipping them out of the country, putting them in labor camps, in forced labor camps, and make them work-- do the real dirty work there, like ammunition and-- and being the first in the line in setting up bombs and everything-- I mean, explosives. And so we heard that they were transporting a lot of people out of the country, out of the cities, and transporting them somewhere into the country. But nothing came to Budapest here. So we were like a privileged place, where you kind of lived like you lived before, if you had enough money, of course. But we were not attacked. Or we were not shipped out. So it-- that was until 1940. Then in 1941 and 1942, it actually started. And they were shipping people out from Hungary, from Budapest, not only from Hungary. And we heard about all those villages that were taken to Auschwitz and what happened to them. Actually, we did not really get any official notification what happened to them. We were-- just heard about things that-- that was done to them, that they shipped them in cattle cars. And some people found pieces of paper where people who were shipped in those cattle cars wrote that they were going, they were moving out, and they were going out, and they didn't know what to do. They did-- they write-- they wrote they are all right. But they were not really all right. And things started getting pretty scary. So from then on, the main thing was to keep alive. That was the only, main thing. And that's what we were mostly concerned with. My father still kept his-- his office. And we still lived in the same place until 1944. Then in 1944, the Germans got pretty upset that nothing happens in Hungary. Everything was way too slow and especially in Budapest. I understand that they didn't get the carts, that they were going to the cattle cars that they were supposed to get to ship everybody. And things started to get pretty eerie. And so that's when a lot of people left. And my father absolutely refused to move. 
INT: Were you still living at home in 1944? MG: Yeah, in '44, I was still-- I guess. No, I got married-- I was married in 1942. I got married, and then we-- that's right. And then we-- I moved out to my own-- to our own apartment. And my parents stayed in the-- in their old house. And I-- I remember asking my father, why don't we leave? And he said, well, his patients know him there. He can't just leave everybody. And we never did leave. And then in 1944, I lived by my-- by my husband-- 1943, 1944. My husband was called up for labor to-- to go into forced labor camp. But he-- he-- he went. And he stayed around town. Luckily, he stayed around town, and when he could, he came home. And that's when things started to get really bad.  INT: Who was your husband? MG: My second--  INT: Where did you-- MG: This was my first husband. He was a-- he was weaving. He worked in a factory that made material-- ribbons. He couldn't go to-- to school. So he learned it all there and had a very good job. They were making narrow textiles, so to say. And that's where he was working. And he seemed to be-- it was also a Jewish factory. And he seemed to be doing pretty well, until he was called in and had to leave his job and so on. So that was pretty good. 
INT: How-- how old a man was he? MG: He was just three years older than I was. We met each other when I was 14 and he was 17. And we've been going together ever since. My parents didn't know. First my father wouldn't let me go with anybody. He thought I was too young. And it was not the kind of marriage he wanted me to have. He wanted me to have a doctor, I guess. But at that time, it didn't make much difference anyway.  INT: We'll go on to tape number 2. MG: OK.  INT: This is tape number two of the interview with Marianna Glazek. You were just, actually, talking about your first husband. What was his name? MG: His name was George. And we knew each other for-- for many years. And then, finally, my father agreed, in 1942, that we should get married. Then there wasn't really too much choice. And we moved into our own apartment. But we only lived together like eight months or nine months, because then they called him into forced labor camp. [COUGHS] Excuse me. And he was called into-- into a camp that was in Budapest, actually. But he couldn't go home unless he-- he got special permission. But he just tried to escape home. So for a few months, that's what we did. He came home once in a while, and-- and then he went away again. And I never knew when I'm going to see him again. And I went with my parents. So those last two years-- '42 and forty-- starting with '42, after we got married in August, then '43 was pretty bad. I mean, we were waiting from one coming home to the other, and heard all those terrible news about people in the country who were-- who were deported. And of course, we did not realize how terrible it was. And I still have a hard time explaining to myself how come we didn't realize that they were actually deported, that they weren't going to come home at all. And they were-- they could not send us regular mail. So there was a kind of pre-printed card, which they wrote their name and said, we're feeling very well. We're feeling wonderful. We are on our way to a-- to a camp. And we're going to write you later. So we were in this kind of a mood about-- everything is going to be all right. Everything is going to be all right. But we are still worried about it. Then I hid-- I got pregnant. And my father said I shouldn't have the baby. This was not a time to have a baby.
And actually, I-- I got rid-- I had a-- I got rid of the baby. Then I got pregnant again. And at that time, I-- I had the baby in 1944, November 26th-- 26, 27. And-- and I kept it. But that-- that was the time when we already moved out of our apartment. In 1943-- '43, '44, 1944, we first had to turn in all our possessions. There was a big sign appeared on the street that Jews have to turn in their bicycles. That was the hardest thing of all, because we used the bicycle a lot. We had to turn in the bicycles, all the jewelry, all the silver, and all the China, and all the valuable things that were not turned in up to that time. And we had to take it ourselves and turn it in. Then there came another law, in which they  said that Jews should move into designated housing, into Jewish housing. At that time, several-- three of the countries took the responsibility upon themselves to designate certain houses as their house, as their own house. And we moved into a house that was claimed by the Swedish government as being under their protection. And it happened to be the house that my sister-in-law and her husband and her mother lived, in an apartment that wasn't very far from us. But at that time, my-- my brother-in-law was already gone to a forced labor camp. He never came back. This was my brother-in-law, and he was an executive for Shell Oil Company. But he was Hungarian. And so his-- his wife-- my husband's brother-- he was much younger than she was. And-- and her mother and his mother, they lived there. So we decided that that's going to be the best place for us to move. And we moved into that house. But we couldn't-- in the meantime, our apartment was confiscated by the Germans. It was a very nice German officer who didn't mind for us to be there at all. But we could not live there anymore. My father was allowed for a while to go in during office hours and have his office there. I am not even sure where the Germans lived, but they lived in our apartment. And pretty soon then, my father couldn't go out anymore, because there were certain hours when you were-- when you were allowed to leave, to go out of the house. We had to wear a star, a yellow star designating us as-- as Jews. Everybody had to sew it on. It must have been in March when the Germans-- in '44, when the Germans moved into Hungary and took up positions.
And-- and that was a time that we realized that it's going to come pretty soon to Budapest. So we are not those privileged people who escape all that. And so we moved in with my mother-in-law. We didn't get along very well. We never did get along very well with her. And all her things were there. And we used all her thing. And we didn't have our own sheets, and our own pillow cases, and our own beddings. But we-- all of us moved, like three-- three or four of us moved into a small room, where she stayed with my-- In the meantime, my sister actually left, too. She was-- she was hiding somewhere. We didn't know where. At one point she disappeared, and my father and I took off the stars, and were looking for her all day long. That was in summer-- must have been July or August. We're looking for her all-- all day long, and then it turned out that she went with-- to yoga teacher. At that time when nobody in Budapest even knew how to spell yoga, she knew-- she exercised, and she did it. She was a very good gymnast. She-- in the school try-outs, she was always the first doing gymnastics. And at the school's festival, at the end of every year, when we of had performances, and so on, she was always the biggest drawing card for-- she was so good in gymnastics, that, actually, she was supposed to go to the Olympics. But then she couldn't, because she was Jewish. So she did not live with us. She lived off and on, I think. And that was-- that must have been in July-- must have been in August, July or August. So at one point, we decided that it's not going to take very long anymore. And the Germans, evidently, did not live in the apartment. So we decided we're going to go to our apartment and hide out there. And my father took us all. And my-- my sister came first with us. But then she decided that she would only come if her boyfriend could come, too. And my father didn't want that. So I don't think she came with us. But she came to visit. And a-- a maid what we had before-- brought every day our food. And she really liked to came, and was very friendly and so on. But then finally, it turned out that she was the one who-- who talked about us, and told people that we are there. And we had to move out. We were for two weeks-- it was two or three weeks we were hiding in the apartment. And we couldn't talk. It was very much like Anne Frank's story. We couldn't talk loudly enough. I was-- I remember the books I was reading. I was reading by [? Thomas ?] [? Martin ?]. I was reading and [?  and [?  it was a trilogy, three books. I haven't thought of that for a long time, so I actually forgot it. I was reading all day long. I was reading all the time. And we couldn't talk about the books, because we weren't supposed to talk. We were afraid that the neighbors will realize that we are there. And then at one point, we moved back into the-- our-- the apartment. That was an apartment, a Swedish house that was protected by Wallenberg's agency. And I think the reason for that was that that maid who brought us the food, she told somebody about us. And we could not stay there anymore. 
INT: And when you were hiding, you had your daughter with you. MG: No. No she wasn't born yet. I had her with me, but she wasn't born. [LAUGHS]  INT: Then she probably didn't cry much. MG: I just remember from that time that my father used to bring all the food home for me. I was the one, because I had to eat. Nobody else had to eat, but I had to eat. I had green peppers for breakfast. That was considered to be very healthy, because it has vitamin C, since that was the time when the Hungarian scientist, Dr. Szent-Gyorgyi won a Nobel Prize for finding that there were-- that there was vitamin C in the green pepper. So I was the one who ate all the good food, and everybody else did not eat so well. Excuse me. [DRINKS] It's getting to be drinkable now. [DRINKS] [INAUDIBLE] And everywhere, everything that-- Hungarian sausage is also very important in the Hungarian diet. So I was the one who got that food, always. So we had to move back. And that must have been like August, September and so on. We had to move back into the apartment, and [INAUDIBLE] where my sister-in-law and my mother-in-law lived. And my father was always taking care of me. He was cutting my toenails, and all the other thing, and worrying how I'm going to deliver the baby. He was-- he was very worried. But he had all his [INAUDIBLE] friends, and there was a very famous gynecologist obstetrician in the Jewish hospital. And he talked to him on the phone. That was the time my father couldn't go out anymore. He couldn't go out to take care of his patients, or he couldn't go out to take care of any new patients. So he didn't really use his office much anymore. So he told me that Dr. [NON-ENGLISH] I think was his name-- he's going to take care of me when I have the baby. It just so happened that the doctor was extremely heavy. I mean, just very heavy, like 400 pounds or something, 300 pounds, something like this. He told me not to get scared because he's a very good doctor in spite of the fact that he is so heavy. So we-- we are coming-- we're in the year-- to November. We were actually in November. And it was around November, the beginning of December, when the Russians-- the Russians came close, approached Budapest, and were trying to cut off the-- the routes that were going to Budapest. Everybody was scared. There was no food. It was very hard to get hold of food. [DRINKS] Everybody was-- was thinking of what's going to happen. And my sister-in-law, in the meantime, went away somewhere, to hide somewhere. And my sister was also gone. And she told us that she's hiding, and not to look for her. Actually, we were once, already, as I said that in the other tape-- we were also, we were looking-- my father and I were looking for her for a whole day. Then finally, we found her somewhere in-- in the country. That was a pretty dangerous kind of trip for us. And we were trying to find-- find her. And finally, we found her. And then she said that she's leaving. And if we won't take her boyfriend, then she's not going to stay with us, something to that effect. So there was only my-- my mother, my father, and myself who were there in the apartment. And by Christmas Eve-- Christmas Eve-- the city was surrounded by Russians. And nobody could get out or get in. And we didn't really know what was going on. Only afterwards we found out that there was this American, this girl from Israel, who was a Hungarian girl, but she lived in Israel, who was apprehended. And what was her name? Remember her name? 
INT: Hannah Senesh. MG: What?  INT: Hannah Senesh. MG: Hannah Senesh, who was actually right across from where we stayed-- we lived. We lived near the Danube, and she was on the-- on the other side of the Danube in the castle, in the-- in the jail. And she was executed. That, I just found out when I came to the United States. And so the town was surrounded. And there was nothing that we could do. We couldn't get out. We couldn't get in. We had to live just the best way we could. My sister-in-law was gone. My sister was gone. There was only my-- my mother-in-law and the three of us left. And then at Christmas Eve-- in November, actually, something happened. And that was my daughter was born. That was November the 26th. That was before the town was-- it was surrounded. It was almost surrounded, but that was before it was completely surrounded. And so my father couldn't come with us. So he called the first aid. And they picked me up and took me to the hospital. Now, that was an experience in itself, because in the hospital, when we called, they said they had no place. I can't come, because most of the places are taken by people who tried to commit suicide. [DRINKS] And actually that hospital was for women to give birth. But they said they have no place. The only way I can come-- if I-- if I bring my own bedding. And I told them I have no bedding, because I'm not living at home. And I don't have anything-- anything there. Well, they says I can't come then. But I went, anyway. And I took some sheets and pillowcases from my mother-in-law. And it turned out, when I got there, they put me and another woman in one bed. Two women and two babies in one bed. And she was born the first night. I remember the doctor was, like, 400 pounds, 300 pounds, 400 pounds. And he jumped on me and pressed out the afterbirth. This was a pretty drastic way of doing it. But that's the way he did it. And I was crying all the time when I was there. The hospital was in such bad shape. There was water in the rooms where-- where people were sleeping in the bed. There water up to the ankles because the sewers didn't work. And the babies didn't get their own place. They had to sleep in the same bed where the mothers were sleeping. And they didn't bring them any food. And if you didn't have milk, it was just tough luck. And things were just really very bad.
Once during the time I was there, my husband came in to visit me. He was dressed up like an old man. And he was-- [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] had a stick, and pretended that he was not able to walk. And he came to visit me. But it turned out that it was him after a while. And he came to visit me, and I was very happy that he came. But he said that-- he saw the baby, and he said, well, he thought it's going to be nicer-looking. But he hoped that the baby would be able to play the piano well. [DRINKS] In the meantime-- she doesn't play the piano. But that was OK, because he-- my husband loved music very much. And he played just from hearing. He loved Beethoven's Ninth Symphony. And he kind of made up his mind that maybe his daughter won't be beautiful, but she will be able to play the piano pretty well. So I stayed there, maybe, a week. But I still have some of the letters that he wrote me. And my mother sent, every day, something for me to eat. I mean, you didn't get anything to eat in the hospital. So somebody had to send you something to eat. And having your first baby under these circumstances was not exactly considered to be very ideal, but that was the only thing I could do. So I-- I took this for granted, cried most of the time, but still accepted it. And then I went home. And I can't remember anymore who picked me up and how I got home. But finally, I got home with the baby. She was all right. And then we waited for anything that's going to happen. So on Christmas Eve, it was Christmas Eve when we found out that the town, the city, is surrounded-- is surrounded by Russians. And at that time, we thought the Russians were like the angels. They came to save us. That they were our savior. Even when I was there last year, I told them. And they weren't very happy about it, [DRINKS] because the Russians were already gone last-- when they were there last year-- no. Two years ago. And the Russians were already gone. And they decided that the Russians didn't save the city, but they took the city. So they tried to [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] to make the Russians look pretty bad. But actually, they were the ones who saved us. And when I went home, it was very hard, because I didn't have any milk. I didn't think I had any milk. There was no way to get any milk. That was on Christmas Eve, Christmas Eve the 24th.
On December the 30th, in the morning, as it was our habit, we went down to the bunkers, because the-- [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] I think it was the British. We thought it was the Americans-- came and bombed the city every day. Every day we went down to the bunker. And there was no difference if you were-- most of the people were Jewish there because it was a Jewish house. But we really didn't know each other very well. So we came on down in the morning. And around 11 o'clock, they told us to come upstairs. And it turned out that there were the Hungarian Nazis there. They were ready to pick us up and take us. There was no other way. I couldn't even go up to get some diapers. My mother and I had the baby in a basket, in a bushel basket. That was like-- the bushel baskets were long, and were really baskets, not plastic. And we had her-- we had her there. And they made us stand in line. And then they took us out, and in front of the house, made us stand in front of the house. And we were walking-- we were walking down the street to the house where the Hungarian Nazis had their headquarters. They called that Freedom House, I think. And we-- and we were taken to the Freedom House, and taken to the Nazis, and were asked questions. I know that they took my watch away, my rings away. They said I don't need the rings anymore. And they had all kind of things that they were doing to people. And when-- then in the evening-- they didn't give us any food, of course-- but the evening, they said we should stand in line. They said that 80 people, 80 of the men, should go in the front. And my father was always very law-abiding, so he went in front. Well, my husband didn't go in front. He stayed with us. [DRINKS] And that was the most terrible part, this. But the Hungarian Nazis, they were uneducated, young people who didn't know what was going on. They were just left to do whatever they wanted. And they were terrorizing people. And they said we're all going to go now to the ghetto, I think they said. But they made everybody undress, just have their underwear and something. This was December the 30th, the coldest night of the year, probably. And my mother and I were allowed to keep our clothes on because we were carrying the bushel basket. One person couldn't carry the bushel basket. Two people had to carry the bushel basket. And so we were standing in line. And my-- my father was in the front. We assembled in the courtyard. And I remember my father said, poor Eva, she will come home and won't find anybody anymore. So that was his last words. And he gave me his handkerchief, that I still have, and some other things. And we said goodbye to each other. And he went in front. And then we all started the march. We went through town. From the house we lived to the house on [NON-ENGLISH] was not very far. It was during the day. But this was at night, and this was going to the Danube. And it got colder and colder if we came closer to the Danube. Then we went in front of the parliament. And there was a young man who-- who-- and his father. And they tried to escape or something. There was some kind of things going on, because one of the Nazis took his gun and shot the father and shot the son. They were trying to-- they said they were trying to escape. So actually, I saw that. And then we were standing-- they made us stand in front of the parliament. It was-- every time I see the parliament, I remember that. And they cut off the 80 men in front. And we only heard them firing their gun. And we did not, of course, believe that they shot them in the Danube. You never believe the worst things that can happen. But they did shoot them at that time, into the Danube. And some of them escaped by trying to swim. Some of them escaped by trying to appear like they were going to swim. And most of them didn't. Most of them were killed right there. And that was the last time, of course, I saw my father. And the next day-- then we stood there for a while. And then, some police came dressed in police uniform and talked to us. 
INT: This is tape number three of the interview with Marianna Glazek. You were saying it was the day after that you had been all lined up. MG: Yeah. But we already went to the Danube, and now we came back. Minus those 80 people who we later found out were shot into the Danube. And we came back. I don't know if they gave us something to eat. That was actually New Year's Eve. They were celebrating and had-- had some wine and what-- all kind of other things. And they were celebrating. And the SS had the good time. And next day we-- we woke up. My husband was with me then, but he was very-- pretty upset. He was talking with everybody. Seemed to arrange things. And the next day, they told us that they going to let us go. And I think the other tape I-- I stopped when I said that soldiers came. That the police came. We were standing next to the Danube and the police came. And I found out, two years ago I just found out when Wallenberg's partner who was with him at the-- at the Swedish Consulate told me that it was-- the police were actually from Wallenberg. Wallenberg had those police uniforms, and he dress some people up and send them to some of those Danube scenes and had them act like they would be the police. And so I found out 50 years later this is what actually Wallenberg who arranged that we-- that we were not shot into the Danube, that we went back to the house. And when-- when we got  there, we were trying to sleep sitting down or standing up. I can't even remember anymore. And next day they-- they told us that they're going to let us go. I said, where are you going to let us go? Wherever we wanted to. Then my husband who was all night talking to people, and so he told me that he's going to stay there. Because he made some good friends there, and they seem to be very nice to him. And he wants to survive the war right there. So it's going to be only a few days anyway. So he stayed there. And my mother, and my daughter, and myself, we left. We didn't know exactly where to go. We went to our old house, old apartment, but it was all burned out. The neighbors told us that some people, probably neighbors, stole all our stuff from the apartment and then set fire to the apartment. This was the only apartment that was burnt up. None of the other apartments were burned up.
And so we had to go somewhere else. We couldn't go to the Swedish house because all of the windows were broken and were destroyed. Apartment was destroyed. And I can't remember where my mother-in-law was, but my sister-in-law wasn't there. That's for sure. And so we went to the basement office Swiss house. They had Swedish house, Swiss house. They had houses from the Vatican houses. And went to a Swiss house. And we sat down there, and I remember asking somebody to-- to give-- left a spoonful of food in the plate. I asked her if she would give it to my mother, because we had nothing at this point. I didn't have any diapers. I-- I didn't have any food. I didn't have anything. So then later on, I went upstairs and there were some people who helped me break up the furniture so we could make fire in-- in the room. And-- and somebody had some cream of wheat, or grits, and that's what we cooked in water. And that's what I fed to Judy, the-- the cream of wheat. So staying there was one of the worst experiences, really, in this war. I had to worry all day long where to get some food. But it didn't-- it lasted like, maybe 10 days, or 11 days. Of course 10, 11 days really seems like a long time. If you have nothing else to do but try to get food. It was just like trying to get food for everybody. And my mother kept saying we should just kill ourselves. There's no sense for the whole thing. It didn't seem to be very much sense anyway, but I had Judy. And I thought I had to survive anyway. So pretty soon, around the 11th, I think, one day the door opened. Of course, the door opened, the window was broke anyway. And the Russians came in. And these were the first Russians who where-- who came from a certain part of Russia where people were not too civilized, say, because they came in, and just like wild animals, they started shouting and so on. And who is Jewish here? And who is not Jewish? And I can't remember this period very well. I only know that it was very disturbing. They came in and that meant that we were liberated. Because the Russians were our liberators. And people said that they were taking the women and-- and having a good time with them. And you have to be nice in order to get some food. And-- and that-- that then we could walk out on the street already, and I used to go. And we went, then, back-- yeah, we went back to the apartment where we-- that was the Swedish house.
And we stayed there in that room in spite of the fact that the windows were broken. And I-- I used to go out and look for food. All the-- all the stores in town were broken in and all the food was carried away. So it did not function as a town anymore at all. But I used to take the baby with me because I thought what if they kill me? Then she is really going to starve. Even now she was starving. So finally, we were able to find some doctor. There was some help. There were some doctors who were looking at babies. And I took Judy there, and they said she had pneumonia on both sides. And she had typhus in-- on her body. That's a [INAUDIBLE]. A kind of typhus that attacks the body, and she had also typhus in her hair. But she survived, as you can see. And then we moved to-- we moved over to the apartment that I used to live in when I was married. And we had a-- And from there, I made my trips to for food all over, and my mother kept saying there's no sense to do this. But she kept up-- she kept it up with me. So it was like in a-- in a town that is besieged. And you just break out for food and then come back. At-- at one point, I decided that we are going to make some-- some kind of cookies, the muffins. They were like muffins. We used to like that very much before the war. And you made it out of some kind of goose fat. And it was salty. And you ate it before the party. But this time we ate it as-- as food. A substitute for food. And I told my mother and she baked it. And I went out in the street and sold it. So that was one way of-- of-- of surviving. Then we found out that where the apartment was, where my father's apartment was, we actually hid-- my father and my mother hid a lot of silver, and jewelry, and also some pounds from South Africa. I had an uncle in South Africa who would send us every birthday a pound. We had that hidden there. And we found, we were-- we were told that that doesn't burn in the fire. So we should just dig on the spot where they were hidden. So we went there every day. And-- and were digging at the spot, but didn't find anything. Then a few months later, we found out that my sister took everything. And somebody took it from her.
So, we were-- We left the baby in her playpen, in the apartment where I lived, for the whole day, because there were no street cars. We had to walk pretty far. And we walked there and walked back, and she couldn't-- and we couldn't find anything. So we did that for awhile. Then we were trying to find our things. My father gave oriental rugs and everything else to people, would later denied everything they had. So-- so I think maybe we got one rug back. We had a lot of rugs. We were trying to make things work. I also helped to set up a child-- it was like a cribbery for babies, in-- in one of the big apartment houses on the top floor. And after I helped to carry all the beds and mattresses and everything there for the babies, when they started hiring people for money, they told me they can't hire me because I'm too sad. I said and what do you expect me to be? They said, well, more cheerful with babies. [DRINKS] So then I-- I got a job. I was trying to work with this leather work that I did before. It didn't turn out very good, and I was trying to get a job. And then finally, my sister came back. And she said that she was in Germany somewhere hiding out. I never found out what she was really doing there. But all the jewelry's gone. They stole it all from her. And she said we should leave Hungary and come to the American zone, because there is no future in Hungary. And we did. We got all our things together, and got some papers. The papers showed that we were Germans repatriating to Hungary-- to Germany. German, wanting to go home. Volksdeutsche. That means people, Germans who belong to the German nation and were trying to go home. And we left with my sister, my mother, and the baby. And I remember taking this suitcase, some kind of material to make sheets and pillow cases from. But the Germans took it, stole it. We went to three, then we went through the Swiss border. We went through the-- not Swiss. We to the German border, then we went-- the Germans were at camp already. We went to the Russian, to the Soviet border, to the French, and to the British border. Until finally we ended up, first in a-- in a concentration camp that was for former SS soldiers. We were there for two weeks. Then we ended up in Vienna, in a hospital that had mostly people who were escapees who lived there. And we were there for one or two days. And then we ended up in a DP camp. Where the chief welfare officer was just distributing clothes, packages. And Judy by that time was completely exhausted. I remember for a whole day we were in a cattle car, being pushed around. They thought we were Germans. And the Germans didn't acknowledge us, of course. And we were pushed around. And I took her out one day from that bag. It was one of those bags that you zip her up and just put the whole baby in there. She will was a year old already. It was in November, in '45. And she looked so limp they thought she was dead. But then she revived. [INAUDIBLE] revived here. And we were-- we went to the DP camp where my husband, my future husband, was distributing care packages. And I asked him if he wants to, if he would give me a care package. He looked and then my name was not on the list, because I was there illegally. But then he kind of caught on, and I think later he brought a care package to my apartment. And asked me if I would work for him because I was the only one who knew English. That's the end of the story. 
INT: But what had happened to your first husband? MG: My first husband, I never saw him again. After that-- after he said he was going to stay there in the house, I never saw him again. And never knew what happened to him. [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] So he just must have gotten lost. I was there for two years in the DP camp. For a year in the camp, and then in the hotel for another year.  INT: What was life like in the DP camp? MG: Well, we went every day for food. We were searching for food. We went to the-- I went to work, because I had a job and I went to work. I was trying to get some clothes so I looked a little bit more human. And I was trying to make things work. You know, we lived together with some-- Many of the people who lived there were from Russia, who did not believe that I was Jewish because I didn't talk Yiddish. And I said, well, in Hungary everybody didn't talk Yiddish. And they insisted that I didn't know, that I wasn't that Jewish because I didn't talk Yiddish. But then finally they accepted my husband. Where did I put the-- I've got this statue over there that they gave to us when we got married. And said for all the DPs in-- in upper Austria, because my husband was a welfare officer for upper Austria.  INT: What was-- MG: He was American, but he was born in Poland. 
INT: Where was this DP camp? MG: This was in Austria. In Braunau, that's the place where Hitler was born. It was near to Munich. And Hitler was born there.  INT: So you were there year, and then you were in-- MG: Yeah, I was there a year, or even maybe even more. And then I went to Salzburg and lived privately there.  INT: And where was your mother and sister? MG: They were with me. My sister, no, my sister actually left there already. In-- in one of the camps.  She said she has to go to Munich because there is a university place for her that opens for her. She has to go there. So she never came to Austria with us. She left us in Vienna. She was [INAUDIBLE] Austria, too, but she left her there. But then it turned out that she didn't have a place, and she went back to Vienna and went to medical school there.  INT: And then what happened to you? MG: After this?  INT: Yeah. MG: [SIGHS] Well, let's see, a completely different-- I lived that was in '45. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] The end of '45. Then I lived in '46 in the DP camp. And then '47. Then in '48, we got married. That's when I got married, in '48. I guess. It wasn't easy to get married because, first of all, I was a alien who was not part of the-- who was an alien, Hungarian. But I had no citizenship. I was without a citizenship. So the Americans were not very happy for me to marry, to marry him. And they-- they kept bringing up the medical reasons that they couldn't-- I had sugar in the urine. And I knew that, but that wasn't anything, but you couldn't talk to them. So finally, my husband and I exchanged the urine samples, and I turned in his, and he turned in mine. But then finally we got married. And that's where we got all those presents, and so on. And then when I, it was then I see when my husband was made to work for the military government instead of the displaced persons. The honorary United Nations Rehabilitation and Relief Organization-- Association. And that-- then he was made chief welfare-- he was chief welfare officer, then he was made for military government. He worked for the military government. And he sent me home in 1948, in May. And I arrived in the United States on-- in 1948 on-- on Memorial Day in Detroit, to his family at Polish. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] And that was one of the worst days of my life. But-- [LAUGHS] I-- I can visually-- I don't think that she remembers. But everybody was so amazed because she was so well behaved. American children were not so well behaved as she. She was very well behaved. She could eat with a fork and with knife with both hands. And she was very polite. And everybody just loved her very much-- we came on the ship. And the army transport. 
INT: So that was 48 years ago? MG: Yeah.  INT: Briefly, what's happened since? MG: Well, since then? That's quite a story after that, too. I went with-- my husband came back to the United-- to-- went back to Germany. And then in-- in Austria. He went back to Austria. And he realized that a lot of people got visas who were former Nazis. And he kind of suspected that there must be some kind of thing beside this-- behind this. And there was, because the Americans tried to get Germans who knew about Russia, about Communism, they were trying to get them to the United States. And he wrote to several agencies. He wrote to his congressman, to his senator, but to no avail. And he said if nobody's going to pay attention, I'm going to resign, and he did. And he-- he came back to the United States, and then went to Tennessee for-- to law school. It was in Tennessee before he got his bachelors degree there. So now he went to Tennessee to law school. And at that time, he already was actually sick. He had Parkinson's disease. Very young, but it seems now that he must have gotten it as a child when he was in Poland. And he took the bar examination after four years, but he didn't pass it. Then we came to Michigan. And he took the bar examination here four more times, and he never passed it. And we think that one reason was, they called him to the hearing of the un-American committee hearings and they suspected that he was a fellow traveler. This was in McCarthy times. So they suspected him of all kind of things. And he never-- he-- he-- he never passed the bar examination. And he was selling law books for awhile. And then he went back to school and he became-- he got the teachers' permit. But his-- at that time they did not know how to cure or how to get rid of the symptoms of the Parkinson's disease. And he had very bad symptoms. And then 19-- when was it-- in-- he died in '74. It was in '74, '73, he got 100% disability from the Veterans Administration. And they operated on him too. I, in the meantime, went to-- to school. I studied as a medical technologist. And worked as a medical technologist for about 20 years. More than 20 years, I think. And then I went to school again. And I got a bachelor's degree. I got a master's degree, and then I got a PhD in philosophy of education. And then I started teaching. My husband died in the meantime. That's when I got my degree. My last degree, before I went to Germany. They sent me to Germany on a scholarship. And before I went there, he died. A few days before I left, he died. 
INT: Did you have any more children after Judy? MG: Oh, after Judy I had-- I had-- I had five more. Five children more, yes. And they all have children. So I have 13 grandchildren. And I have five great-grandchildren. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] So that's what my friend always said, that's a revenge on Hitler.  INT: Have you been back to Budapest? MG: Oh yeah, I've been going, yeah. Like four times or so. And even took Judy back one year, too, with me. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] It's-- it's-- Yeah. I see my friends. But now my cousin died. The one that was just like a brother. [DRINKS] So maybe I'll go back one more time, if she wants me to go back. And that will be probably it. I don't think I want to go back again. I don't know, my voice must have-- sound pretty bad.  INT: And-- and your mother came to the United States? MG: My mother came here. Yes, she came here in-- see, I went in '48. And she came here by '50. And she came with us to Tennessee and stayed with us all the time. She went down to Florida in winter and helped people. She was very unhappy here. She couldn't-- didn't make any friends. And she didn't have any money to live on. And we didn't have very much money. So she wasn't very happy. My mother died in 19-- my husband died in '70-- in '64. 1964 she died. 
INT: How do you think the experiences during the war has shaped the rest of your life? MG: Well, it changed my whole life. I couldn't-- I couldn't be what I wanted to be. Of course, before I didn't think of it very much. But it's just, I had to adjust constantly. Adjust to the new circumstances and-- and try to make the best of it. I didn't have an easy time because my husband didn't make much money. At times he was unemployed. And he-- he worked, and then he worked just part-time jobs. But because of his disease, he could not make ends meet at all. So I had to work all the time, even at the time when it was not fashionable for women to have children and work. I still worked.  INT: Before we meet your family, let me just ask you, why did you do the interview today? MG: Why? Because I read it in the paper, I think, and I wanted my family to know. Maybe I'm going to write it. I was just thinking this morning that maybe I just buy myself a newer computer and write the story of my life down. But I thought for my family it would be nice to have some memories.  INT: Well, thank you very much. MG: Well, you're very welcome. And I hope that-- that this is going to be-- have some effect. [INAUDIBLE].  INT: Thank you.  INT: This is tape number four of the interview with Marianna Glazek. Can you tell us who this is? MG: Yeah, this is my-- my grandfather, Jacob Seeman, was his name. That's my father's father. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] These are-- this is the member of my family when my mother and-- and her sister were a young girl. This is in a vacation place in Hungary in-- in a hotel. You can see the sign of the hotel there. And my grandfather and my grandmother is on it and my great-grandmother and my great-grandfather and my-- my mother and her sister and her brother. This is also before I was born. It's my grandmother and my great-grandmother and their sister, I think. And this is either my aunt or my mother. I'm not sure. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] This is my-- my grandmother and my grandfather and then the two daughters, my-- my mother and her sister and their brother. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] This is my-- this is my sister and myself. It must be one of the summer vacation places. And my sister has a rose in front of her. [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] This is myself. I'm in Switzerland in St. Moritz, and this was just when the war actually became pretty vicious in 1938. And I'm posing with my skis. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] This is my father when he was a young man. That was before he got married. I think this is dedicated to his sister-in-law. 
INT: Full picture. MG: This is the last Passover that we spent together in Budapest. My older cousin was already in Switzerland, and we never had another Passover again together. We used to meet every year.  INT: Was this 1944? MG: No, I think it's '43. This is a picture of my first husband, the one who disappeared in the-- after the-- the Holocaust, after the-- our stay in the Nazi house. [PAUSES FOR 8 SECONDS] This is my-- my husband, [? Yuri, ?] and his friend, Pauly. It's a ice skating rink. This was an artificial ice skating rink, and we went there all winter every other day. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] This was in the displaced person camp. And that man in the uniform is my husband and the little girl in my arms is Judy, my oldest daughter. [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] This is myself and my husband. Just-- it was already during the war when they took that picture, 1943 maybe, before we got-- when we got married. [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] This is my aunt and my uncle with their two sons in Venice on a vacation.  INT: What are their names? MG: In 1936.  INT: What are their names? MG: Their name is [? Pishtar, ?] or Stephen, is the older one. And [? Leonchi, ?] or John, is the younger one. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] Amazing. This is my husband and myself after we got married in Austria.  INT: What was his name? MG: Edward M. Glazek is his name. This is my sister in her favorite pose. She was a gymnast. She was actually training for the Olympics, but then she didn't go because she was Jewish. And this is on a-- a vacation place on the lake. My mother looks like she's 16. This is my-- this is my mother and her sister, and it must have been early in the century. My mother looks like she's 16 maybe, both of them in their school girl's uniform. [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] This is my sister and myself dressed exactly alike. I was 10 years old and she was eight years old at that time. [PAUSES FOR 5 SECONDS] This is my retirement. I received the professor emeritus status that I was told that I should be very proud of. [LAUGHS] [PAUSES FOR 6 SECONDS] JULIA POLCYN: Dillon. 
INT: Marianne, would you like to introduce us? MG: Introduce my family. Yeah, well, maybe I'll start with Brian. BRIAN POLCYN: Me. MG: With my son-in-law. [LAUGHTER] And next to Brian-- next to Brian is who? BRIAN POLCYN: The-- the-- the terrible boy. MG: The terrible boy. JULIA POLCYN: Benjamin. MG: Benjamin and Julia and my daughter, Judy, and my granddaughter, Alana. Dillon, Alex, and Carmen. This just part of my family.  INT: Would anybody like to say anything? ALANA POLCYN: I would like to say that I'm very proud of my Oma, that all that's she's gone through. And I'd just like to say I love her. UNIDENTIFIED SPEAKER: I agree. [LAUGHTER] JUDITH ELLIS: And I'm-- I'm the baby in the-- that was in the story, and if it wasn't for her wanting to survive, I wouldn't be here now. [PAUSES FOR 5 SECONDS]  INT: Well, I want to thank you. Today has really been a privilege for me. It truly is Hitler's revenge, as you said. [LAUGHTER] MG: It certainly is. It really was very nice that you came and doing this. It's wonderful. Thank you. CREW: This is the-- MG: Thank you, both of you. [INAUDIBLE]. CREW: This is the conclusion of the videotape session. We used four tapes.