INT: It is November 8, 1996. The survivor's name is Betty Kale, nee Schuster. My name is Renée Firestone, R-E-N double E, F-I-R-E-S-T-O-N-E. We are in Santa Rosa, California, in the United States. And the language will be English. Just stick it out. My name is Renée Firestone. It is November 8, 1996. And I have the pleasure of interviewing Betty Kale Schuster, in Santa Rosa, California, in the United States. And we will speak English. Good morning, Mrs. Kale. We thank you for inviting us into your beautiful home. Please let's start by telling your name and spell it for us. BK: My name is Betty Kale, B-E-T-T-Y, capital K-A-L-E.  INT: Your maiden name? BK: Schuster, S-C-H-U-S-T-E-R.  INT: Can you tell us where you were born and when and how old are you today? BK: I was born in-- on February the 11th, 1921, in Sterbfritz. It's S-T-E-R-B-F-R-I-T-C, a little village in Germany, about 20 kilometers north of Frankfurt. And today I'm 75 and 1/2 years old.  INT: I would like you to remember your father and tell us how you remember him. BK: My father was a very loving person. He loved everybody, friends and foe alike. He didn't really have any enemies. He would help anybody that needed help. If he could, he would have given his shirt off his back to anybody that needed a shirt. He was a heavyset man. He always had problems with his feet. He would always say, if my feet were as good as my heart, I'd be a very healthy man. But nature fooled him. His heart wasn't so good. He died of a heart attack, just sitting at the kitchen table on a Friday afternoon in 19-- in May the 5th, 1935. 
INT: What was his name, and what was his [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] work-- labor of love? BK: His name was Abraham Schuster, A-B-R-A-H-A-M S-C-H-U-S-T-E-R. He loved animals, and he loved land. He had a few acres, and he did a little farming. He grew enough crops for us to have enough potatoes and wheat or corn for-- for flour for the year round. And he had a little business on the side. He would travel by horse and buggy to the little farm town in the-- in the area. He would also take the train occasionally. And he was-- would sell the farmers needed supplies of clothing, of furniture, whatever they needed. And all his business was done on credit. And that was the downfall for us. Because when Hitler came, an edict was issued, that anybody that owed money to the Jewish people didn't have to pay their-- their-- whatever they owed. And my father died, and my mother was left penniless.  INT: Were you close to your father? BK: I was 14-years-old when he died. And I don't really know what close in relation to means. Physically, they did not show much affection. I mean, they were not the type of people that hugged you constantly, but you knew they loved you.  INT: And what was your mother's name? And describe her a little bit. BK: My mother, Rosa Schuster. Her maiden name was Steinfeld, S-T-E-I-N-F-E-L-D. My mother was a very efficient lady. She did all the canning and the cooking and-- and what-- they were not wealthy people. They-- they worked very hard for what-- to-- to feed the family. And besides taking care of the household, she also ran a-- a small business from our house. We had a couple of rooms that were strictly for business, and she worked there, while my father went to the country to sell to the farmers. And when we had to bring in the crops in the fall, we would all go-- help work on-- in the fields. And my mother would make food. And she'd make a-- a big soup and a kugel, and we-- we'd put it on a little wagon, on a little cart. And we walked a couple of miles to the farm and feed the people that worked the farm. And she was a-- if anybody was sick in the little town, she'd cook a chicken soup. And she was always there to help people. 
INT: Did you have any brothers and sisters? BK: Yes. I had one sister, Margot, M-A-R-G-O-T. She was born on-- in October, 1922. She was a year and a half younger than I am. And I-- I still have-- and she perished. I still have a brother that lives in Las Vegas. His name is Henry Schuster.  INT: Were you a close family? BK: Very close family.  INT: Did you have any grandparents? BK: There had been-- yes. I-- I did have a grandmother left from my mother's side. The others all had died. I believe some of them were alive when I was an infant.  INT: Do you remember your grandmother? BK: Yes. My grandmother was a very old lady, considering today, when I'm almost 76, and she was a very old lady at 50. In those days, the ladies were always black crows, and-- and-- and they looked old. And they didn't dress the way we dress today. And she had asthma. She was a very sick lady. And I-- she lived in a little town called [NON-ENGLISH]. And when her daughter-in-law left for-- I don't remember where her daughter-in-law went to-- I went by taxi. This must have been in 1940. And I picked her up to come and live with us in Frankfurt. My mother was running a home for the aged at the time.  INT: How long did she stay with you? BK: She died of asthma, probably in-- around-- around 1940. 
INT: Was your family practicing Jews? BK: Oh, absolutely. We went to temple every Saturday. We even didn't walk more than, I believe it's called an [NON-ENGLISH], on-- on Shabbos. And-- and it's an imaginary line. And we would celebrate the holidays very much, always together with the families. There was always cake and coffee and-- and a-- a-- a close family relationship.  INT: Would you explain what the [NON-ENGLISH] was for? BK: Yes. In Orthodox religion, I believe you can only walk a certain amount of kilometers, and not carry anything. And this was an imaginary line drawn, where you could carry something, and you could walk so much.  INT: And how were the holiday celebrations, the Friday nights, in your house? BK: My father would go to synagogue. At-- at times, my mother would go. And there-- there was always chicken soup and-- and the usual Jewish meals.  INT: Did your mother light candles? BK: Oh, yes. Absolutely. Absolutely.  INT: Do you? BK: No.  INT: On Passover, for example, did you have-- BK: Oh, we had separate sets of dishes. In fact, certain utensils that we didn't have duplicates of, my mother would dig a hole in the ground, in the backyard, and-- and put a-- a-- rocks in there and boiling water, and put the utensils into the hole, so that they would be kosher or kashrut, whatever, and they could be used for Passover. And then after the holiday was over, the stuff was put away for next year. In fact, they were so strict with the Passover, that in 19-- probably in '37, when it was forbidden for matzah bakeries to operate, that we baked our own matzah in the little towns. We-- I remember, we-- it-- it had to be done, from start to finish, in 18 minutes. And we-- we would-- they would take a big, metal sheet and put it up on top of the stove and spread the dough there, so they could bake the matzoh. It was just a makeshift thing, but it was-- adhered to the kashrut. 
INT: In your town, were there other farmers living in the same vicinity? BK: The town was primarily a farm town. The Jews, several of them had some land. We couldn't-- you can't really consider that a-- a-- a farmer. We had maybe three, four acres. I don't know, exactly. But the whole town was a-- a poor farm town. People eked out a living.  INT: Did you live together with non-Jewish population? BK: Oh, yes, yes. Our family lived in this little town from the 17th century on. We have records where our family lived in this town. And we were friends-- and we were neighbors of-- of the non-Jewish population.  INT: Do you remember the year of 1933? BK: Oh, yes. I remember that very well. On January the 30th, in 1933, Hitler became chancellor of Germany. And very shortly after that, Brownshirts, which is actually-- it's called the SR, the Sturmabteilung, I believe it was called, they were sent into the little town to agitate the population against the Jews. And they really riled up the population to an incredible extent. And the teachers who had been friends of the Jewish families all along, became the most virulent antisemites, right from the start.  INT: How did that affect your family? BK: In-- right in early 1933, they looked for any pretense to harass us. They would throw stones into our bedrooms at night or shoot guns into the bedrooms. So I remember my mother had huge sacks of feathers that she would secure in front of our bedroom windows, and we, children and parents, were all to-- to sleep in one room, so we were kind of together. It-- and-- and if they would shoot a gun into the feathers, it would get stuck in the feathers, and it wouldn't just hit us. It-- it affected us in other ways too. This little town had a Jewish parochial school. In those days, the German government substituted the parochial schools, and the town was thus able to have a teacher for the Jewish children. And-- and we were about 30 Jewish children. There was about 100 Jewish people in this little town. So we had a one-room schoolhouse and a-- all-- all eight classes were in one classroom. And the teacher managed to teach us all eight classes at the same time. He would keep certain grades busy while he taught the other grades. And in 1935-- I'm sorry. In-- going back. In 1934, the subsidies ended, and the Jewish community could not afford to keep a teacher. So we were forced to go to the public school, which in itself would not have been a tragedy, but the teachers were so antisemitic, that life became just daily horror for us. I remember I had to go to a classroom, which wasn't the worst thing. Because my teacher was a pretty good man. [PAUSES FOR 6 SECONDS] But the teacher that taught sewing class, a lady, she was miserable. She told the girls to stick needles into my body. So I sat there in sewing class, bleeding from different parts of my body. Because the-- she just said, as we were sewing, she says, go. Go stick her. Stick her. I remember very well what my little brother-- he was about six-- five years younger than I. His teacher, a Mr. Weidling, W-E-I-D-L-I-N-G, he was incredible. He took the Jewish youngsters to the public swimming pool. And he used them as dummies. He took-- the older Gentile children were supposed to learn how to swim. So he took the Jewish youngsters and threw them into the deep end of the pool, and then the older Gentile children practiced lifesaving. So by the time they got the little Jewish boys and girls out of the water, they were half-dead. My brother was one of those youngsters. The same teacher, on another occasion, took these kids, the whole classroom, for a walk in the woods. And he hung these kids by their feet on a tree. And he told them, you're just gonna hang there until the birds eat you up. Naturally, eventually, they cut them down. But harassment, for us, in this small town, since everybody knew whoever was a Jew, it started in 1933. And it didn't end for me until the liberation in 1945. 
INT: Were these the same people who were your friends before? BK: Yes, yes, yes. The teachers used to play cards with the Jewish families on Saturday night in a little cafe. The neighbors used to come in. We had a-- what you call a Shabbos Goy-- if you want me to explain. It's a lady that would come in and-- and turn the lights on for us on-- on Shabbos. Because according to Jewish religious law, we are not supposed to light-- light the fire. These were all friends and neighbors, and they turned completely around, against us.  INT: What did you think? BK: I was 12-years-old. I-- I-- I didn't know. I guess I didn't know better. I didn't understand. As time went on, and-- and-- and we'd no more radio. We had-- that-- that's the first thing they took away from us, were the radios. We had no communication with the outside world. We didn't know what was happening. Was this going on all over the world or were we singled out? So I-- I cannot say-- say what I thought. I don't know.  INT: When-- when your teacher encouraged the children to stick pins in you, did you cry? BK: No. You-- you felt you had to be brave to-- to survive. You did not cry. You went home, and you told your mother, and your mother would soothe you and would-- and they will-- would tell you, well, this is just a temporary thing. This will all be over soon. Hitler won't last. And this whole era will-- will be gone soon. 
INT: Did you think of revenge-- to hit back, or-- BK: No. No. You-- well, you couldn't hit back. You were one against 30. How can you fight 30?  INT: Do you remember this teacher's name? BK: Her name was Schotte, S-C-H-O-T-T-E.  INT: Do you know what happened to her? BK: She was-- no, I don't really know. She was an old maid, and she was a miserable person. She lived in a house with-- she-- she had about five or six dogs in her yard. And any time you would walk by the place, they would bark and scream at you. What happened to her, I have no idea.  INT: You said that they took the radios from you. BK: Yes.  INT: Did your father read any newspapers? BK: Yes, they did. But we-- we weren't able to get any newspapers anymore either. We-- we were cut off from the world.  INT: Why couldn't you go out and buy a newspaper? BK: Well, this was a small town, and-- and there would be, perhaps, one-- one paper. It's called the [NON-ENGLISH], which was from the-- a neighboring town. And there was just a few of them brought into this little village. And I don't-- we wouldn't dare to go and buy one. They wouldn't-- wouldn't have sold it to us.  INT: What happened to your parents' farm and business? BK: Everything was left, and it was occupied by-- by Gentiles-- taken over. The house itself, it was a three-story house and a-- a-- a little store on-- in-- on the ground floor. The-- the-- we had to rent out apartments when Hitler came, which was all right. It was supposed to be a little income. And then one man, by the name of Kirst, K-I-R-S-T, he rented our little store. And he also rented an apartment. And he became so bad, that he put a sign on to his entrance door-- Juden [NON-ENGLISH], which means, Jews are not allowed to come in here. Now, every store had like a-- a closed entrance. So we-- no-- meantime, we moved up into the-- under the attic, my mother and my sister and I. My father was dead already. My father died of a heart attack in 1935, sitting in the kitchen. And he took a deep breath, and my mother said, Papa [NON-ENGLISH]. Get-- go and get the doctor. And I ran. A-- and a doctor did come. But by the time the doctor came, my father was dead. I mean, he-- he died immediately of heart attack or-- or-- or a cerebral hemorrhage. We don't know. So then this-- those rooms were rented out. And there was this sign, Juden [NON-ENGLISH]. And my mother, she was very inventive. Juden is spelled J-U-D-E-N. At night, she went and made an E out of the U. And it said Jeden [NON-ENGLISH]. That means, nobody can enter here. So when this guy, Kirst, got up in the morning, and he saw that sign, he was furious. And he came and questioned, and-- and naturally, nobody knew. We didn't know that, what happened to the sign. So they-- my brother was, at the time, nine-years-old. They-- he went to the police, this Kirst. And they went to the school, and they dragged my brother out. And they-- they said to him, you tell us who changed the sign. And my brother said, I don't know. I have no idea. So they came with the whole police of the town. They arrested him, put him-- put him in jail at age nine, and tried to get out of him who changed the sign. But he-- he wouldn't say. He didn't know. Finally, it happened so that a brother of my mother's, an uncle of mine, was visiting, and he went to the burgermeister, and he-- he just begged the burgermeister to let that kid out of jail. He would-- that he would take him out of this town. So my little brother went with my uncle, to live with my uncle. 
INT: While he was interrogated, was he physically abused in any way? BK: No. No, he was not. He was not. But he was petrified.  INT: How long was he in? BK: Just a day.  INT: What happened to you? How did you cope with these changes? BK: Meantime, I was-- this-- this was already past 1935. In 1935, I-- they didn't know what to do with me. I was a 14-year-old girl at home. What do you do with a 14-year-old girl? She has to learn something. She has to go to school. So my mother found this Jewish girls' school in the Bavarian Alps. It was called [NON-ENGLISH], in Wolfratshausen, which was way up in the Bavarian Alps. And-- and I guess some Jewish organization helped her pay for this schooling. I don't know how it was paid for. And I was able to go to this school for a year. By that time, I was now 15-years-old, and forced labor had begun.  INT: Before that, tell us about this school. Describe the school. BK: The school, we had, I don't know, 60, 70 girls. They-- the part I was in was in preparation for hakhshara, which is-- was an-- an agricultural experience-- experiment to go to Palestine, at the time. And there were two parts to the school. One part was for girls that already had come from college, and they were taught how to cook and how to keep house and how to take care of a family. And the part I was in was the part where we learned a little bit of agriculture, a little bit of cooking, in preparation to go, eventually, to Israel, or Palestine, at the time. 
INT: Yes, go on. BK: Well, it was a very good school, and I learned a lot. But when the school was finished, I had to do something. I couldn't go back home, because all my friends already were doing forced labor. Some of my friends had to go to Berlin, work at the Siemens electrical works. Others were-- my mother and sister worked on the road, helping build a road, cut-- taking rocks and-- and making smaller rocks out of big rocks. So what was I going to do? Go back home and do the same thing? So through some kind of an organization, I don't remember who-- some kind of a Jewish organization-- they found a job for me in the town of Würzburg. And I was a-- a companion to a-- a Down syndrome young girl. She was, at the time, 16-years-old. I, more or less, had to take care of her. At the same time, I had to help clean the house and do all the shopping or errands that had to be done in this house. I was a mere 15 and 1/2, and-- and my charge was 16. And I stayed there for, oh, a few months. And then somehow, I don't remember how, I-- I heard of this job in Frankfurt. And I was, meantime, 16 and 1/2, and I-- there was an opening in Frankfurt, in-- in the Israel [NON-ENGLISH] Home for the Aged. They were looking for a young girl to take care of their-- the-- the person that managed the home was looking for somebody to take care of her children. And I got that job. And I went there, and I took care of these two youngsters. The family's name was [? Lieberman. ?] And I stayed there for quite a while. In fact, in 1938, November the 9th, Kristallnacht, I was still there, working with-- with these children and with the family. And this was the night of the broken glass. 
INT: Before you tell us about the-- the Kristallnacht, have you ever gone back home to visit your parents during this time? BK: Yes. My father was dead. I went back to visit my mother. She still lived in this little town. But then she too, she and my sister had both-- were still living in this little town. My mother was able to-- to put my little brother into an orphanage in Frankfurt. And my mother and sister finally left this little town too. My mother took a job taking care of two elderly ladies in Frankfurt. And my sister worked in a dentist's home, in a town of Offenbach, near Frankfurt.  INT: What I wanted to ask you, when you went back to visit, did you meet any of your non-Jewish schoolmates? BK: Yes, I did. And they were afraid to talk to me. Because anybody that had anything to do with Jews were-- were punished. And it was a terrible feeling. And-- and I only stayed for a couple of days. And-- and my mother and sister left shortly after too.  INT: When you met face to face with these people, what did they say? How did they behave? BK: They could-- they wouldn't talk to you. I mean, I-- I was able to take the train to go back home. I was a kid myself. They-- they couldn't face you. They knew it was wrong. They knew it was a terrible thing. But they were afraid to talk to you. 
INT: So when Kristallnacht happened, where were you? BK: I was in Frankfurt, [NON-ENGLISH] 77, in the Jewish home for the Aged. My little brother was on [NON-ENGLISH] 87, just next door, in the Jewish orphanage. My mother was still in the little town that we had lived in. My sister was in Offenbach, working for another family. In the middle of the night, we hear this--  INT: You know what? Let's stop for a minute. We have to change tapes. BK: OK.  INT: And I don't want you to break the story. BK: Yes.  INT: I want you to start from the beginning. BK: OK.  INT: Tape two, with Betty Kale. You just described where the family was when Kristallnacht happened. Tell us what you saw. BK: On November the 9th, from the 9th to the 10th, naturally, nobody could really sleep, because we-- we knew all the synagogues had burned in Frankfurt. Hundreds of men had been arrested, put into a concentration camp. Lots of them had been beaten up. Lots of people had been killed. All the glass of the-- the storefronts had been broken. We knew what was going on in Frankfurt. And in the middle of the night, this banging on the door. And we go and check what's happening. As I opened the door, there was somebody else with me. My uncle, my father's brother-- his name was [? Moritz ?] Schuster-- and his wife [? Toni, ?] and my mother, were outside the door. They looked bedraggled. My uncle was bleeding profusely. He had been beaten to a pulp. We could hardly recognize him. My mother and-- and aunt were in shock. So naturally, we got them into the old age home. Not only these three people came-- a lot of refugees from the small towns came into Frankfurt. And we tried to-- in-- in a big city, you could hide somebody much more than in a little town. So we took my uncle. We hid him in a closet and put barricades in front of the closet, because we knew that they were-- they were still looking for him. He had been a fairly wealthy man, and they were looking for him to arrest him. Because most of the Jewish men-- 30,000, I think, they arrested that day. So we hid him. Luckily, nobody came to look for him. Then we were able to let him out of the closet and nurse him back. And they, eventually, found an apartment and moved to Frankfurt. My mother stayed at the home for the aged. It happened so that the people, Mr. and Mrs. [? Lieberman-- ?] they were the-- the leader for this home, the managers-- they were in the process of-- process of going to Lima, Peru. And-- and the-- the Jewish community, they needed a-- a person to run this home. And they recognized in my mother a very able person, and they hired her to be the leader for this home. And she became the manager for this home. So meantime, I was working in the home. My mother was working in the home. My brother was just next door in the orphanage. And eventually, my sister was also working in the home. So the family, more or less, got together in Frankfurt after the Kristallnacht. 
INT: Did your uncle ever tell you about the experience of being beaten? BK: Oh, yes, yes, yes.  INT: What did he say? BK: They were still living in this little town of Sterbfritz. And a-- a whole group of Nazis-- see, what they did, instead of taking the people that lived in the town that would be recognized, they brought in hoodlums from other towns, and they beat him up. Naturally, he didn't know who beat him up. And they just beat him up and then-- until they thought he was dead. And then they left. How they came to Frankfurt, I don't remember. I don't-- I just don't remember that anymore. But they-- they came to Frankfurt, and they came to our home right in the middle of the night after the Kristallnacht.  INT: You said that the temples were burning? BK: Yes.  INT: Did you see that? BK: Well, you could smell the smoke all over Frankfurt, and you could see the fires. You didn't dare to go there, but you could-- you could smell it.  INT: Did you know that these things are happening in other towns? BK: Well, in the big cities, you still had more connections with the outside world. There was still a-- a paper that would-- would be-- was smuggled in. Or somebody had a-- a clandestine radio or something. We were more informed than we were in these little towns.  INT: What happened right after Kristallnacht? BK: After Kristallnacht, it was a fight to get food to feed 100 people. The home had 100 aged-- very old people, and-- and we had about probably 12, 15 people that worked in the home. So our problem was getting food for these people. So I was delegated to go to this German office to get ration cards. And then we had-- had to try to scramble to get some potatoes and some rice or something, to just keep these people from starving. In fact, we did have some luck. We knew some Gentile people that were-- they were decent people. And we were able to barter. We would give them linens from the home. And in the still of the night, they would bring a bag of rice or a bag of potatoes, some bread, so we-- we could keep our people fed. 
INT: What was the main meal in this old age home? BK: Strictly potatoes, rice, and vegetables. There was no more meat. I mean, we-- we were not given any-- any meat rations or anything. But with the help of these people that we bartered with, we could keep the people fed. They were not hungry.  INT: What was the result? BK: The result? Deportation. One day, that the Nazis decided that they needed the home we were in, this home for the aged. And they came and told us to move the 100 people to a synagogue that still had been-- had not been destroyed. It was a very old synagogue, and there was a few rooms. So we had to pack the stuff for these old people and bring them into this synagogue building, and set up shop for them there, try to care for them, try to feed them. And-- and they took-- the Nazis took over the home for the aged.  INT: And what happened then? BK: Not much. We just-- for a few years, we just went along. This was 1938, '39, '40. We-- we struggled along. One incident I'll-- I'll never forget. I had a very bad infection in my tonsils-- very bad. And at the time, Jewish doctors were not given any more medications. They could treat you, but what could they treat you with? With their bare hands? They had nothing. They couldn't have any medications to treat us with. And I went to a doctor. I had a high temperature, and bad, infected tonsils. And one time before that, my-- it had gone into my kidneys. I had a kidney problem through-- through the tonsils. So this doctor said, your tonsils have to come out. Because if they don't come out, you're going to be very sick. He says-- he says, I'll take them out, but I don't have any anesthetic to give you. Will you be able to stand it? So I said, I guess I have to. So he came to the home for the aged, and he told me to sit on a chair and hold onto the chair, because he's gonna peel those tonsils out. And he did-- without any anesthetic, without any medication. And he did a good job, and I survived. 
INT: Thus, what were you thinking while this was going on? BK: We did not know that we were doomed. We really didn't know. We were still hoping that someday, this Nazi regime would go away again, and we could live a life again. But we had to hang on. I guess the drive to survive in every human being is so strong, that you will be able to suffer many, many insults. And-- and we had to take those insults in order to survive.  INT: So when did the situation begin to change for you? BK: I believe, in October 1941, the first transport of Jews left Frankfurt. This meant about 1,000 Jewish people were told to come to the next morning to this market hall. It was a-- a huge vegetable supply hall right near the east railroad station, [GERMAN], in Frankfurt. And they were told to bring what they could carry, not more. So 1,000 people, 1,000 Jews, were collected in this market hall. And the trains were standing outside. This was right next to the railroad depot. The trains were ready for them to be shoved into. And these were cattle cars. So my sister and I, and a lot of other young people, we were delegated to come to this market hall and help supply these people with a little coffee, a-- a-- a little aid to make this-- this night-- until they were shoved in the cattle cars-- a little easier. And this went on from October 1941 till September 1942. In September 1942, only 240 Jewish people were left in Frankfurt. And most of us were younger people, because we had been delegated to help shove the others out of Frankfurt. So, I believe it was September 21, and the next day was Simchat Torah, as far as my memory goes. We were told to meet on the 22nd of September 1942, in this market hall. And as we were loaded onto the trains, there was an overpass on the-- in the back of that hall. And German people were standing on that overpass. And throughout the years, any time we-- we talked to German people, everybody would say, [GERMAN]. We didn't know what went on. And here on this overpass was a bunch of German civilians standing, watching this macabre situation, where all these human people-- human beings are shoved onto this train. And the most horrible thing that happened on that day-- on a stretcher, brought by a couple of youngsters, was a woman. She had big red welts around her neck. She had hung herself. She didn't want to be deported, so she hung herself. But her heart was still beating when the Nazis came into her apartment. So they cut her down, and they put her on a stretcher. And they called in a couple of Jewish boys. And they brought her to the railroad depot, and they loaded her onto our train. She eventually died on the train. Like I said before, this was a passenger train, and we had seats. So we were crowded into this little compartment, my mother, my sister, I, and quite a few other people. And among us was a young woman. She had just had a baby. The baby might have been two-months-old. I don't know. And as we were sitting in this train, eventually, the train moved. But the train moved very slowly, because we were all the way shoved onto the sidings, so the troop trains could go by. So it took a long, long time we were on this train. There was no food. There was hardly any water-- maybe a little water. I think once we stopped, and we got a little water. This mother dried up. She couldn't feed her baby. And this baby, sitting on her-- laying in her mother's-- in her mother's lap whimpering, whimpering, until the baby couldn't whimper anymore. He just died in his mother's arms. And we sat there. We could not help. We had no way of helping her. 
INT: How were you advised that you are going to leave? BK: Well, we knew that we were going to leave, because we had helped, I believe, 25,000 people out of Frankfurt. We had helped them to be deported. We were forced to help them-- help them. We-- we were in the market hall, and give them a little coffee or whatever. And we knew our time would come. And then they came. They-- they-- I believe the SS came-- sent-- either they came themselves, or they sent one of their adjutants, and told us be ready, to come to this and this place with whatever you can carry.  INT: Did they tell you your destination? BK: Oh, no. We had no idea where we-- we were-- where we were going to go to.  INT: Where do you think you were going? BK: We went to Berlin. We were only 240 out of Frankfurt. We went to Berlin, and we stayed overnight on a railroad siding in Berlin. The next day, they brought 1,000 Jewish Berliners, and shoved him onto the train. Because after all, it was-- 240 people wasn't enough to exterminate at one time. It had to pay for itself to-- so-- but by now, we were over 1,200. Eventually, the train left Berlin. And I believe we were heading towards Riga. And the SS went to confer with the-- I guess the commandant of the Riga concentration camp. And they were told there was no room. And we kept going, and we went back onto the train for days-- days on end. And we finally wound up in a place called [NON-ENGLISH]. That was the railroad station. There we were unloaded. It was somewhere in Estonia. And that was in early October of 1942. 
INT: Did you know that you were in Estonia? BK: Well, number one, they-- they had told us never to look out of the window, although we had a passenger train. But I guess somebody snuck a-- and saw that a-- a sign said this is [NON-ENGLISH]. And yes, we knew that we were in Estonia. And the train stopped, and the doors were opened. And the young men were the first ones to call out. They were asked to take all the baggage and put it onto trucks. And then the women and children left the train. So we were standing all at this railroad siding, somewhere in the middle of the woods. There wasn't a soul anywhere. And the SS came by. And they told my mother and sister, you go over there. And I said, I'm going with my mother and sister. Can you cook? I was asked. I said, yes, I can cook. OK, you stay on this side. You'll-- your mother and sister will go by bus, and you'll-- you'll come with a truck later on. You'll meet them up in a-- in a camp. So they eventually were shoved into buses. They were new buses. And we were still ignorant. We still didn't know what was happening. And one of the girls-- she just passed away last year, 1975-- she found a suitcase that belonged to one of these women that was shoved onto one of the buses. And she says, oh, this-- this lady needs her stuff. She has a child with her. So she went over to a bus, and she brought in that suitcase. And a SS man came to her and he says, what are you doing here? She says, I have to give the-- the suitcase to Mrs. Goldman, or whatever her name was. So he says, no, you stay here, too. And she says, no, I have to go back out there. My mother is out there. So he says, get out of here. And she looked around, and she sees there are no windows in these buses. So when we heard that, we had an inkling of something wasn't right. But we did not know. We finally were-- 100 of us were left over out of the 1,200 some odd people-- 100 young women and 70 young men. And there was quite a few trucks where all the luggage was loaded onto-- onto these trucks. And then we were commandeered to sit on top of the luggage. So they-- finally these trucks went into the woods. And we drove and drove. And we finally came to a place called Jagala. That was somewhere deep in the woods in Estonia-- 100 girls. And 70 men went to-- into a separate area. We never saw them again. But as we came into this camp, they opened this barrack for us. Meantime, it was October. And it was a big wooden barrack. There was no glass-- glass in the windows-- just holes. And we were shoved into the barracks. And there were three tiers, three wooden tiers across the whole barracks. Those were to be our beds. And the luggage came and was unloaded, and was brought into a-- a-- a big wooden barrack. And one of our girls had the nerve to ask one of the guards, the luggage is here. Where are our people? He says-- he answered her, don't worry about it. They'll-- they'll never come. They're gone. So we still hoped. We didn't know. Were they dead? Were they alive? We had no idea. But nobody ever heard from those, about 1,100 people anymore. 
INT: Did you go into a camp? BK: This was our camp. Our-- the reason we were brought there-- when we get-- got into this camp, there were already 100 girls from Czechoslovakia into another barrack. So that meant there was over 2,000 people that were involved in this whole maneuver. So 2,000 people are missing, and the luggage of the 2,000 people is in one barrack. So we could figure out pretty easily. Their luggage is here. Where are the people? Now the SS put us to work. Our job was to sort the luggage into shoes and clothes and-- and whatever there was, to be bundled and shipped back to be used in Germany. So our people's luggage was sent back to Germany. We never heard from our people again. The only thing that came out of working in the shed, to sort the clothes, we were able to take some extra clothes for ourselves. Because by now it was winter. And in Estonia, it got dark 2:00 or 3:00 in the afternoon. It was practically a 24-hour nighttime. So we were able to take some extra clothes and bundle ourselves up in-- in these barracks, where there was no heat. There was no windows. If we wanted to wash ourselves, we had to go out and get snow and try to melt the snow to wash ourselves. So we-- we stayed there roughly three months. I don't know. Time is something that's very vague with me. I think we stayed roughly three months. During the time we were there, there were quite a few selections made. The SS looked at us, and they figured, well, we can get some work out of certain people. And there are certain people amongst us they can't get any work out of. So they might as well do away with them. So the selections were made, and people were put somewhere to be killed. 
INT: Describe one of these selections. BK: Well, I can describe one very well. I was quite heavy. It was quite early after we had left home, and the-- our menstrual periods stopped immediately from the shock and from the lack of food or whatever, and from saltpeter or something they put into our food. And-- and instead of losing weight, I was gaining weight. And one day, I wasn't feeling too well, and I was laying on a bunk. I couldn't go to work. And I was laying on a bunk. And the SS came in and selected people to be exterminated. So one SS man says to the other, [GERMAN]? Where's the fat one? And the other SS man said to him, oh, [GERMAN]. Leave her alone. We can get some work out of her. So that told me point blank. If you can't work, you'll get killed. And I remember very well-- this was a little-- a little later. This-- we were in another camp by now. A truck came back. And on the back of this truck was written in blood, when you go onto this truck-- truck-- you will be shot. In other words, one of our girls that was put onto this truck, she took her own blood and wrote on this truck what our fate would be.  INT: What was this truck? BK: Just an-- a-- a-- a-- a big-- a truck where they could stand up people, and to transport them-- just an ordinary big truck. 
INT: Where-- do you know where they transported her? BK: We don't know. I-- we don't know if they had to dig their own graves, and shot them into their own graves. That's what we assumed. Because how-- how did they get bloody and be able to ride on a truck? So we assumed they were brought somewhere into the woods and were shot into their own graves.  INT: What about those buses that your mother went on? Did you ever see any of those buses again? BK: No. No. No. No. No. Never.  INT: Did you hear about them afterwards? BK: No, except that the guards said, don't worry, nobody will come back. And we-- we realized when there was no windows in these buses, that the exhaust pipes had to go inside these buses and-- and asphyxiated these people. That's the only thing we could figure out.  INT: How long did you stay in Jagala? BK: I don't think it was quite three months. And it must have been around December or January. I'm not sure. We had arrived there in early October. We sorted all the clothes. When we were done with the clothes, they had no more work for us. They put us into trucks again, and they brought us back to the town of Tallinn. At the time it was called Reval, I believe. And we arrived there. It was pitch dark, because it was-- was dark most of the time. And they brought us into this huge, huge, big old stone building, and they marched us through hallways and hallways. And finally, we came to a block where there was nothing but cells. We couldn't even see the cells, but we heard. We heard the doors open. A metal door opened up, and 10 of us were shoved into a cell, and the door was closed. And then we kept on going to the next cell-- so-- until they all put us into the cells. And that was really a-- a hotel for us, because it was warm. We weren't freezing anymore at night. We had heat. We were a few days in this-- in this beautiful hotel. And then we were told to get rid of our Magen Davids, our star of Davids that we had been wearing. Why? They marched us out in the morning through the town of Reval. They didn't want the population to know that we were Jews. Now we come to this huge harbor, the harbor of Reval. It was all bombed out. The Russians had bombed it, I guess, before the Germans took it over. And the Germans wanted to rebuild it. But they didn't want to rebuild it, in the eyes of the population, with Jews. So we were prisoners. So they marched us to this big harbor, and we were handed overalls. And we had some clothes. It wasn't sufficient, because the temperature by now was way below zero. We had no gloves. And it just was bitter cold. We were just freezing. So we were told to go into these buildings, and emptying them of the rubble. The rubble were fallen bricks. These buildings were all brick buildings, and the rubble was all inside these buildings. So we were giving wheelbarrows, or we had to carry it by hand. We were-- we-- we were to clean out these buildings. So we cleaned out these buildings. Many, many months we worked there, and we cleaned out these buildings. One thing I must say. Some credit has to be given to some Estonian people. Without them, surviving in Estonia, in this bitter cold winter, with so little food, would have been for us, practically impossible. 
INT: Why don't we stop here and change tapes? I want to hear this story.  INT: This is tape three with Betty Kale. I wanted to ask you, Betty, when you were in Tallinn, when they took you back to Tallinn from Jagala, did you think that you're going to find your mother and sister there? BK: A human being has one thing going to survive, and that is hope. And we always hoped. With all the bad things we had heard and seen, we always hoped we would find them. But we did not.  INT: So go on. BK: Actually, we did not go back to Tallinn. We had never been in Tallinn. We were-- we had arrived in a place called [? Raasiku. ?] From [? Raasiku, ?] we went to Jagala. From Jagala, we went to Tallinn. In Tallinn, we worked for the Firma Holzmann This was a big German building firm that were rebuilding the harbor in Tallinn. So we cleaned out the rubble from the old broken down buildings. But when the springtime came, and the ice and snow was melting, we could do something else. These buildings could be rebuilt. So they taught us to be bricklayers. Meantime, we were-- we were taught how to mix the mortar for these bricks. And the roughest work was to carry 100-pound bags of lime. And lime is a very toxic substance, and those bags of lime were torn. And we carried those bags of lime. And you can imagine, when that lime hit our skin, what that did to our skin. We were-- we were always full of sores. Finally, they taught us how to mix the cement. And they taught us how to lay bricks. And we actually worked on rebuilding those buildings. 
INT: Were you all women, or will there any men? BK: We were only women. Once, from a-- very far away, we saw some men, and they did not fare as well as we did. You see, [SIGHS] I guess we had a German Vorarbeiter, and another foreman, a German man that was watching that we did the right work. And he felt some kind of-- he had feeling for us. And he did not overwork us, and he tried to have us get a little extra rations here and there. But what also helped us, these Estonian men-- all around us, there was this harbor, and there were metal factories. I don't know what they were producing. And there were these Estonian men that were in these dark brown overalls, and they had these fur caps on. And they saw us girls. And we were still-- it was only three, four months after we had left home. We were still pretty good-looking girls. And they felt sorry for us. They, they gestured to us, and they pointed with their eyes to certain places. And eventually, lots of us found a few slices of bread, in certain places, that these men that lived on rations themselves gave up part of their food to help us survive.  INT: This foreman that you said was sort of reasonable? BK: He-- his name was, I believe, Holzmann. He was incredible.  INT: Was he an SS? BK: No, no, no, no. He was a builder. He was strictly a builder. And he was an unbelievable man. I will tell you a story that sounds as if it was taken out of a Grimm's fairy tales, I believe. One day, they didn't let us out of the jail. We didn't know why they didn't let us out of the jail. For some reason, we were stuck in the jail. And that was up, two, three stories up in the jail. And we had just these little windows to look out of. And this man, this German foreman, he, he knew we couldn't come out. He knew we couldn't get extra food. And he gestured to us to tie our clothes together, make a long string of clothes, and he persuaded the Estonian guard to come under this little cell window. And he gestured to us to let the clothes down. And he sent food up to us through that little cell window. And he-- and naturally, we divided the food amongst us. It helped. We did find some human beings amongst all this horror. And, perhaps, another story that, that sounds ridiculous, but it is true. One morning, as we were marching through this town of Tallinn-- and [SIGHS] we kind of a mental calendar of what time of year it was. Could it be Passover? Could it be [? Shavuot ?] or could it-- what could it be? We kept a calendar amongst ourselves. We were marching through this town. And we were in, in a-- probably three or four-- no, I think six, seven in a column. And it was a-- in, in a row and a long column. And guards, with a-- with their bayonets and machine guns on each side of us. And all of a sudden, we hear this little commotion we couldn't figure out. And we just kept on marching until we came to our place of work in the harbor. And there, we were able to talk to each other during working periods, during the slack periods. We found out some person had slipped a package of matzah into our column to show us that there are some Jews around somewhere. This was the most incredible thing that happened. 
INT: Can you sort of draw us a visual picture of what happened when that package was opened? BK: We couldn't talk too loud about this. We had to be very, very quiet. The foreman, he was-- he was with us all the way. But the guards were Nazi guards. If there weren't Nazi guards, they were Estonians. And the Estonians had to do what the Germans told them to do. They were all afraid. So we-- and [SIGHS] we had to be very quiet. When we opened this package and we saw this matzah, we were stunned. It wasn't something that we could survive on, but it showed us there is somebody in this world that knows we are Jews and that knows what's happening to us.  INT: Did you ever investigate afterwards? BK: No, it was many, many years after this, before we were liberated. And when we were liberated, I guess we kind of wanted to put that chapter in our life behind us for a while and didn't really want to look back. We had to look forward to making a living for ourselves, because, here, we were young people, and there was nobody to, to help us. We had to fight for our own lives.  INT: So go back to Estonia. BK: We stayed in Tallinn for a few months and may-- nope, probably pretty close to a year. Yes, we had come there in late winter or early winter. And then during the summertime, when it was harvest in Estonia-- during the summertime, it's almost 24 hours daylight. And the crops grow pretty fast, so they had to be harvested pretty soon. So one day, about 60 of us were put onto a train. And we were brought into the country. Where, where, I don't know. And we were unloaded somewhere. We marched to a big farm. And we were told to-- we were shown to go to the field and harvest the turnips, the carrots, whatever had to be harvested. All of a sudden, we ate so much raw food [LAUGHS] that our stomach-- our stomachs weren't used to all that food anymore. So while we were working on this farm, we had plenty to eat. And we were-- we felt very bad when we had to leave this farm. But after about three weeks, we went back to Tallinn. And then the whole thing was over in Tallinn. They shoved us onto a train, and they brought us to a place called Ereda, somewhere deep in Estonia. And we got off the, the train. And we realized the working place was in a place called Kohtla, also in Estonia, eight kilometers from-- away from Ereda. So Ereda was our hotel. That's where we slept. And in the morning, we had to walk through the snow. This was going towards the fall again, fall and winter, eight kilometers to our working place, which was in Kohtla. What was our work? We had to unload and cut down trees. The trees were ice from, from the winter, from the cold. We had to cut-- cut them, stack them, load them, unload them, clear the snow off the road. They, they wanted to build a better access road. For what? We don't know. They wanted to make another camp. They wanted to make another extermination camp. We don't know. So they-- we spent many months up there. And one thing I will never, ever forget. We were sleeping in Ereda, and one day-- I don't know if it was day or night, because it was always dark. It was in the wintertime. It was bitter cold. And they called us out of the barracks. And they said, you're going to get a bath now. And we walked, and we walked. And it was through deep snow, and our clothes was very poor, and our shoes were terrible. And we finally came to this other camp called Kohtla. and there, they shoved us into a big building. It was supposed to be the bath. It was a bath. There were some showers there. But as we got into the building, then they told us to strip, put our clothes down. The SS, they stripped themselves, too. They wore just rubber boots, and they shoved us into this big room, where there were showers coming down from the ceiling. And there were Jewish men. They had brought the men from another camp. So the SS were going to have themselves a little show. The men were not in as good a shape as we were. They had been suffering from, I guess, diarrhea, whatever you call it. There was feces all over the ground-- floor on this barrack. We were slithering and sliding around in this mess. Finally, we were able to get a little water on us, and then walk back, through the snow, to our hotel in Ereda. That was the bath we got. 
INT: The SS were also naked? BK: Yes. Yes, because, after all, they couldn't have worn clothes. They had a shower to go in afterwards. And they wore huge rubber boots. They wouldn't get dirty. They could clean themselves afterwards.  INT: So this was for what purpose? BK: Was there any rhyme or reason to their actions? There was never any rhyme or reason. Yes, then I must tell you this. Some of our girls, when they had come from home, had been pregnant. And they were about time to give birth. I mean, we were already a few months away from home, maybe, maybe eight, nine months. I don't remember. In one of the camps-- I don't remember in which one-- three of our nurses-- I remember their names. It was [? Lauri ?] and [? Irene, ?] and [? Paula. ?] They were work-- they were working in the so-called infirmary. And one day, they came back from the infirmary, and they told us that a woman had given birth to a baby. And they assist-- had to assist her and take the baby and dump the baby, head first, into a bucket of water. And the SS man told them, this will stop us from having another generation of Jews. [PAUSES FOR 6 SECONDS] Some other friends we were with were sent to some kind of a, a Quonset hut, one morning, to help clean out the Quonset hut. In this Quonset hut, according-- I did not see this. This is only what our friends told us. There were little children. They were frozen to the metal walls in this Quonset hut. They were dead. 
INT: Did you believe these stories? BK: Certainly. Certainly. That they put the baby into the bucket of water? Certainly. These women were pregnant one day. We knew these women. The next day, they weren't pregnant anymore. We never saw a baby, so something had to happen to that baby. I mean these-- we were 100 women. And we knew each other. And, you know, yes, they had stomachs. They were pregnant. But there was never a baby to be seen.  INT: Did the mothers say anything? BK: The mothers were probably as shocked as we were. What could they do? What could, could they do? You're like a lion in a cage. You're trapped. They throw you some food once in a while, but you can't get out of the cage. [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] You know, maybe I should backtrack to Germany. This might, might be very interesting to know. This goes back to 1942. Many of our friends had emigrated from Germany. They went to America. They went to South Africa, the Dominican Republic, to Cuba. And often, I was asked, why didn't you leave Germany? Well, it was very simple. These people that went to South Africa or wherever they went, they had money to buy their way out, to buy a ticket to leave Germany. We wanted to go to the United States of America. But in order to get to the United States of America, you had to have a number. Because, in this respect, we were treated as Germans. We were under the German quota system. There was an, an immigration quota system for the Germans. So we, we had got numbers to be able to emigrate from Germany. We also needed an affidavit of support, from the United States, in order to come to America. So we did have some relatives in, in Shreveport, Louisiana, distant relatives that had come here over 100 years ago. And they sent affidavits of support. And my mother figured, let me go first, I, as the oldest one. And once I get to America, I can help her and my sister to get out of Germany. So I got the papers to go to America. I got an affidavit of support. I had a number. I was called to the American consulate in Stuttgart, Germany. I talked to the consul. I was physically examined. I was so-- I was seen fit to be admitted to the United States. And I was told, go back home to Frankfurt. Your visa will be issued shortly. I'm still waiting for that visa. That visa never came, because the State Department changed their minds, and they didn't issue any more visas to the Jews. So instead of going to America, in those days, we wound up in the concentration camp. I survived. My mother and sister got killed. My little brother came to the United States. Now that's a different story altogether, and I'll tell you later. 
INT: Let's go back to Estonia. BK: To-- yes.  INT: To Estonia. Continue your story there. BK: Well, this was getting probably closer to 1943 by now. And the Russians-- it must have been 1943. The Russians were fighting the Germans and were pushing the Germans back. And the Germans didn't want to leave too much evidence that there-- that they killed people or whatever they did with us. So they decided that we were still able to work. They're going to bring us back into Germany to do some more slave labor. So one day, I-- and the days are hazy in my mind. One day, they took us from Kohtla or Ereda on the train, and they brought us to Tallinn. And there was supposed to be a boat for us, to go across the Baltic, to go back to Germany. But the boat was needed for some other reason, and we didn't get the boat. Meantime, we were in Tallinn, and they didn't know what to do with us. They couldn't just shoot us right there, because the Estonians would have known what went on. So they brought us to a huge meadow, an open meadow, and we stayed on this meadow for about three weeks. All we had was the clothes that we wore. There were no blankets. There was no bedding. There was no nothing. There was a bowl of soup a day, and we stayed on that meadow waiting for a boat. And finally, a boat did come available. And we were shoved onto this boat, standing room only, no toilet facilities, no food, no water. The boat started out from Tallinn, went towards Danzig, Germany. We were three days on that boat. The sanitary conditions were incredible, because we had no facilities. There was no water. We had a-- we had gotten a, a few slices of bread before we left. And we made it last for the three days. And we finally arrived somewhere near Danzig. And there's the River [? Vistula. ?] And there, they shoved us onto another boat, and they brought us to the concentration camp of Stutthof. In Stutthof, we had to stand on the parade grounds. I remember the German word, appell. You know the English word? It doesn't come to my mind right now. We had to stand for eight, nine hours on this parade ground, standing perfectly still. And anybody that moved or stepped out of the line, an SS woman-- now we were under the care of SS women. And these women were as vicious if not more vicious than the men. So they were handing out all kinds of goodies by hitting us, kicking us. We had to stay in line and, and stand on parade. And until finally, they let us sit down, and this was not far from the border. It was only sand. And we were sitting in the sand. There was nothing to do. Once a day, they gave us some kind of a dirty bowl with soup, three people to one bowl of soup, without utensils. We had to eat them with our hands, whatever we could eat. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] And in the morning, we were awakened with buckets of cold water. In other words, we were sleep-- we were sleeping in these barracks now. Sleeping? And the SS ladies decided to wake us, would be very-- a very nice way to wake us was with buckets of cold water. And that's how they woke us in the morning. And what did we do? Stand back on the parade ground, hours and hours. 
INT: How many of you slept on a bunk, and how big was the bunk? BK: We had no bunks. We had no-- this was one big barrack with a floor of sand. There was no bunks.  INT: Let me ask you just for a minute, in Estonia, in the camps, did you have bunks there? BK: Yeah, three-tier bunks. There was no separation on the tiers. There was just one-- one flat tier across the whole barrack.  INT: And how many slept on these bunks? BK: We were 100 girls in one barrack, and we slept, our head-- one girl's head to one side, and, and the, the, the foot in her face. We were like sardines packed into a can.  INT: And in Stutthof? BK: Beg your pardon?  INT: And in Stutthof? BK: In Stutthof, we were just sleeping on the ground, in a barrack, in the sand.  INT: How many? BK: Hundreds and hundreds and Gypsies and Jews and God knows. This was a, a combination of everything.  INT: Did this exercise have a name, when you were standing up? BK: They called just appell, yeah.  INT: Did you have appells in Estonia? BK: Yes, at one time, I was-- well, I guess I was working in the kitchen. And I asked for more raw material to help cook the meals. And I was pushed onto this-- that, that parade ground, and I had to stand there for eight hours, because, because I had the nerve to ask for more food. And other girls, yes, they had to stand for hours and hours on these grounds. 
INT: So let's go on, and what happened in Stutthof? BK: We heard that 500 women were needed in Hamburg. You always heard something through the grapevine. How we did, I don't know. And naturally, everybody wanted to get out of there, because this was a death trap. And we knew if we'd stay there any length of time, we would be dead. So when we were on the parade ground, everybody raised their arm, wanted to go. And luckily, quite a-- I think we were close to 70 or 80 of us were chosen, and they were mostly of the girls that had come in late-- the latest, because we were still the, the most physically fit. And they selected us, and they gave us a code. And they cleaned us up. They gave us a shower. And they put us on a train, and they-- we were for a few days on the train. I don't remember that we got any food or whether we got any food or not. I don't remember that. But we wound up in a place called Neuengamme.  INT: Were Gypsies also along with you on this-- BK: No, no. These were just the Jewish girls. We were from the, the Czechoslovakian Jewish girls and the German Jewish girls, we, we wound up in Neuengamme.  INT: When you came to Stutthof, and you saw Gypsies-- BK: Yes.  INT: --were you surprised? What did you think? BK: No, we had heard already. We had-- to begin with, we had known already of the extermination of the retarded and the crippled, right, in the beginning of, of the Third Reich. We also knew that the Hitler regime didn't like Gypsies. We were not surprised, no. Nothing surprised us. 
INT: OK, go on. BK: Well, we finally wound up in Neuengamme. And in Neuengamme, I was fortunate enough to really work in the kitchen. And working in the kitchen meant you could do something for your friends with whatever materials. We did get some horse meat, and we did get some vegetables and potatoes. And whatever we-- we, we made some kind of a stew. And we tried to have it divided amongst our people evenly that everybody got something to eat. And again, we stood on the parade grounds. The girls worked in three shifts. They went-- they left for the factory, 6 o'clock in the evening, and they came back 6 o'clock the next morning. Other girls worked from 6:00 in the morning to, to 6:00 at night in, in different shifts.  INT: What factories did they work in? BK: Hanseatische Kettenwerke in-- I don't remember if-- I believe it was [GERMAN]. It was a German firm. They called themselves Kettenwerke, but what they really made, as far as we could figure out, was bullets. And there were not only Jewish girls working there. There were all kinds of prisoners working there, naturally. We were not-- I occasionally worked in that factory, too, but we were not allowed to have any communications with any other prisoners. If you tried to talk to somebody, [SIGHS] you got 25 lashes.  INT: Who were these other prisoners? BK: They were Belgian prisoners. They were Polish prisoners. They were prisoners from all over. 
INT: Jews? BK: No, not necessarily, not in the factory, because they were desperate to have ammunition being produced. This was already 1942-- '44, because they needed ammunition, and they didn't care who worked in those factories anymore.  INT: We will have to change tapes again. BK: OK.  INT: Tape four, and we're speaking to Betty Kale. In Neuengamme, do you know how many Jewish prisoners were there? BK: No. We were in a barrack, or I don't even remember the housing. We had smaller rooms. I don't remember the housing exactly, and I don't-- I don't have any idea how many Jewish prisoners.  INT: In the factory they were working at-- BK: Yeah.  INT: --were those guards SS, or were there civilian guards? BK: Civilians, civilians. But there was naturally always an SS man there. They wouldn't dare to let just the civilians watch.  INT: How did these civilian guards treat the workers? BK: They were-- they felt very sorry for the workers, but they couldn't do anything. They couldn't help. I guess some girls did find some ways to make a little contact, but most of them couldn't help us at all. They couldn't, because they were under a death sentence.  INT: The non-Jewish prisoners who worked there, were they living in camps? BK: I have no idea. I have no idea, because there was no contact. I remember my friend Ilse in New York once was given-- and this was not a non-Jew-- this was-- she was given a letter from a brother of a girl that was in our camp. In other words, the men worked in the same factory, and he found out through our girls that his sister was in our camp. So he gave Ilse a letter to take to his sister. And they got-- Ilse got caught. And the commandant from the-- from the camp told her that she's going to get 25 lashes. But then he changed his mind, and he says, no, three days, no food. So luckily, she had friends in the kitchen. So the three days, she survived. But you had to be extremely careful to have contact with anybody. 
INT: Did you see anyone receiving 25 lashes? BK: I know somebody who got them, but they never-- they didn't do it in front of us. They took her aside and did it. Yes. I know her name. Her name was [? Anka ?] [? Kraus. ?]  INT: Why did she receive the lashes? BK: I don't remember what she did. She-- probably contact with somebody, and she got 25 lashes. She was from Prague.  INT: How long were you in Neuengamme? BK: Until about a month before liberation, and that would have been about early March of 1945, from late '44 until early March, 1945.  INT: And what happened? How did you-- BK: Well, to our great pleasure, we heard the air raid sirens go off all the time when we were in Neuengamme. And we knew that Hamburg was burning, because there was always somebody that let a, a word drop, a guard, you know, let a word drop how terrible and terrible what these Americans are doing. And any time the air raids went on, the guards and the Nazis ran like crazy to the shelters. And we were left alone. And we were looking into the sky, and with great glee and pleasure, we saw the bombers hitting Hamburg. And we knew this had to be the, the end of our-- of our problems. But it wasn't the end of our problems. The Germans wouldn't just let us be there. They decided to torture us a little more. They put us on a train again. This time the train stopped outside of Bergen-Belsen. And we were unloaded, and we were to march to the camp. It was a long walk, a very long walk, and a very bitter walk, because along the side of the road, many, many dead Jewish people. Whoever couldn't walk anymore was just shot and left along side of the road. We finally came into Bergen-Belsen. 
INT: How long was the journey? BK: Beg your pardon?  INT: How long was the journey? How long did it last? BK: I-- the trip, I don't remember. Not too much, because probably a couple of days, three days. I don't remember exactly. We came in to Bergen-Belsen, and that was the horror of all horrors. Wherever you stepped, you had to watch not to, to step onto a body, a body dead or alive. You didn't know. And here, again, we were still a little stronger, because we just had come from a labor camp, that that was our fortune amongst the misfortunes that we were used as laborers. So in order to keep us alive, they had to-- they had to feed us a little better. So we came to Bergen-Belsen, and there were dead, dead and alive bodies wherever you walked. So we had to clear the walkways. So an SS girl-- these were, again, women-- came, and they selected certain girls, I amongst them. And we had to take a person that was laying on the floor, dead or alive, four of us, one each an arm, one each a leg, and drag them to the pile of the dead. This was a wall probably eight foot high of nothing but dead people. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] And at times, we dragged the person-- we had no strength either. We dragged the person, and the person was not quite dead and would drag on the floor a little bit. And you'd hear this person moan, and you know this is somebody alive. And there is this-- an SS lady with a gun standing right next to you, and you have to stack up this person on that pile. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] And that was our job. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] And there was no water to drink. There was a manmade lake or whatever, a pond right across from our barracks. And there were dead bodies floating in the pond, and the only water was the water from the pond. And we knew this was a death sentence if we drank the water. So we did get some raw turnips for food, which was a little bit of moisture in it, and we tried to avoid the water as much as we could. And we struggled along Bergen-Belsen. We cleaned the roads of the dead people. We came to the pile of the dead, and we looked at the faces, trying to see if there's somebody we had known once, if there is a mother or a sister or a friend or somebody we knew amongst this [? tile ?] of human debris. But I must say, luckily, I didn't see anybody that I knew or I had known. 
INT: Did anybody? BK: Nobody, nobody. Nobody saw anybody. Little children were walking around this head-- this camp with these big belly-- bloated bellies. These children had come very recently, I believe, from Hungary with the bloated bellies and the big heads, starving. We couldn't help them.  INT: Jewish children? Jewish children? BK: Oh, sure. Jewish children. Jewish children. I think there was only Jews in Bergen-Belsen. I don't-- I haven't-- I hadn't seen anybody that hadn't been Jewish, although a dead person, whether Jewish or Gentile, all look alike. Now, this Bergen-Belsen was a horror in itself. We all got sick with typhus, so when you have typhus, you run. You run to the latrine. And what was the latrine? It was a hole with a board across, a big, long hole, 12, 15 feet long. And if you were unable to stand straight on that board, you fell into the hole. So by the time we, we got-- we all had typhus. So we tried to help each other to, to stand on that board to relieve ourselves. And that's what you had to do 24 hours a day, because that's, that's the illness. It takes everything out of you. Well, that went on, I guess, for about three weeks. And on April the 15th, [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] we heard tremendous commotion, tremendous gunfire in the camp. And then we heard through a bullhorn, [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] a soldier announce, [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] the Allied have just liberated you. Please stay where you are. Do not move, because it is very dangerous right now. We will take care of you, but stay where you are. 
INT: What year was this? BK: April the 15th, 1945. We stayed. The Germans ran. The Germans fled en masse. And one Nazi stood on that truck where the announcement came from. He was still wearing his Nazi uniform. And one of our prisoners, prisoner women, went over to slap him in the face. And then we really knew there was more to it. There, there were friends here now so that all the Nazi guards-- most of them fled. Some of them were taken prisoners. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] But Hungarian guards were taking over the camp. They were working for the Germans, and they were confused. They were shooting left and right. And lots of people died of gunshot wounds after liberation. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] We were liberated, I believe, 40,000 people in Bergen-Belsen. I believe there were 10,000 dead bodies. Out of the 40,000, 20-some-odd thousand perished after liberation, because they were too sick to survive, or there was another reason. The Army came in, the British Army. They gave us K rations, Army rations. Our stomachs weren't used to any food. So whoever [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] was still standing straight without having typhoid got a diarrhea from the Army rations, because it was very fatty food. So they, they didn't know what to do. They had-- they had to feed us. They had to do something, and they were incredible. And then they started to delouse us and started to clean us up, and the process of rehabilitation supposedly started. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] And we heard that an American reporter had come to the camp to take names of, of us, to broadcast these names throughout the world. And I had typhus, and I crept on all fours to this reporter and told him that I had a brother in America. And I will tell you how that brother got to America a little later on. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] And please take my name, and let them know in America I am alive. So hundreds of us went over to the reporter, and they took the names. And the next day, our names were published in newspapers in the United States, over radio stations, and I had said, I have a brother in Shreveport, Louisiana. And the Shreveport radio station called up a distant cousin, who my brother had stayed, stayed with and said, there is a-- my name was [? Bethel-- ?] [? Bethel ?] Schuster liberated in Germany, and she has a brother here. How can we reach him? [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] Well, my brother was-- he had volunteered for the American Army. He was 18 years old, meantime, and he volunteered to get into the Air Force.
He was stationed-- I believe it was Florida. I am not sure of that. And he was in a port of embarkation to be shipped to go to Japan. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] So this news comes to Shreveport, and they knew where my brother was. He was at a certain base in Florida. They contacted the base, and he was out. He had an evening off. He was out. And they left a message for him-- no matter what time you come back, you call Shreveport. You call your Uncle Sam. So my brother came home 2 o'clock in the morning, and he called Shreveport, and he was told that I was liberated. Here he is in a port of embarkation ready to go to Japan, and he sure doesn't want to go to Japan, being I'm liberated in Germany. So he went to the Red Cross and asked if they could help him being transferred to a troop transport to Germany. And the Red Cross told him, we can't do anything for you. The best thing you can do is make out papers so that your sister can come to the United States. He tried all kinds of people to help him to get to, to be transferred to a different area. Well, he finally contacted-- or my uncle, my cousin, at the time, contacted Senator Ellender in Louisiana. The senator contacted Washington, and they commanded the base where my brother was to send him to a port of embarkation for Europe. So meantime, my brother-- we-- there was no way that you could get in contact with anybody. It was chaos in Europe. So through the British soldiers that were stationed in Bergen-Belsen, we wrote letters. They sent them home to their mothers and fathers in England, and from England, in turn, these letters were sent to America. That's how we communicated right after the war with America. So I got in touch with my brother, after he knew I was liberated, and he got papers from the affidavits of support to come to the United States. Meantime, he went onto the troop transport, and they landed somewhere in France. I don't know if it was Cherbourg or wherever they landed. And he went to his commanding, commanding officer, and he said, I have a sister that just got liberated in Germany. Give me-- and she is now in Paris. I know how to contact her. Give me a few hours leave. I have to see her. So the commanding officer said, I cannot give you leave. We are going to leave tomorrow for a place in Germany. When we come to Germany, you can apply for a furlough, but I cannot give you a leave now.
But do as you think fit. In other words, with his sanction, he left. He left, and he hitchhiked, and somehow, he found his way to Paris. Meantime, I was living in Paris through some cousin in the United States. He had contacted people-- this cousin from Peoria, Illinois had contacted people in Paris that had survived in the underground in France. They lived underground somewhere. They came back to Paris. They got their beautiful apartments back, and they wanted to do something for us survivors. So we were living in one of those big camps in Paris, a big room-- 20, 30, 40 in a room-- waiting until we could be liberated out of France to get where we wanted to go. So these people-- [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] I forgot their names-- [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] they came to this camp in Paris. And they looked for me, they found me, and they said, you can come and live with us until you can go to America. And you can take a friend of yours with you. So I chose Ilse. Her name is [? Kahani ?] today. Her name was Wetterhan. And the names of the people that came, their name was Frank. We went to Paris. We lived with the-- with the Franks in their beautiful apartment, and we waited to get papers to go to, to America. This was already probably in late '45, very late. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] And meantime, my brother was coming to France, but I didn't know about it. And these people, these Franks, had two little kids. And they asked us one afternoon to come and babysit. Would we babysit for their children? They had to do something. So Ilse and I went to their home. It was on a third floor walk-up. And, you know, in Europe, the first floor is usually parterre, and then you walk up three other flights of stairs. So we went to these people to babysit, and they went to, to go about their business. And when they came back home, they thanked us, and we were on our way back to this place where we slept. As we walked down the flight of stairs, a young American soldier walks up the stairs. He wanted to know, from these Franks, where to find me. And I look at him, and he looks at me, and I hadn't seen him since he was 13 years old, a month before his bar mitzvah. And here's a young American soldier, and he looks so familiar. And he yells out my name, and I call out his name. That's how we met after the war. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] So he had to go back to camp right away, because he went AWL. And he went back to camp, and they went to Germany. They went to Ansbach in Germany, or near Ansbach, with the occupation forces. And when they were stationed there, he asked for a furlough, and he got a furlough. And he came to Paris, and he was able to spend two weeks with me. And he had gone to the PX at his Army base, and he bought anything he could buy-- chocolate and coffee and anything he could get a hold of-- and he came with a duffel bag loaded with stuff to bring to me. So we spent two weeks together. We had a great time. And we went to the American consulate. It was just opened. A new consulate was opened in Paris. And there was a new consul, consul there. And we went in, and he looks at my papers. And my brother had my affidavits with him. And he says, today is Lincoln's birthday, and yesterday was your birthday. I will issue you a visa, so you can go to the United States. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] And that was the beginning of my life in America. 
INT: Let's go back for a minute. We skipped a part of your story. When you were liberated in Bergen-Belsen-- BK: Yes, you're right.  INT: --how did you reach to Paris? BK: First of all, I worked for the British Red Cross. After I was cleaned up, and I was rid of typhus, I immediately volunteered to work. I worked for the British Red Cross. I worked in the clothing shed. We had gotten clothes from-- I guess they confiscated it from German stores. They, they sent them in from England from all over the world. So we assorted the clothes, and we tried to fit the girls and the boys, whatever, with the proper clothing. And I worked for them. And through, through my work, I knew there was a-- there were Jewish boys coming in from the Jewish Brigade from Palestine. And a truckload of boys from the Jewish Brigade came in, and we talked to them, and we said we-- Ilse and I and a few other girls-- we have to get to Paris, because Ilse had already papers. Her mother and father were in America, and she had papers. This is a story in itself. This little girl is left in Germany, her mother and father are in America. So the boys said, we can take you to Brussels. From Brussels, you have to find your own way. So we went onto the truck with the, with the Jewish boys, and they dropped us in Brussels. And in Brussels, we were at the station, at the railroad station. And we knew one of the girls that was-- treated me like her daughter. She was, at the time, 38, and I was 21. And she saw to it, whenever she had food, that I had food. Whenever I was sick, that she watched over me. She would-- she even went out into the field to barter some clothes with some food from the Estonian farmer. And her arm was shot right at the wrist-- was shot right through. That was in Estonia. There was no medical help. The arm had to heal itself, and it healed in a position like this. This is how her arm healed. Eventually, it healed. And this lady had two children in Brussels. Her husband was in America. In 1938, he got a visa, and he got out hoping he would get his family out. She had two children, a girl and a boy, in a Catholic home in Brussels. They saved the children as Catholics. So she went right away. She got herself to Brussels. You see, we had chutzpah right after the liberation. We went onto a train. I went back to my hometown, and I went into a train and said, I have no money.
I was just liberated from a concentration camp. I got to get onto this train. I want to go where-- that is something that I have to tell you before we forget. Anyhow, we are still at [? Bella ?] [? Strauss. ?] [? Bella ?] [? Strauss's ?] in Brussels. She found her children. The son had been a retarded boy, when she had put him into Brussels. The daughter was a brilliant young lady, and she met these children in Brussels. She worked on her visa to get to the United States. She came to the United States with her daughter. The son already had learned French, and they couldn't uproot him again. He stayed in France. The daughter came here. She became a professor. She is in Canada now. She is a professor at university-- I believe it's Ottawa. I'm not sure. The brother is still in the home in Belgium, taken care of by the nuns. Here-- what was I trying to tell you before? Yes. After liberation, after we were cleaned up, I was already in fairly good health. I decided to go back to the town I was born in, the little town of Sterbfritz. I had no money, so we had the chutzpah to just get onto a train and tell the conductor, you've got to let us on. And they did. And the trains were-- there were-- there was no-- all the railroad stations were bombed, and all the-- the [? license-- ?] what do you call them? The tracks were bombed, and we, we really had to work our way through Germany to get back to where we wanted to go. And eventually, I got back to this little town. And when we were deported, when we were thrown out of Germany, our home had been rented to this guy by the name of [? Kirst. ?] He rented the home. He rented the store. And he survived the war, and he figured, now he has a beautiful home. I walk into the store, and this [? Kirst ?] is standing in the store, and he almost dropped dead when he saw me. Here, I'm coming from the dead. He thought all the Schusters are dead. And I'm in there, and I walked over to him, and I said, you are going to be out of here within two hours. This is my home, and I want it back. And I don't remember whether he emptied the store or the apartment, immediately, before I even left this little town. Then I got a big basket. Somewhere I got a big wicker basket. We went into the backyard. 
INT: Let's, let's change tapes. BK: Yes.  INT: This is tape five. Betty, you went back home and you retrieved your home. BK: I went back to a house. I couldn't have gone back to a home because what is four walls? It's just a house. But I couldn't leave it in the hands of people that hated us so much. And when the man that had lived in that house for all these years-- when he saw me, he recognized me, and he almost had apoplexy when he saw me. And I told him to vacate within two hours. He vacated either the-- either the apartment or the store, I don't remember. But later on, my brother came and got him out of the house. And he bought the house back into a-- he paid the mortgage off with American cigarettes. In other words, he sold cigarettes on the black market, cigarettes and coffee on the black market. And he paid the mortgage off this house.  INT: And what happened to the house? BK: Well, eventually-- this was-- our daughter Terry was born in '49. I believe it was in 1953 my brother and I decided that I should go back to Germany to try to sell this house. But this was a very, very bad time to sell the house because property wasn't worth anything, and the exchange between the dollar and the mark was horrendous. So I did sell the-- I went to Germany with a little girl and went to this little town, again to the Sterbfritz, and moved into it with a family-- with a family that I knew were not Nazis. And I stayed with them. And I found a buyer for the house and sold the house for I believe 20,000 marks-- I don't remember anymore-- for a pittance. And with the exchange rate, we really realized nothing. But we had the satisfaction that this horrible person did not have our property, and that was a great satisfaction. 
INT: When you first time went back to Germany to your hometown, did you run into any of these people that behaved so poorly before? BK: I avoided them because there was no sense, I did meet several of them that was-- that were not Nazis, that I knew. When I went to this public school, they were always on, you know-- clandestinely on my side. And I knew these people. They were-- her name was [? Gertrude ?] Muller before she was married. And she was an incredible lady. She was a very religious person. Her whole family was very religious, and they were very good to the Jews. They-- they had a butcher store, and they tried to help us as much as they could. So I naturally-- I got in touch with her and her family, and in touch with the people I stayed with. Otherwise, I avoided the Germans like a plague because what did you hear in Germany? [GERMAN].  INT: Translate. BK: Nobody knew anything. And as I told you to the-- in the beginning, they were standing on the overpass of the railroad station and watching us being loaded into the trains, and they never saw us come back.  INT: Do you know what happened to those two teachers that behaved so badly? BK: No, I don't know. When I came back, I was not in a position mentally to go after anybody. Here I had a little girl that needed all this help, and I'm in a-- not in my country. My country was America by this time. I came to-- to do a job, to throw these people out of our house, to-- to sell this house, to take it away from them. And I had-- I was really working with this little girl, Terry. And I-- there was enough for me. 
INT: Let's come to that. When did you come to the United States? BK: 1946.  INT: Describe the journey. BK: I was on a war bride ship. Was one of the first ships where civilians could come into the United States. And these girls were war brides. We left out of France. There were no German war brides at the time. They were English, English and French girls on the ship. And meantime my brother was still in Germany. He had to fulfill his tour of duty with the American army. And we notified cousins of mine in New York that I was going to come to New York. And after the journey, we landed in New York. And this cousin, [? Milan ?] Schuster, picked me up at the boat-- on the boat. And he looks at me. He--he-- he expected a monster, I guess. And he says, what a pretty girl. And he took me to his home, and I stayed in his family, and I looked for a job.  INT: What ship did you arrive on? And do you-- BK: I don't remember.  INT: Do you remember when the ship was entering the harbor? BK: Oh, gosh, when we saw the Statue of Liberty, and everybody was on deck, and the excitement was absolutely incredible. Here we're coming to a country where we will be accepted for what we are. We will be free people. We can live our lives the way we want to live our lives. And it-- the feeling is indescribable. 
INT: Did you then know about the Statue of Liberty? BK: Oh, sure, sure, sure. After all, right after the war, I-- right after we were liberated, I went to the Berlitz School of Languages to learn a little English. I didn't learn any French. I mean, the time we spent in Paris, the French were not very nice to us. When we had to go to an official place to get some papers, we were always the Boche. We were not the Jewish concentration camp victims. We were the Boche. And naturally I didn't want to learn French. And I went to the Berlitz School of Languages and learned as much as I could English, and tried to read a little bit about America and what America was all about.  INT: What is a Boche? BK: The Boche is a German in the eyes of a French.  INT: So your cousin was waiting for you? BK: Yes. Yes. And he took me to his home. And their dining room was-- they had a day bed in it. And that was my-- my bedroom. And I had to do something. I had to go make a living. I wasn't going to be a burden on anybody. And I couldn't do much. I-- I didn't have a profession. I didn't have much of an education. So the next best thing was to be a baby sitter or a housekeeper. And I found a job with a-- I believe his name was Warren. I'm not sure. He was an announcer for one of the radio station in New York, and he lived in New York City. And he was incredible. He was-- he told me, you German Jews had this coming. And I was astonished. I mean, how could you stay with people like that? I stayed for a couple of weeks, and I-- I went back to my cousin. And one of my cousins was an upholsterer. That was another cousin. And he said to me, you know, learn how to sew and come into the upholstery line, and you can make a good living. So he got me a job in an upholstery factory. And being I didn't know how to operate these powerful machines-- I knew how to work a little sewing machine from home, but these powerful machines I didn't know how to operate. And-- and the people in the factory were very nice. They let me first use a needle and thread and sew up cushions, the big cushions for sofas, and I learned to do that. And then they showed me how to use the power machines. Naturally, in the beginning, I didn't get my fingers out of the way and I sewed through my fingers, which was not very pleasant. But pretty soon I learned how to operate these powerful machines, and I became very efficient on these sewing machines. And I did make a good living. And I joined the union. And my husband had-- my husband Harold had just come out of the service. And he also had to make a living. So his brother had a-- an upholstery factory. And Harold, my husband, worked for his brother in the upholstery factory. And one day they needed what is called an operator to operate the sewing machines. And his brother says to him, you have a big mouth. Go to the union and get us an operator. And he called up the union and he said, we can't work. We don't have anybody that does the sewing for us. In order for us to work, we have to have somebody to do the sewing. So the union sent me to the factory where Harold worked. And the first day after work, Harold says, where do you live? And I said in Washington Heights. And this was way out in Brooklyn somewhere. So Harold said, I'll drive you to the subway. And that was the beginning of a 50-year romance. We got married a few months later. And since we couldn't get married between Passover and [NON-ENGLISH], we had to pick out Lag B'Omer. So in a rabbi's home, a few friends and relatives got together, and we got married. 
INT: Tell us what [NON-ENGLISH] is. BK: Lag B'Omer is the counting of the Omer between Passover and [NON-ENGLISH], which I believe is 49 days. And the 33rd day of the Omer is-- during the 49 days you cannot have any [NON-ENGLISH], any happy occasions. And I believe Lag B'Omer was the 33rd day of the Omer when you could have a wedding. You could have a [NON-ENGLISH]. And we got married on that day in the rabbi's home.  INT: Do you have any family? BK: My brother was at the wedding. Meantime, he was released from the army, and he became an instructor in electronics in-- in New York. And he came to the wedding, and Harold's brother-- Harold's sister, brother-in-law, and brother, and father came to the wedding. And it was all in the rabbi's home.  INT: You didn't tell us how did your brother come to the United States? BK: Oh, yes, this is quite a-- quite a thing. He lived in Frankfurt in the-- in the orphanage. And after Kristallnacht, a lot of children were taken out of Germany. The Rothschilds in Paris opened their homes and their castles for these children. And an organization called [NON-ENGLISH] was founded, and they helped get these children out of Germany. And it was just before his bar mitzvah. He was able to leave Germany and get into one of the Rothschilds' homes in the Paris vicinity. And these children were then shoved from home to home because the Germans eventually came into Paris. So they ran across France into different homes. They went into different homes. And when they were finally settled in certain homes, they would-- they learned trades. My brother became a carpenter. Eventually they wound up, I believe, in the French part that was not occupied. And the American Quakers sponsored a bunch of children from the [NON-ENGLISH] with the help of, finally, Mrs. Roosevelt. She finally persuaded her husband to let some children come in. President Roosevelt was not a great friend of ours in those days. He didn't let any Jews in, If you remember the St. Louis. So with the help of Eleanor, these children were taken through the Quakers on a freighter that came into New York. And they looked like a bunch of ragamuffins. And again, relatives were notified that these children are on the way to New York, come to the ship and try to help place these children. And when he arrived in New York, by the greatest coincident, a brother of my mother's was working in the harbor helping unload these ships. And he came onto that ship and he saw my brother. He didn't know my brother was on the ship. And then my cousin, my cousin [? Milan ?] that picked me up, he came, and he picked him up. They-- they bought him a suit of clothes because they looked like whatever, ragamuffins. And it happened so that this-- distant cousins that lived in Shreveport, Louisiana-- they'd been there for about 100 years and they were very wealthy. So my cousin [? Milan ?] called up this Sam Schuster, and I said-- and he said to him, Sam, here's a boy, that just came from-- from Europe. He's a survivor. Can you take him? And Sam said, it happens so my wife is in New York. I'll let her get in touch with you. And Pearl-- that was his wife's name-- got in touch with [? Milan ?] Schuster. And she arranged for Henry to go with her to Shreveport. So Henry found a home in Shreveport. Pearl became a bitch, excuse the expression. She was not good to him. Sam was wonderful, but Pearl was very jealous of him. But anyhow, he got an education. He had a home. And he went to Shreveport, Louisiana living with Sam Schuster. 
INT: When this happened, did your mother still know that [? Milan-- ?] BK: Yes. In the home for the aged that my mother ran was an old lady by the name of [? Neumann. ?] Mrs. [? Neumann ?] had a daughter by the name of Theresa in Switzerland. And Theresa came to visit her mother. That was still in 1930-- '39 or so. And we gave Theresa-- no, that had to be later. That had to be in-- in the-- yes. We gave her Henry's address in France, my brother's address in France. She got in touch with him and she stayed in touch with him throughout the war. And he notified her when-- when he left for-- for the United States on this transport. And she in turn, through clandestine ways, let us know. And my mother knew that my brother was alive in the United States. And that's how I knew that I had a brother in the United States. That's how I was able to tell the reporter I have a brother in Shreveport, Louisiana, all through roundabout ways.  INT: So now you're married. You're in the United States. Do you have any children? BK: Yes. We have a darling daughter by the name of Terry. She's retarded.  INT: You want to tell us a little bit about her? BK: She had encephalitis shortly after she was born. She had 108 temperature, and the temperature ruined her brain cells. Naturally, we don't know if this happened through me or through a bug, or how she got the disease. We don't know. We never found out. We only knew that she had this horrible temperature, and we-- we ran her to the hospital. And they got the temperature down. We took her home again. And it continued having high fevers, not-- came into the-- to the cause of the fevers. The cause was established when she was maybe seven, eight years old because in those days, there was no-- no antibiotics. There was something they gave her. I don't remember what it was, something to kill the bug. But it possibly killed the bug, and it didn't-- she didn't have any further damage. But when she was older, they finally could take x-rays or CAT scans or whatever they took. And they determined that she did have encephalitis when she was a baby, and with unknown causes. And Terry stayed home, in our home with us for 23 years. We took good care of her. We loved her dearly. We found schools. We-- we founded schools for the retarded. My husband helped build a school for the retarded. We both worked very hard to get them teachers through different organizations.
There was no funding from the government in those days. We did find funding. We ran fund-raising affairs. We did get them a school. The kids were occupied for a few hours a day. And this was in Springfield, Illinois. By that time, we lived in Springfield, Illinois. In fact, going back to New York, when we lived in New York, I helped fund the North-- North Shore League for the Retarded. Was-- that was-- I was one of the founders. And we-- all our lives we worked very hard that these children should get what possibly is coming to them as far as schooling was concerned. And she stayed home for 23 years. And we did travel with her. We've made lots of trips with her. She had a good life at home. She was-- she developed asthma when she was about 11 or 12, which was the worst of all. When somebody can't catch their breath, that-- that is a horrible sight to see. But eventually we got help for that-- with that, too. We got medications. We got doctors to help us. And we just stayed together for 23 years. And then eventually we realized Terry couldn't stay home anymore. She needed to be with her peers. The situation was becoming so that she was so unhappy. And we couldn't do anything on our own. We couldn't-- we had to get a baby sitter if we could get one. We more or less had to stay home in the evenings. In the daytime we took her with us wherever we could. So we decided there was no other way but to put her into a state institution. And there wasn't-- in Southern California, it was terrible. The smog was getting my husband down. The smog was getting her down. So we decided, let's go to Northern California and see what-- what is possible there. So we drove to Santa Rosa. We had no-- nobody here. We didn't know what to do, what to look for. We found an organization called Regional Center, and we talked to them, and they told us about the Sonoma State-- State Hospital, at the time it was called. It is called now Sonoma Development Center. It's no more State Hospital. So we went there, and they accepted her. And we went back to Southern California. She was-- meantime she went to school in Southern California in another state hospital, in a daycare program. We went back to Southern California. We sold our house. We brought the family to Santa Rosa. We rented a home in Santa Rosa. My husband looked for work, which was almost an impossibility because he was meantime in his 50s.
And his qualifications were wonderful, but the age wasn't so good. So eventually, he opened a little gift shop. And little by little, we made our way. But meantime, there was an opening at the Sonoma Development Center for Terry. And she went to that place, which, at the time, was not a good place. It was still what you could call a snake pit. But meantime I went to-- to night school and got myself a child development degree. And I went to work at the state hospital. And I saw what went on, and I saw what was needed, and I became an activist trying to make the life for these youngsters better. And my husband and I both worked very hard to better the life for these people. He meantime had a little business. And I started to work as a teacher at the institution. And from a snake pit, over the years, it has changed into a wonderful home for these people. When she first went there, there was 14, 15 in a huge room. And you had to practically climb over the beds to get-- to get to their bed. Today it's four people to a room. They have their own closets. They have their television sets. They have their radios. They go to classes twice a day. Meantime, Terry is 47 years old, and she has to be occupied. And they go to classrooms. And she works a computer, not the way we would work a computer. It's by pictures and touch. In other words, the teacher tells her match a house to a house, a car to a car. Or in other words, and then go a little deeper into it, abstract things. And-- and she loves the computer. And she loves to go to school two times a day. She loves her peers. She is very friendly. She helps. She helps pushing wheelchairs. She cannot talk. But you-- after you know her for a while, you understand what she wants. And she has a little book that she can show them what she wants, a drink. Or even there's a bulletin board on the wall. If she wants something specific, she can go over and point to what she wants. And she has a good life. And we both still work as volunteers there. In fact, the rabbi, special rabbi for these state hospitals, comes twice a month. And we work with the rabbi. We give them a party. The Jewish residents-- we have-- there's about 30 Jewish residents, and about 15 to 20 come to services. Not all of them understand what services mean, but they all know it's a party, and the Kales are there to give him a party. And we're over there. I work on the Human Rights Committee, always trying to help make their lives a little better, which means our lives are better, too. And I think we made a life for ourselves. 
INT: When did you come to California? BK: We came to a town called Glendora in Southern California in 1964.  INT: And when did you move up here? BK: 1972. 1972, November, 1972.  INT: Why did you decide to speak about your experience now? BK: I believe future generations should know what happened, and they should be aware of what can happen. America is a free country, but we have lots of freaks in this country, too, and lots of organizations that work against the government. And all you have to give some of these youngsters is a leather jacket and a gun and some booze, and tell them to go out and shoot-- shoot some people. That can happen anywhere in the world. We have seen it since World War II-- since the end of World War II, in Rwanda, in Africa anywhere. We have seen it in Yugoslavia. We have seen it in Afghanistan. There are Holocausts all over the world. And we, as survivors, have to alert people to what can happen. And people have to know to be on the watch of what can happen in their country.  INT: So how do you do the alerting? BK: Through the Alliance of the Study of the Holocaust, which is an organization run from the Sonoma State University. They have many Holocaust survivors speaking in the public schools, in the high schools, and at the university, telling our story. And that's what I'm doing. 
INT: What is the most important message you have for these children? BK: Don't hate. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] Hate is a horrible thing. It perpetuates itself. Try to get along with your fellow human beings, no matter what color they are, no matter what race they are. Try to live in peace with your fellow human beings.  INT: I want to thank you. BK: Thank you for coming. You were wonderful. BK: This is my grandmother, Bertha, and my grandfather, David Schuster in Sterbfritz, Germany.  INT: Do you know the year? BK: I have no idea, because they both passed away before I was born.  INT: Thank you. BK: This is my grandmother and grandfather, Johanna and Hertz Steinfeld in [? Josbach, ?] Germany. Year, I don't know.  INT: Thank you. BK: This is my father, Abraham, and my mother, Rosa Schuster, in about 1932 in Germany. This is me, the chubby one on the left-hand side, on an outing with a public school.  INT: What year? BK: This had to be in 1931, '32.  INT: Where? BK: In Sterbfritz, Germany. My name is Betty Kale. My birth name was Schuster.  INT: Thank you. BK: This is the same photograph, but it's the whole class on the picture. The teacher's name was [NON-ENGLISH]. And this was a combination of both schools, Jewish and non-Jewish, in the town of Sterbfritz, in Germany, probably 1932, '31, '32.  INT: Thank you. BK: On the right side is my mother, Rosa Schuster. Sitting, more or less, on her lap is my brother Henry, Heinz Schuster. In the rear, it is me, Betty Kale, born a Schuster. This was taken in 1939 in Germany. My sister could not come. She was not able to be with us at the time. 
INT: Thank you. BK: This is my sister, Margot Schuster. The picture was taken in 1942 in Frankfurt, Germany.  INT: Thank you. BK: This is my brother, Henry Schuster, an American GI, and myself, in Paris, in 1946. This is myself with a little cousin by the name of Norman [NON-ENGLISH], This was taken in Peoria, Illinois, and a reporter was interviewing me shortly after I was liberated, in, in this country. This is Harold Kale and myself, Betty Schuster. This is before we got married, in New York, in the year of 1947. These are the newlyweds, Harold and Betty Kale, on May the 7th, 1947 in New York City. And we're still married. This is our new baby, Terry. This is our new baby, Terry Kale, sometime in the summer of 1949, in a park, in Brooklyn, New York.  INT: Thank you. BK: This is Terry Kale, in 1958, in Springfield, Illinois. This is also our daughter, Terry Kale. This was taken in our backyard in Santa Rosa, California in the summer of 1975. This is Rabbi Levenberg and I, in 1985, at the Sonoma Developmental Center for the Retarded, in Eldridge, California.  INT: What do you have to do with this school? BK: We are both, my husband and I are both volunteers working with the rabbi and other volunteer work at the-- at the Sonoma Development Center.  INT: Thank you. BK: This is a family picture. From left to right, it's my nephew, Michael Schuster. Next is myself, then my brother, my brother, Henry Schuster. My name is Betty Kale. In the back of my brother is Pat Schuster. She's the daughter-in-law of my brother. Then on his right is his son, Alan. Next to Alan Schuster, next to him is his wife, Anita Schuster. Then in the back is the daughter, [? Rene ?] Schuster. And the last one, on the right, is the daughter-in-law, Gail Goodwin. And the year was 1979. The picture was taken in Los Angeles, California. 
INT: Thank you. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] Would you please introduce your husband to us? BK: This is my dear husband of 50 years, Harold Kale. HAROLD KALE: That's me.  INT: When were you married? BK: In 1947. We'll have our 50th anniversary coming May.  INT: Harold did, did she tell you her story? HAROLD KALE: Oh, I know her story, every bit of it. After all, we've been married almost 50 years. So I, I know all about it. BK: I didn't tell you all my secrets. HAROLD KALE: Well, not, not everything. I'm not talking about your love affair. BK: [LAUGHS]  INT: How do you feel about this interview? HAROLD KALE: How do I feel about it? I wish it had never happened, but it has happened. And I'm-- I'm just thankful that I have her here safe and sound.  INT: And I want to thank you both. HAROLD KALE: We thank you. BK: Thank you very much. HAROLD KALE: And I want to take this special occasion to thank Raul, right in back of the camera.