INT: November 10, 1996. Survivor, Erna Roth Anolik. Interviewer, Susie Eisenstock. Cherry Hill, New Jersey, United States of America. The language is in English. My name is Susie Paul Eisenstock. The date today is Sunday, November 10, 1996. I'm conducting an interview with Erna Roth Anolik. The interview is being conducted in Cherry Hill, New Jersey, the United States of America. And the interview is being conducted in English. What is your name? EA: My name is Erna Roth Anolik.  INT: Could you spell your name, please? EA: E-R-N-A, Erna. Roth, R-O-T-H. And Anolik is A-N-O-L-I-K.  INT: Do you have any nicknames? EA: No, I don't. Well, actually Erna is short for Ernestine. So everybody calls me Erna.  INT: What is your birth date? EA: December 15, 1923.  INT: How old are you today? EA: 73. 72, actually. Want to be right. [LAUGHS] Be 73 soon.  INT: What is the city and country of your birth?  INT: The city is Uchorod, Czechoslovakia.  INT: Would you spell Uchorod, please? EA: U-C-H-O-R-O-D.  INT: Thank you very much. Tell me, what is your father's name, please? EA: Father's name was Ignac Roth.  INT: Would you spell that? EA: I-G-N-A-C, Ignac. Roth, R-O-T-H.  INT: And where was your father born? EA: In the Austro-Hungarian Empire, but I cannot tell you what town.  INT: Did your father go to school? EA: Yes.  INT: And where-- how many years did he complete? EA: I guess equivalent to high school. That was as high as he went. 
INT: What was his occupation? EA: He was a wine merchant. But as a young man, he worked in a bank. And then he went into business for himself, and he was a wine merchant.  INT: Was your father ever in the Army? EA: I wouldn't know. [LAUGHS] Never talked about it, so I don't know.  INT: Was he ever a member of any political party? EA: No, he was not.  INT: Was he a member of any organizations? EA: No.  INT: What religion was your father? EA: Jewish.  INT: And what sect of Judaism? EA: Orthodox.  INT: OK. And your mother, what was her name? EA: Maria Lebovitz Roth.  INT: Would you spell that? EA: M-A-R-I-A. Lebovitz is L-E-B-O-V-I-T-- T-Z or sometimes it's spelled with C. I'm not-- and Roth, R-O-T-H.  INT: And where was your mother born? EA: She was born in Szeredne in the Austro-Hungarian Empire also.  INT: Would you mind spelling the city? EA: S-Z-E-R-E-D-N-E.  INT: And was that a large city? EA: No. That was a small town.  INT: Was it near something that-- EA: It was a near Uchorod.  INT: OK. Did your mom go to school? EA: Yes. But I, I can't really tell you how far she has gone to school.  INT: Did your mother ever have a job? EA: No.  INT: OK. EA: No.  INT: Was she a member of any political party or any-- EA: No. 
INT: --Organization? EA: No. She was not.  INT: And what was your mother's religion? EA: Jewish.  INT: OK. And her-- EA: Again, orthodox.  INT: Great. EA: Yeah.  INT: Did you have any brothers or sisters? EA: Yes. I had-- my oldest brother was Joseph Roth. Then I had a sister, Olga, another sister, Elizabeth, and a younger brother Erwin.  INT: Let's start with Joseph. Where was Joseph born? EA: He was born in Uchorod on January 7th, 1918.  INT: Do you remember your brother going to school? EA: Yes. Yes, of course.  INT: And how far did he complete? EA: He finished high school.  INT: Did he go on to what we think of as college or anything? EA: No, he did not. No, he did not. He went to work--  INT: Oh. EA: --after high school. Yeah.  INT: What was his job? EA: Worked, worked as a salesman in a department store.  INT: Do you happen to remember the name of that department store? EA: I think it was called Gerstli, G-E-R-S-T-L-I. I think that was--  INT: Does the department store similar to the way we have department stores today? EA: Yes. It was not quite as large. It was probably on the smaller scale, but was a department store, nevertheless, you know?  INT: Was he married while you were still at home? EA: No. No.  INT: And is he a survivor of the Holocaust? EA: Well, he left home in 1938 to go to Israel. So he survived in Israel. In fact, he just died one month ago today. 
INT: I'm sorry. We'll go on with your sister, Olga. EA: Yeah.  INT: When and where was she born? EA: She was born October 16th, 1919 in Uchorod. And she also finished high school, and then she went on to learn a-- sewing, to be a seamstress.  INT: Did she marry while you were still at home? EA: Yes, she did. She married in 1941 in Uchorod.  INT: And we'll go on with Elizabeth. EA: Elizabeth was born August 7th or 9th-- and-- I think it was-- must have been 9th, in-- in 1921 in Uchorod. And she finished high school as well. And as my older sister, she, after high school, she went to learn sewing, you know, to be a seamstress.  INT: And did she marry while you were still there? EA: No.  INT: OK. EA: No, she did not.  INT: And you mentioned the fourth brother was Erwin. EA: Yes. He was born May 26, 1932 in Uchorod.  INT: OK. To backtrack a little, was Olga a survivor of the Holocaust? EA: No. No, she was not.  INT: Elizabeth? EA: Yes. She was with me all the time, through the concentration camp.  INT: And Erwin? EA: No.  INT: OK. Tell me about your home, when you were growing up. EA: Mhm. Well, Uchorod was the capital of the Carpathian part of Czechoslovakia, which is the eastern most part of Czechoslovakia. And it was-- I, I think I had a wonderful childhood. We had a lot of friends. A lot of our relatives lived in town, also my father's family mainly. My father had one sister who lived in the same town-- same street as we did. And then we had-- he had two younger brothers who lived in town. My aunt, who lived in the same street as we did, had children very close to our-- my, my age and my sisters ages, brothers ages. So we saw them very often. And I was very friendly with my cousin, who now lives in Pittsburgh. And even in school, I remember a very happy childhood. Had a lot of friends, and parents were quite religious. I remember, for instance, having to always be home on Shabbat for our dinner meal. We have to be there at home. My father came home from the synagogue, and we all had dinner together. And what else shall I tell you about it? And then I went to the gymnasium and-- in fact, in 1939 or '40, the Hungarians occupied that part of Czechoslovakia. And then I had to transfer from the Czech gymnasium to the Hebrew gymnasium. And so I developed a whole new set of friends, again, in a new school. And it was very pleasant, very nice. But then-- and we were just graduating from the Gymnasium in April 24th, 1944 when there was a, a proclamation. All Jews have to leave home the very next day. So we could not finish our graduation, and we left home the very next day. 
INT: OK. I want to take you back a little bit because-- EA: OK.  INT: I want to clarify-- EA: Yep.  INT: --A few things. Do you remember your address? Your first address of your first home? EA: Yes. It was Eight Bozos Utca. Bozos is spelled B-O-Z-O-S. Utca means street, and utca is spelled U-T-C-A. And that was in Uchorod.  INT: Can you describe the type of home you lived in? Was it a single home or-- EA: No. It was an apartment and there were two apartments in the house. And then there was a courtyard. And behind, there were, again, the landlord lived behind, also in an apartment. And we lived there until I was 15 years old. And then in 1938, we moved to another apartment temporarily while my parents had a house built, which we moved into about 1939.  INT: In your town, what was the percentage of population that were Jewish? EA: Well, since all my friends were Jewish-- until fairly recently, when somebody asked me, I said, at least half the town had to be Jewish, and then I found out it wasn't so. It just seemed to me that way because all my friends and everybody I associated with were Jewish. But I think about 30% of the town must have been Jewish.  INT: Did you experience any anti-Semitism before 19-- EA: None. None at all. Never. Never.  INT: Your friends-- let's go back. You said your cousins were your friends. EA: Yeah. 
INT: Tell me about your cousins with their names, please. EA: Yeah. My closest friend-- cousin was Piri, Piri Weinberger. We went to school together and we used to play around after school, hang around together. And she now lives in Pittsburgh, and we still are very close.  INT: Did you have any other friends? EA: Yes. I remember my-- the friends from later years, from the Hebrew gymnasium. And a couple of them survived, and I'm still very close to them. My very good friend is Susan White, who now lives in Englewood, New Jersey-- Englewood Cliffs, New Jersey. Then there's Edith Ellis, and she lives in West Orange, New Jersey. So I'm very close to them. Then there's another friend in California, who I see occasionally. But that's, that's about it. Yeah. And there's other ones that survived.  INT: When you went to school-- I'm going to take you back to when you were in school prior to 1939-- what were your favorite subjects? EA: I always liked math. I always liked math, and I also liked geography. I, generally-- I enjoyed school a lot.  INT: What did you want to be when you grew up when you were little? EA: Well, that-- that I thought of much later on, when I was in a gymnasium, and I wanted to be a textile engineer. And it so happened that's what I did when I came to the States, became a textile engineer.  INT: Did you have any remembrances of holidays? You told us about Shabbat, but-- EA: Yeah. 
INT: --tell us about holidays when you were growing up. EA: Yeah. Generally, when I think of, of home, of my parents' house, and-- [COUGHS] Excuse me. Those are times, I remember, that we always-- the Shabbat-- being always together and being having dinners always together. And the holidays were very significant. My parents were orthodox, so we always observed every holiday. My father went to synagogue every day. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] And-- and I remember also having friends in the-- in the building that we lived in. The landlord had a-- a daughter exactly my age. She went to school with me also. They were Hasidic. And I remember, I could go-- sometime I would go to their house on Shabbat or on holidays. And when I went there, you could only speak Yiddish, if you went to their house on holidays, especially when her father was home. You have to, had to speak Yiddish. And I didn't speak Yiddish too well, so I would go there but not very often on holidays or on Shabbat. [PAUSES FOR 7 SECONDS] As I said, we observed all the holidays. We observed strictly, and I-- I would go-- what I remember about holidays, for instance, that on Tish'a B'Av, we used to go to my very religious friends. And we used to sit there on the floor and pray and-- certain things come back, you know? [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] We certainly-- because the families were so large-- like, for instance, Passover, over here, the whole family gets together and a lot of people. We didn't do that, I guess because we lived in apartments and the apartments were not large enough to accommodate very large families. So for, for Passover, we just had immediate family together. And then after the dinner, we would go visiting the relatives or they would come to our house. And a lot of my father's family, and as well as my mother's family, they lived in, in small towns. So when they came into the city to visit, they would always stay with us. And that was very pleasant. Nice memories for that. And on the other hand, on-- in the summers when we were on school vacations, I used to go either to my grandparents-- my father's parents-- for a vacation, or sometime to some of my aunts in Szeredne. But I especially remember enjoying very much going to visit my grandparents, because they had a farm and they grew their own vegetables, and fruits, and seeing them milk cows. So it was exciting for me. I used to enjoy going there. [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] What else can I tell you? 
INT: Do you remember your name of your father's parents. EA: Yes. My grandfather's name was Herman Roth, and my grandmother's name was, I think it was, Rebecca Roth. And my father's family was a very large family. He had a-- he had three brothers, and must have been at least six or eight sisters. So.  INT: You mentioned some of those aunts and uncles lived in the town. Do you remember what their names were? EA: Yes. The aunt who lived in town was Ida. We called her Idushka. And then there was a brother, David, another brother [? Bela-- ?] which is William. And those are the ones who lived in town. Then there was one aunt on my mother's side that I was very close to because my mother came from a very large family. I didn't even know all the aunts and uncles. But I think that most of them were half sisters and brothers to my mother. There was one real sister, and we were very close to her. Her name was Dora Birnbaum. And she lived in [NON-ENGLISH]. And she also had daughters very close to my age. In fact, her-- she had two daughters. The younger one has the same name as I have, and she's very-- I'm even between the two girls so we were very close also.  INT: What did you do for-- to play when you were little? Did you have toys? EA: Not too many toys. [LAUGHS] We just had to play tag or whatever. But we were mostly playing outside in the yard or whatever. In the winter, we went sleigh riding. We-- in the summer, we were at the river swimming all day long, all afternoon definitely. We spent a lot of time at on at the river. But there weren't too many toys. [LAUGHS] Nobody had too many toys. But I do remember when somebody would come and visit us with a bicycle. I was very anxious to learn to ride a bicycle. So my father would ask whoever's bicycle it was if he could teach me to ride a bicycle. And I learned to ride a bicycle. I was very happy about that. And as a result now, my whole family's bicycle riders. [LAUGHS] 
INT: You-- did you have any formal religious training? EA: Well, in Czechoslovakia, religion was one of the subjects you learned in school. It was-- we went to school from 8:00 to 1:00, and then any-- like gym and religion was taught after the one o'clock class. We'd go back for those classes. So religion was taught in school. And it was not taught-- in the-- the Jewish kids went to the Jewish religion class. Catholics would probably go to the Catholic religion, or Protestants to the Protestants. So we were not, the whole group, learning religion together. So we had religion there. And, of course, in my family, as, as early as we could learn, we had to learn prayer in the morning and prayer at night. And-- and then later on, I went to the Hebrew gymnasium. So there, I had religion again. There was much more intense. I learned Torah and [YIDDISH]. And-- so I definitely had to learn religion. Yeah.  INT: You mentioned your synagogue. Do you remember the name of the synagogue? Did it have a name? EA: I don't remember. I think it was just named after the street that it was on. And it was the Radvanc. [INTERPOSING VOICES]  INT: Could you try to spell that? EA: R-A-D-V-A-N-C. Radvanc.  INT: Do you remember the rabbi's name of the synagogue. EA: No, I don't. I don't remember.  INT: You mentioned also a river that you played in. EA: Mhm. 
INT: Do you know the name of the river? EA: The name of the river was Uz. U-Z. That's why the name was called Uchorod, because it was named after the river. And also there was a, a castle just above the river and the name horod mean-- I think it's in Russian-- or in Czech-- meant castle. So castle on the Uz, on the river Uz. And that's where the name of the town came from. Uchorod.  INT: You also mentioned-- and I'd like to clarify-- that you went and while you were playing with your friends and things like that-- EA: Yeah.  INT: What was your parents doing again? EA: My father was a wine merchant, and mother, my mother was just homemaker. Yeah.  INT: Did she-- was there anybody else in the house with your mother and with you growing up? EA: We had a maid who was-- who lived with us.  INT: And what were her jobs to do? EA: Oh, she had the house cleaning and laundry. That was mainly it because my mother did all the cooking. But the-- the maid did the house cleaning and the laundry, ironing, that, that type of thing.  INT: And your house-- the original house where you grew up before you got your new home-- EA: Mhm. The Apartment.  INT: --Where was that located in relation to other things in the town? EA: It was on the street that the main market was on. The, the market-- we didn't have big supermarkets like we have here. So, for instance, produce and chickens, geese, ducks, and all these things, you bought-- the poultry, you bought it live at the market. So people from surrounding towns-- farmers-- used to bring their produce and livestock into town every day, but especially on Thursdays, I think. So the market was set up right in our street, on Bozos Utca. The produce, farmers were mainly Bulgarians. And-- so they-- they would bring in the produce and fruits and, and vegetables. So we would buy it-- go to the market and buy it all the time. And that was set up right in front of our house. They would be out there in the morning. By twelve or one o'clock in the afternoon, it was all cleaned up. You wouldn't know there was a market there. And-- but-- and also, the street we lived on was a continuation of Masaryk [? Tere. ?] Masaryk was the president of Czechoslovakia and the main-- main square in town was named after him. It was like a plaza. [? Tere ?] means plaza. So the street I lived on was sort of a continuation of the Masaryk [? Tere, ?] of the main plaza. There was a park there with a statue of the president, Masaryk. And our-- my elementary school was right around the, the same plaza that I went to. And next door to us was a nunnery. That was one of our preoccupations was [INAUDIBLE] to always go spy on the nuns. [LAUGHS] 
INT: How did your father sell his wine? EA: He had a wine cellar, and he sold mainly wholesale. But a lot of Jewish-- on Fridays, a lot of Jewish people came to buy wine from him just for Fridays, because it had to be bought from a Jewish person. Once a non-Jewish person touched a wine, it was no longer kosher. So a lot of Jewish people came on Fridays. But mainly, he sold wholesale to inns and-- I guess mainly for inns. Yeah. And he would-- he would have-- he had a wine cellar. The wine was kept in huge barrels. And I remember in, in the summer, or rather, in the fall, they would harvest the grape, and they would-- he would-- he would make the wine out of it. And I very fondly remember having the new wine before it fermented. And we'd go roast potatoes in the skin and have the-- this new wine with it, which was delicious.  INT: Did you speak any other languages, other than the native language of Czechoslovakia? EA: Yes. We spoke Hungarian, because my father mainly spoken Hungarian. So in the house, actually, at home we spoke mainly Hungarian. Czech was spoken in school and, and Hungarian at home. And if my parents didn't want us to understand what they said, then they spoke Yiddish. [LAUGHS]  INT: Thank you. CREW: --11/10/96.  INT: OK. Erna, we were talking about the many languages you spoke. You said that you spoke Czech and Hungarian. Was there any other languages that you spoke? EA: Well, later on, when I went to Hebrew school, I learned to speak Hebrew. That was-- 
INT: Living next door to the nunnery, did you find the nuns or the priests or anybody there-- any kind of anti-Semitism? How did they treat you? EA: We really didn't have any contact with them. We saw them, but we didn't have any contact with them really, so-- but I really don't remember any anti-Semitism until the Hungarians occupied our area. And then--  INT: Now, you moved before the Hungarians-- EA: Yes. Yes.  INT: --occupied your area? What year did make your first move since that house? EA: In 1938, we moved to another apartment. We were there for about a year or two and then moved into our own house. [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] It was about-- only about two blocks away from where we lived before, so it wasn't really far. The town, Uzhorod, was divided into two by the river. So we stayed on the same side of the river that we were before. And my father's business was not too far also. So we actually-- I kept the same friends really.  INT: You went to the same school until-- EA: Yes. Yeah. [INAUDIBLE]  INT: Even after the move it wasn't-- there was no change? EA: No, because by that-- that-- there was only one gymnasium, so you either went to high school, which was-- if you didn't plan to go to college, you went to high school. You planned to go to college, or university rather, then you went to a-- a gymnasium. So there was only one high school, one gymnasium. And then there was one teachers'-- they called it a lyceum, teachers' college. And then there was a Hebrew gymnasium. So those were [INAUDIBLE] the only options really. So it wasn't-- the town wasn't so very large that it-- it would have more than one high school, or more than-- well, it had two gymnasiums, because one was a-- a Hebrew gymnasium. The other one was a public school, Czech gymnasium. 
INT: Now, which school did you enter and what year? EA: I went to the Czech gymnasium right after elementary school. And I went to five years elementary school. And then I had to take an exam to get into the gymnasium. And I went to gymnasium for eight years. But actually, I went to the public school, the Czech gymnasium for four years. And then the Hungarians occupied us and we couldn't go to the public school, so I transferred to the Hebrew gymnasium.  INT: Was that your first indication that the war had begun? What other way did you know? EA: Well, in 1938, we still had radios and newspapers that we could get. So we knew-- we were very well aware that war has broken out. It was only later that we could not have any radios, couldn't-- [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] couldn't find out what's going on and later on, because newspapers were not-- I'm sure not reporting what was going on. And there were a few people who had radios clandestinely, I mean secretly. So I know that my father had a friend who had a shortwave radio. And he used to go to his house. And he would listen to radio and come home and tell us what's going on. But other than that, you could not openly own radios then, Jewish people couldn't. So-- and that's when anti-Semitism has begun. In fact, [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] one time-- [PAUSES FOR 5 SECONDS] excuse me-- [CRYING] On Fridays, my father used to go down to the river, where the fisherman were, and buy fresh fish for Shabbat. And one day, he went down to the river, and he saw one of the fishermen beating a young boy. And my father said, why are you beating him? And the fisherman got very-- and he said, well, you just stop it. And my-- the fisherman got into an argument with Father, my father that it is none of his business. And he reported it to the authorities that my father made slanderous remarks against Hungarians, about the Hungarian government. And my father was arrested. [PAUSES FOR 7 SECONDS] And that was my first experience with anti-Semitism. [PAUSES FOR 7 SECONDS] And I think it left my father very-- even after we had-- he had been released from jail, [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] he-- he was very worried and very afraid. [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] I guess he realized that this-- this is the way things are going to be and was very worried about it. 
INT: What year was this that this happened? EA: I think this about 1939 or '40, maybe 1940.  INT: Did this change your life, your lifestyle? Were you allowed to do what you did before or-- EA: Well, it certainly changed my father's life completely. As far as we were concerned, we had to-- we couldn't go to public school. Jewish people couldn't go to public school, so I went to the Hebrew gymnasium. And [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] I think there were some other things also. But [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] you know, as-- as young people, we didn't really pay attention to-- we-- all my friends were Jewish, so I guess I was not as exposed to the anti-Semitism as some other people were. But-- [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] but while under-- before 1938, I had never heard the word Jew mentioned. I mean-- and-- and, of course, we had religious freedom, so it's not like we didn't have the religious freedom and that's why I didn't hear the word Jew. But certainly under the Hungarians, there was an awful lot of anti-Semitism. And even when we were taken away from home, I think that the Hungarians very willingly and fully cooperated with the Germans.  INT: Were you still able to go in, 1938, '39, to synagogue and-- EA: Yeah. Yeah. We were-- yes, my father was-- we were able to go to synagogues. Yeah. Yeah. That-- that we were able to.  INT: Did your father still do business with the Gentiles as well as the Jewish population? EA: With some, yeah, some. 
INT: And how long did this last? EA: Until April 1944.  INT: In the town, you said your father started noticing trouble brewing and his incident. Did that affect your brothers or sisters at all? EA: Well, it certainly affected my brother. My brother left in 1938 for Israel, because the war broke out and he was just at the age where he would be drafted for the army. And he didn't want any part of the war, so he left illegally at that time to Israel. And my parents were very, very upset, especially my father. I remember him waking up at night walking the [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] room, because it took my brother about three months to get to Israel. And we didn't hear from him, so we didn't know what was going on. And then finally, after the three months, he got to Israel and he was able to write to us. But even when he got to Israel, they couldn't really land. He went by ship, and they couldn't land [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] in Haifa or wherever it was-- they-- because it was under British mandate. So they stopped-- the ship stopped further back and they had to wade out into-- to shore. And he had a very rough time at the beginning there.  INT: Did the war affect your sister in any way? EA: It affected my-- certainly my older sister Olga, because she got married in 1941. And very shortly after that, her husband was taken into work camp. At that time, a lot of the young man were taken into labor camp. They were taken-- they would not take Jewish guys to the army, but they took them labor camps. And he has never come back. So a lot of them died in labor camp under the conditions they lived on. So-- so it definitely affected her, because once he left, she has never heard-- we didn't hear from him. And of course, he never came back. 
INT: Did you ever try to find out what happened to your brother-in-law? EA: No. There was just no way. We just assumed that he didn't-- didn't survive, because I'm sure that he would have come back if he had survived. But he didn't.  INT: You were still able to get mail uncensored and the radio coming through uncensored through 1941 to-- EA: I-- I think the mail was censored. But we did get mail from my brother.  INT: Before 1944-- EA: Yeah.  INT: --you were in school. EA: Yeah.  INT: And you were able to plan your life any way you wanted to. EA: Yes.  INT: At that point, did you choose a career goal? EA: Well, yeah. I-- I thought I would go into engineering. And I was fully prepared in 1944, when I was graduating from gymnasium that I'll be going to university. But of course, it never happened.  INT: What happened then? EA: On the 24th of April, there was a-- [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] there were placards all over town saying that all Jews will have to leave their homes, take with them whatever they can carry, and that's it, and that we have to report to a central point. In our case, it was a lumber yard. So-- my son's here. So we took what we could with us. And we reported to the lumber yard, where we stayed for-- it was April 24th until May 16th. We were put up-- there were no buildings or anything. So there were sheds [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] where everybody-- I don't how many families in one shed. No privacy. No facilities really to speak of. And that's where we stayed until May 16th. 
INT: Was there any indication before April 24th that this was going to happen? Did-- was there any-- EA: None. None whatsoever. None whatsoever. Actually, what happened was that in some towns in Slovakia, [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] the Jews were taken away-- taken from home earlier. And [PAUSES FOR 5 SECONDS] we heard rumors that the Jews that were taken from home were taken to-- they had to dig their own pits and they were killed. And-- but we wouldn't-- we didn't want to believe it. The way we have found out about these things, that occasionally apparently when these people were shot down, there were children who survived by having other people fall on top of them so they-- they were not killed and that somehow they found their way backs. And-- and they were the ones who told other people. So they said, no, these children are imagining things. It cannot be happening. So as I say, we did hear. But we didn't want to believe that anything like that is going on. Couldn't imagine that it could be true.  INT: Did everybody follow voluntarily when these placards were put up to go to the different places assigned? Did anybody try to escape? EA: There was really no way to escape, because [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] the Hungarian people-- if-- if somebody did, the Hungarian people would report them to the German authorities. There was no place to go to, because certainly Hungarian neighbors were not willing to help us, to hide anybody. So there was just no way of doing it. 
INT: The lumberyard you went to, who owned that lumberyard? Did the Germans confiscate it or-- EA: The Germans confiscated it from Jewish people. In fact, my very good friend who I mentioned lives in West Orange now, Edith Alice, her grandfather owned the lumberyard. Excuse me. I have to blow my nose.  INT: After May 16th, what happened to you then? You had stayed in the lumber yard. EA: On May 16th, we were told again that we have to get all our belongings, and we have to go to the railroad station. And we were all herded up. And we were taken to the railroad station. We didn't know where we were going. And they put us into [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] the cattle cars, railroad cars without windows. And hundreds of people in one train-- in one car actually. And [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] took us three days until we arrived what we now know is Auschwitz. We didn't know where we were when we arrived. We just know that finally they opened the doors. During the three days that we traveled, there was no food, except what we took with us from camp. And we didn't have much then. So some of the people even died in the cars. They were not removed for the three days. There were no-- there was no place to sit, so we're just standing there for the three days. And after three days, we arrived in Auschwitz. The doors were opened. And we saw people in [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] some kind of clothing. We didn't know what-- who they were. But they were wearing gray and blue striped-- [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] I can't call it uniforms, but clothes. And apparently they were inmates from Auschwitz who were assigned to work, to have these people get out of the cars and line-- line them up. [PAUSES FOR 5 SECONDS] And they put men to one side and women went to the other side. And then I remember my oldest sister saying that since my mother was with my younger brother, that she's going to go with my mother to help her take care of my brother, not knowing that that group was actually destined to go to the gas chamber. [PAUSES FOR 10 SECONDS] So I was with my sister Elizabeth in a different group. And [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] the last thing I remember about my father was he came over to us and said-- apparently he-- he must have known where we were, because he said to us, to my sister and me, wherever you go, they ask you if you know how to do anything, always say yes. [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] And I think it stood me in good-- that was very good advice he gave me, because it helped me later on. And that's the last time I saw him. 
INT: You're now at Auschwitz. [INAUDIBLE] You were able to stay with your sister. What was your life like? What was-- what did you do there? EA: We were put into a barrack that had [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] wooden-- what do you call those?-- where we slept-- wooden [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] like bunks. And you have a lot of women sleeping together in these bunks. In the morning, we would get a piece of bread and coffee. And then in the afternoon, we would get a soup. And that was it. Very early in the morning-- oh. How could I forget? When we first came to Auschwitz, we were taken to a-- an area where-- we were marched to an area where they shaved our heads. [PAUSES FOR 5 SECONDS] We're undressed and given gray dresses, no underwear, just a gray dress and wooden shoes. Then we were taken back to these barracks. On the way to the place where they shaved our heads and took our clothing, there was a big ditch, where apparently people from the train who couldn't-- who were too sick to move were put into these ditches with the dead, the living with the dead, just left there. [CRYING] And later on, they took these bodies and piled them up high. [CRYING] And they were just left there in a pile, because they had no time to bury them. They had to take care of first other things. Anyway, our heads were shaven. We were given this gray dress. And we were taken back to the barracks. [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] And every morning, about 4 o'clock, we went out to what was called a Zahlappell, they counted us, lined up and they counted us. We stood there for several hours until somebody came and went through the whole camp counting. Then we would go back into our barracks. We didn't work. We were not assigned any work. But I remember I volunteered to go and pick up the coffee or bread, whatever there was, to another camp, because I always thought that maybe-- [CRYING] Excuse me. Maybe I'll see my parents. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] Of course, I never did. [PAUSES FOR 7 SECONDS] So there was-- I really didn't do anything in Auschwitz except standing in Zahlappell, morning and at night again. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] And we were in Auschwitz for six weeks. And then, during one of the Zahlappells, they picked out-- during these Zahlappells, they used to pick out people who were not-- who got sick. They were always picked out. And then, after the six weeks, [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] they told us that we'll be taken out of Auschwitz to work.
[PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] And they took us to-- back to a train again, to-- and we went to Gelsenkirchen, Gelsenberg in Germany. [PAUSES FOR 7 SECONDS] And there, as we arrived, we were put into some kind of a big tent building. We were given, I remember, a bucket of soup with no utensils, no nothing. But somebody had a spoon. And about 20 or so women had to share the soup, so everybody would have a spoonful. And we would go around, because, God forbid, somebody would have more than the other. That way, we made sure that everybody had their share. And then, a day-- a few days later, some of the girls came down with typhoid fever or typhus. I'm not really sure which one it was. [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] And-- but there, we were taken to work. And we worked at the railroad station, cleaning up debris from bombing that they had. [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] And here we finally had some kind of [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] facility to shower. It was outdoors. But we had water, which we didn't have in Auschwitz. [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] In fact, in Auschwitz, even when you had to go to the bathroom-- to the latrine, not bathroom, latrine, we would-- we would be taken there. We'd be allowed a certain amount of time, maybe five minutes. And finished or not, you left. And no toilet paper. Nothing. Nothing. [PAUSES FOR 6 SECONDS] But in Gelsenkirchen, or Gelsenberg, at least we had something. We had water. And we had facilities. And we were in Gelsenkirchen from the beginning of July. [PAUSES FOR 5 SECONDS] I can't recall when it was, but one day some-- about four or five men came from Essen, Germany, from the Krupp ammunition factory. And they picked out again women, that there were about 500 of us who they wanted to come and work for the ammunition factory in Essen. And my sister and I-- and two of our friends who were with us all along came with us. So we were taken to Essen then, to a camp on Humboldtstrasse. [PAUSES FOR 8 SECONDS] There our accommodations, [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] we had straw mattresses, I guess you could call them, straw inside of some kind of a cloth on the ground. And that's-- that was our accommodation. And there we went to work every morning. We were woken up again for Zahlappell, for the counting. And then we went to the train-- a streetcar actually, I think it was a streetcar-- and went to work in the factory there. Some women worked at annealing ovens. I myself, with a small group of women, worked outside again, cleaning up debris or bringing in raw material into the factory. I remember in the winter, for instance, we were bringing in metal sheets. Many times we would bring them in and we thought that our skin will come off with the sheets, because it was so cold. And [PAUSES FOR 5 SECONDS] we did that every day. At night, go back to camp. And then I think it was around December 12th for some reason-- I don't know why remember that. But there was a bombing at the camp and our barracks were bombed. [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] 
INT: Thank you. CREW: 11/10/96.  INT: Erna, you were telling us about your day working at the Krupps ammunition factory. Would you just tell us who came to Essen with you-- Essen with you? EA: To Essen?  INT: Yes. EA: My sister and two sisters, who-- one of them went to school with me. Their name was Rene and Agnes Konigsberg. They were with us all along. In fact, when-- when my sister and I were picked out to go to work in Essen, they did not pick-- the-- the two of them were-- had typhus in Gelsenkirchen. So they were very sickly. And they were not picked to go to work. And I said to one of the men who picked me out that I am not going unless they can come with us. So he let-- he had them come also. So they came with us. We all stayed together. And we sort of looked out for each other. The four of us stayed together. When, for instance, in sleeping on the floor in the winter was very cold, and since we just had that one dress and one blanket, no coat, but one blanket, so the blanket served as a cover for at night and also as a coat for during the day. And so one blanket was not warm enough. So the four of us would sleep together and put the four blankets together. That way all of us were warm enough, or kept each other warm. And-- we-- one-- one day in the winter, I remember a very snowy, very cold winter, as we-- I mentioned before, I think, that on December 12, there was a bombing. And our camp was bombed. And also in town, the train that we used to take, the streetcar, was bombed. So it was out of commission. So from then on, we had to march to work. We went by foot. So we had to get up even earlier, because it was seven kilometers each way. So we marched to work. And one day, my wooden shoes broke as we were marching to work. And there was nothing to do. So we just-- my sister and I stayed behind. We tore off a piece of my blanket and wrapped that around my foot and marched to work, because couldn't escape. There was no place to go. I mean, the way we looked, everybody would have known right away that we are Jewish prisoners and just couldn't escape. So we just went back to work. And one of the men working in the factory saw that I didn't have shoes. And next day, he brought shoes for me. And they were all-- every once in a while you found some people who were very nice to us. They would bring in a piece of bread or whatever to help us. In fact, one time one of the workers said that he knows of a German family, a German man, who said when time comes, if the girls, if somebody needs help, he's willing to help. But we didn't know how to go about it, until in February, where there was a bombing everywhere again when-- as we were in the camp at night, the SS people who guarded us went into shelters. But we were not allowed to go into shelters. And that's when one of the women-- her name was Rose Katz, who I don't-- I never knew her before. But she approached my sister and me and said that-- asked rather, if we would be willing to escape. I said, well, where could we go? She says she knows how to get-- where one of the workers from the factory works and he would help us. So my sister and I and the two Konigsberg girls and this Rose Katz and also a sixth girl, I think her name was Gisele Israel, we escaped while the SS guards were in the shelter. 
INT: What year was this? EA: This was in 1945, it was February 1945. And we went in to a Jewish cemetery, went into a building there. But then overnight, there was a bombing, and the building was destroyed. So we went over to another side of the building. And we stayed there. And the next morning, this Rose Katz and my sister went over to the-- where this German lived. Rose Katz apparently knew where this German lived because she had done some work for him and told him that we are hiding, the six of us, and would he help in any way? So he would come over once a day and bring us either a bottle of water or a piece of bread or maybe a potato or whatever he had. But then as we were-- and he said he also would see if he can get in touch with the man who said he knew somebody he would help us. But then one day as we were hiding out in the cellar of the building in the cemetery, a German came in and asked who we were. We said we were German people. And our house-- we were from Duisburg and our homes were bombed. Our parents were out looking for another place to live. And that's why we are hiding here. And he left. But we were afraid that he might have been from police or even if he wasn't he would probably know that what we told him was not true and he would report to us. So we went over to the German and said, we cannot stay there. He has to-- so he took us to his place. But he was really a very poor man. He didn't have much. And he couldn't keep the six of us. 
INT: What was his name? EA: His name was Markwad, Mr. Markwad. And he kept us in his place. And then he told us we-- he really cannot feed us. And again, we told him about Mr. Schneider, who would know where this man who wanted to help us lived. So he went to look for Mr. Schneider, but his place was bombed out, his area. But somehow he found him. And he took us to a Mr. Niermann, Fritz Niermann, who took us in, took four of us in. Rose Katz then went to somebody else, to some-- live with somebody else. But the four of us, my sister and two Konigsberg girls and I went to this Mr. Fritz Niermann, who was the most wonderful person I have ever, ever encountered. He took us in. He was a wholesale, food wholesaler. And he had a big home. And separate from his home was an apartment [INAUDIBLE] he used to have rented out. There was no tenant there then. So he gave us this apartment or big room. Excuse me. And I remember we took our clothes off and burned it in a little stove that was in the room that he put us in. And he told us-- he opened the closet-- he had his wife and two daughters. And he said, anything you want to take from the closet to wear, whatever you need. And we took out clothes and then burnt our own. And he-- we took a bath for the first time since we left home. And-- the first time since we left home, we slept in beds on white sheets. And he treated us very, very well. He had a maid who cooked for-- for him. And he would-- she cooked for us also. And every day she would bring in the food for us. And he would keep us informed how the war was going. And he was just wonderful to us, really wonderful. I-- I couldn't imagine that anybody can be this-- because he endanger not only his life but his family's life. Because if he was caught with us hiding in his place, I'm sure that he would have been killed. And not only did he help us, but there were some Russian prisoners in town that he would have his maid cook in barrels and would bring it over to feed these Russian prisoners. 
INT: Wasn't he afraid that the Nazis would caught him collaborating with the Jews? EA: I'm sure he was. But it was done very secretly. And nobody knew that we were there. And he [? managed ?] he managed to hide us until liberation.  INT: Were you afraid with going through so many different people-- you mentioned Mr. Markwad and Mr. Schneider, that somebody in these people's families would-- EA: Would report us? Well, we-- we were never-- no, never afraid of-- of being caught and dying. I mean, there was no-- we didn't take many-- there was no risk for us. We knew what awaited us if we didn't escape or what awaited us if we stayed in camp. One of the young SS soldiers always told us, you'll never get out alive. We'll all-- always have the five minutes to kill you all. So there was no risk taking really. I mean, there was no-- the alternative definite death.  INT: Mr. Niermann, when he rescued you and put you up in his home, did you have to stay indoors? EA: Oh, yes we stayed indoors all the time, all the time. Once in awhile he would-- we would go into his apartment like, for instance, on I remember Easter. He would-- we went into his apartment and had lunch at his apartment. And the maid made waffles, which I never in my life had waffles. We had waffles with-- with the strawberries. And-- And he would always take out the map and let us know how the war was-- was going, how things were going. And I guess he was hoping that it would be over soon. And sure enough on-- in April-- I think it was around Easter time that was the very first time that we left the apartment. I guess we looked normal enough by then, because we were wearing his daughter's clothing and some of our hair-- our hair grew back, excuse me, and we went outside. And we saw a Jeep with soldiers in it. We didn't know they were American soldiers. So we ran back in, and we told him that we saw a Jeep, you know, a Jeep with soldiers. And they went out and saw that it was American soldiers, so that's-- that's how they knew. That's where we were liberated. 
INT: Just for point of reference, where was Mr. Niermann's wife and children at the time? EA: The wife and two daughters were evacuated from Essen because Essen being an industrial town was being bombed a lot. So a lot of the families, whoever could afford it, evacuated their families to other places in-- in Germany.  INT: OK, before liberation, I [INAUDIBLE] just take you back to you worked in that Krupps munition factory. EA: Yes.  INT: On occasion you said you did take things inside. What did you see inside? Who was working there? What can you describe? EA: Some of the women from our group were women-- working at ovens. Others were working on cranes. At-- at many different jobs, but inside the factory.  INT: Were you working alongside the Germans at the time? Or was it-- EA: The ones in the factory were working alongside the Germans. I was working outside. So there were no Germans there, except for the SS people who guarded us.  INT: Why do you think they used the Jews inside the munitions factory? EA: They used them, I suppose, wherever they needed help. Maybe a lot of the young men were in the army or-- during the war. So they were short of young people. And that's why they needed-- that's why they took us to work there.  INT: Were there any Jewish men working in the factory? EA: No. We haven't seen any.  INT: Was there any form of-- forms of plans of sabotage by the women knowing that you were working in a Jewish-- in a German munitions plant? EA: We-- you know, we actually, I don't know if we knew that it is an ammunition factory, because we didn't actually see any of the guns or ammunition. The finished product we didn't see. So there was no-- no-- no sabotage any kind, no. 
INT: Did you see the owner at any point of this munitions factory? EA: You mean, Krupp? No, no. We didn't. We had-- some of the people in the-- in the ammunition factory, there was one man whose name was, I think, [? Hammerschmidt. ?] And one was Braun. I remember Braun being a very tall man, lame. And he was in a very high position. Now I think that the Braun products that you see now-- you see the Krupp and the Braun product, the coffee makers and whatnot. I think that that Braun was-- apparently has his own Braun factory, or his family does. So that must've been that Braun. But he-- he was about the highest official in the factory who I have seen. But I have not seen the Krupps. Not until after the war.  INT: OK. Thank you. Now I want to take you back to Mr. Niermann's home and liberation. When you told Mr. Niermann about liberation-- EA: Yeah, yeah.  INT: --how did he react? EA: Well, he was very happy. And he said we can stay as long as we want. But, of course, we wanted to report to authorities that we are survivors. And we wanted to somehow get in touch, find out if anybody's alive, who's alive, and-- and possibly get together with somebody from our family.  INT: Why do you think Mr. Niermann took such a chance in feeding-- EA: I guess, he was just against a war. He was against the Nazis. They-- he realized it was wrong what they were doing. And for humanitarian reasons he just wanted to help. 
INT: And do you think he realized the situation he would be in-- EA: Oh, I'm sure--  INT: --had the war not-- EA: Oh, yes. Oh, I'm sure. Every-- every German had to realize that what-- how dangerous it was to-- to help. That they're risking their own lives and their families' lives.  INT: So how long did you stay after the actual liberation? You said was in what month? EA: It was in April--  INT: Of? EA: April 1945. We didn't stay very long then. We didn't stay long. We stayed long enough until his wife came back and daughters. So we met them. And-- and they were equally nice, wonderful, wonderful people. Wonderful people.  INT: No evidence of anti-Semitism, even? EA: None. None at all. They were wonderful people. And-- but we left shortly after the liberation and went to-- my sister and I went to work for the UNRRA. That's the United Nations Relief [PAUSES FOR 5 SECONDS] Association, I suppose, or what? I don't what the A stands for. And--  INT: Where was this? What town? EA: In Essen.  INT: In Essen. EA: In Essen.  INT: And what did you do for UNRRA? EA: Actually, we worked in their house-- [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] my-- Agnes Konigsberg and I stayed together and work for the UNRRA, kept house for them. And my sister Elizabeth and Rene stayed-- now, I don't remember what they did. I don't remember then what they did. But we-- we separated because the Konigsberg girls didn't want to stay together. They-- they preferred that Agnes stayed with me and-- and Rene stayed with my sister. And we did that for a short time. And then my sister and I got a job working for the North German Coal Control. And we were working as receptionists there. And the two Konigsberg girls went to work at an officer's club in Mulheim, Germany. So we stayed in-- 
INT: This was still in Essen? You were still Essen? EA: We were still in Essen. And the North German Coal Control was located in [? Kruppvilla. ?] This was a magnificent, magnificent building, gorgeous. And it was mainly a-- an English-- the Essen and-- and the Ruhr area of Germany was occupied by British. So the North German Coal Control was a British organization. And we worked for them and stayed there for quite awhile as receptionists. But then we realized that we wanted to go to-- we found out-- somehow we met-- the-- the Konigsberg girls had a brother who was in Auschwitz with my father. And he found us after the war somehow. And he told us that our father, my father, did not survive. He was in Auschwitz, but he did not survive. He died of starvation. And so we decided we had no reason to go back home at all. We knew that our-- the rest of the family died. So we decided to-- we would like to go to America. My brother-- we got in touch with my brother in Israel. And he really wanted us to come to Israel. But at that time, Israel was still under British occupation. It was not-- we could not go there legally. If we went there, it would have been illegally. And there was a lot of fighting going on. And we just did not want to go. Although I was a big Zionist before the war-- and still am-- I did not want to go illegally. And I didn't want to go anywhere where there's still fighting going on. So we decided-- decided we not-- did not want to go to Israel. We'd rather go to United States. Through my brother, we found out our aunt-- we had one aunt in Pittsburgh. We found out her address. And we had written to her. And then she had arranged having sponsored us and sent shipping-- a ticket for the ship so that we could come to the States. 
INT: What was this aunt's name? EA: Aunt Helen, Helen [? Schwartz. ?] But since we were in the British occupied area, it was not-- we couldn't go to America from there. So we had to go to a-- to an American occupation area, which was-- so we went Frankfurt then. We went to Frankfurt am Main in Germany because that was under American occupation.  INT: What year? EA: And we tried to arrange-- this was in 1946 or '7, I'm not sure. And then we started trying to arrange to go to United States. And I can say now that that wasn't very easy either because there was a quota. And Czechoslovakia did not have a very high quota. So we were told that if we have-- if we say that we are German citizens, German quota's much higher. And would be-- we'd have a much better chance of getting to United States. So we had to get papers saying that we were German citizens so that we could go to the United States. And we had somehow arranged, got that, arranged that. And that's how we came to the States.  INT: Do you know how you-- who you went to? Who put-- EA: We went to somebody in southern Germany, in Augsburg. And it was-- while we were in Frankfurt, we worked-- I worked at the JCC.  INT: What does that stand for? EA: Jewish-- [PAUSES FOR 6 SECONDS] Committee-- Jewish-- I-- [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] I forget. Jewish, some kind of committee. Jewish-- I forget what to the second C stands for. Jewish [INAUDIBLE] 
INT: Was it the JCC, or was it-- EA: JCC, yeah.  INT: JCC. EA: JCC. They still have JCCs, what does it stand for? Some Jewish community, but I don't-- Jew-- I-- I--  INT: We have JCCs, but that stands for Jewish community center here. EA: Well, maybe that's what it was, Jewish community center. Yeah. And I work for them in Frankfurt. And my sister worked in a-- a Jewish-- like an officer's club, where the American GIs would come to get together with other Jewish GIs. If it was like a-- a club, I suppose. And I guess maybe through that, whether it was through the JCC and being in touch with people, [INAUDIBLE] we found out how to try to get papers that we were German citizens. And I remember going to Augsburg to get the papers. I remember going on a train, standing all the way, because people were traveling with a lot, a lot of packages and whatnot, and trains being very crowded. But we were told how to get in touch with somebody down in Augsburg. And we got the papers. And somehow we managed to get to the United States that way.  INT: And what year did you come to the United States? EA: In 1948. 1948. But before we came to the States, in 19-- it must have been during 19-- end of 1947, just before we came to the States, I was-- we were contacted by some Americans who found out that we were working at the Krupp factories. And they wanted us to testify at the Nuremberg trials. So my sister and I were taken to Nuremberg for the Krupp trials, where we testified for about two days. 
INT: You became involved with the war crimes trial through the American soldiers? EA: Yes. Yeah.  INT: How do you think they found out about you? EA: Well, I don't know if they were soldiers. They were lawyers. I think it was one of their lawyers from Nuremberg came up and contacted us and asked if we would come and testify.  INT: Do you know this gentleman's name? EA: I forget. It was a Jewish man. It was a Jewish man, a lawyer. And I forget his name.  INT: Did you report to a witness-- that you witnessed an investigative organization before the trial? Or-- EA: No, no, there was no pre-trial investigation of any kind. Nobody asked us any questions. They just wanted us to come and testify at the Nuremberg trials.  INT: Did anybody take your statement prior to your going up to Nuremberg? EA: I don't to recall anybody doing that, no.  INT: Did you hesitate at all going to testify? EA: No, not really. Not really. No.  INT: Other than this Jewish American lawyer, were there any other contacts you had before you actually went to Nuremberg for the trial? EA: I think he-- you're finished with the tape, is that it?  INT: You can answer that question. EA: Oh. Did I have any contact with--  INT: Did you have any other contacts other than this America Jewish lawyer before you went up to Nuremberg for the trial? EA: No, not really. 
INT: Thank you. CREW: 11/10/96.  INT: We were talking about the young American or the American that was your contact. You said that you didn't know anybody else at that point. When did you go up to Nuremberg to testify? EA: It must have been either November or December 1947, because it was shortly before I came to the States. And I left Germany for the United States in January. So it had to be either probably December of 1947.  INT: Did you stay for the whole trial? EA: No. No. Just for the couple of days of testimony.  INT: Now, you were living at the time at Frankfurt. How did you get to Nuremberg? EA: I suppose with two-- I'm trying to think whether we went by train or maybe they picked us up. I think they picked us-- must have picked us up in Frankfurt by car and took us to Nuremberg.  INT: And upon arrival, how did they treat you? EA: Wonderfully. It was very-- everybody was very nice and very kind. And [PAUSES FOR 5 SECONDS] I remember somebody saying, there's a Czech general here. And since you've got girls that are Czechoslovakian, we'll have to introduce you. And I was so embarrassed because I realized I had a complete mental block. I could not speak Czech. I couldn't-- couldn't believe that I forgot the language that I had spoken for so many years. It was just a complete block. And I-- I remember being very embarrassed about it. And so we testified at the trial for about two days, and [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] then we went back to Frankfurt for a short while and from there to Bremerhaven to-- to come to the States. 
INT: Just for clarification purposes, you said that they knew you were Czech. Yet you were coming to America under a German-- EA: But nobody-- nobody questioned that. Nobody question-- really, nobody questioned it. That-- they didn't-- first of all, at the Nuremberg trials, nobody knew that we are going to the United States with-- as German citizens. Nobody knew that. So as far as they were concerned, we were Czech, and we always were. It's just for the-- for that trip. We were Czech.  INT: Now, oh-- testifying with you was whom else? EA: My sister.  INT: Your sister Elizabeth. EA: Yeah.  INT: OK. Could you describe your day in court? EA: I remember being in court and Alfried Krupp and some of-- some other men sitting there with earphones on, and they were very dour looking. And they just asked us to describe what kind of work we did and what the living conditions were, what we did, whether we got paid for it or not. And-- and-- and then questions asked. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] That was-- that was about it. You know, it's--  INT: You were testifying against? EA: Krupp-- Alfried Krupp. Yeah.  INT: Now, he was the owner? What was his position for-- EA: Well, he--  INT: --the relation for the Krupp? EA: He is the owner of the Krupp factories-- ammunition factories. I guess it's the largest ammunition factory in Germany-- prominent men.  INT: And you were called as a witness to testify for what purpose? EA: Because we worked as slave labor for Krupp. 
INT: Had you ever seen Alfried Krupp before? EA: No. Only at-- at the trial.  INT: And how did you know that that was-- EA: Because when we came in, they told us who the accused are.  INT: Was anybody else on-- at the same trial with Mr. Krupp? EA: There-- yes, there were some other people, but I don't recall who they were. I really can't tell you who they were.  INT: On your day in court, you said it lasted two days. Do you know anybody else in the courtroom? Was anybody else recognizable? What about the judge, or the-- EA: The judge, yes. There were the judge, named Telford Taylor-- very pleasant man. And I remember when I got to Pittsburgh, when I came to the State and got to [INAUDIBLE], I had a very nice letter from him thanking me for testifying and offering any help should I-- should we need it in the future.  INT: Did you know any of the attorneys? Were you talking to the attorneys-- EA: No.  INT: --on either side? EA: No. No, I don't remember talking to anybody, you know, privately outside the court.  INT: What was your impression of the trial attorneys, the way they questioned you? EA: I thought they were very efficient. I didn't have much courtroom experience, so I really cannot compare to. But it seemed like they were very efficient.  INT: What language did they question you in? EA: In German. 
INT: And you were fluent? EA: Oh, no. You know what? They-- we spoke in English. I just realized. We spoke in English. We did not want to speak German. Although we spoke German fluently, we did not want to speak German. So we-- we spoke German probably more fluently at that time than English, but we decided that we are going to speak English.  INT: The time that you weren't in court during those two days, what were-- did you do? Did they put you up while-- EA: Yes. I think they put us up in a hotel, I suppose. I don't really remember too much about it. It's a big blur.  INT: Did you experience any anti-Semitism in Nuremberg when you were up there testify? EA: No, because we didn't have much contact except for the American lawyer who picked us up and put us up and-- and-- and then the people in the courtroom. And so we didn't-- didn't have much contact with other-- with Germans.  INT: What was your most memorable moment at the trial? EA: That's hard to say. I guess just the first-- first time we stepped into the courtroom. Not having been in a courtroom before, it was very impressive and very-- at the same time very intimidating. But I suppose that-- that was it.  INT: How long did it take for you to testify? EA: About two days.  INT: How did you learn about the outcome of the trial? EA: We learned while we were in the States, through newspaper or radio broadcast, or what-- I think it must have been newspaper-- much later-- that-- that he has been sentenced to a certain amount of years in prison. But-- but it was much later. It was in the States already when we learned about it. 
INT: How did you feel about the outcome? EA: I guess I was-- was satisfying to know that at least he had-- he has been sentenced to some years in prison-- that he just didn't get away scot-free.  INT: Did you keep in touch with anyone from the trial? EA: No, I did not. I wish I had. The judge-- Judge Telford Taylor in his letter said we should keep in touch, but I didn't. I guess I just wanted to forget everything that was connected to that life. I didn't-- and-- so I didn't keep in touch.  INT: So you arrived in America. EA: Yes.  INT: What was the date and year? EA: I arrived in United States on February 5, 1948. We left Bremerhaven in January. I can't tell you what date. Must have been January-- took us three weeks to get there, so it must have been middle of January. We came on a ship that was a troop carrier that was converted, and we hit a very rough sea-- in-- the North Sea. We had a terrible storm. The engine broke down in the-- in the-- on the ship, and the engineer could not fix it. Everybody was trying. And then, my future husband fixed the ship-- fixed the engine. He was radio officer on the ship. And a lot of the people had to send telegrams to their relatives telling them that the ship will be late, because they had these relatives waiting for them at-- in New York at arrival. And they had to tell them that it will be late. So he was swamped with work. And I remember standing with my sister and some other women, talking, and he came and joined us and started talking to us. And then he asked me if-- if I could help him. He asked me if I can work an adding machine and whatnot. And I said, well, I never did, but if he showed me how to, I'm sure I can do it. And I helped him. And then before we arrived in New York, he said he would like to see me, and would I call him? Because I didn't know where I would be. And I was met with-- by relatives-- and the-- by my cousin who lived in New York, and he sent us directly to Pittsburgh. So I didn't get a chance to call him. He lived in New York. But while-- while I was in Pittsburgh, I had written to him and called him one time. And he only stayed in New York for a week or so between trips to Europe. So I called him, and then he left for his trip. And this was in February. So in May of that same year, we left-- my sister and I left Pittsburgh, came back to New York. So I thought, I'll give him a call again. And I did, and we got together. And I saw him, like, once a month when he came back from his trip. And then in September when he came back, he said he wants to leave the ship and the Merchant Marines and wants to get a job in New York, settle down, and would I marry him? 
INT: And this wonderful man-- EA: And we were married in November. That same--  INT: What is this wonderful man's name? [LAUGHS] EA: Bernie Anolik. And we had a wonderful, wonderful life since then-- a wonderful family.  INT: So you and Bernie got married in October? EA: In November.  INT: November. EA: November 28, 1948.  INT: And you settled in? EA: In New York for-- we were in New York for about [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] one year. Yeah-- close to it, not even-- not even a whole year. We lived in New York, and then we moved to New Jersey.  INT: Do you have any children? EA: Yes, I have two wonderful children. I have a daughter, Miriam. She was born in 1949 in New York. And I had a son who was born in New Jersey-- in Hackensack, New Jersey-- in 1952-- September 20, 1952. Yeah.  INT: And do you have any grandchildren? EA: I have four wonderful grandchildren. My daughter has three boys-- David, Joshua, and Daniel. And my son Jonathan has a girl, Jennifer. She's eight years old.  INT: What did you and your husband do after you settled in New Jersey? EA: Well, we lived in New Jersey, but he worked in New York. He worked for RCA Institutes. He taught electronics. He was an electrical engineer. And we lived in-- at first we lived in Duma, New Jersey for two years, until we bought a house in River Edge, New Jersey. Stayed there for four years, and then we moved to another house-- a new house-- in Bergenfield, where we lived for 31 years before moving to Cherry Hill. 
INT: Are you active in any survivors' groups currently? EA: No, I'm not.  INT: Are you a member of a synagogue currently? EA: Yes-- member of Temple Beth Sholom, a conservative synagogue. And-- I'm not very active, but fairly active. I'm definitely involved.  INT: Erna, you never told us what you did. Did you ever go back to work? EA: Yes, after-- when my children were grown. Miriam was in college, and Jonathan was about to go to college, I decided, I'll go out to work. And I-- I worked for Burlington Industries as a textile engineer-- textile planner.  INT: Great. Did you ever meet Mr. Niermann again? EA: Yes. In 1970, Bernie and I went back to Europe for the first time. We had a trip that was organized by RCA for the employees. And we went, took a-- a two-week trip which went to England then Holland and to Paris. No, I think-- yes. England, Holland, and Paris. While we were in Holland, we were so close to Essen that I-- I asked Bernie-- and we were driving-- so I said, why don't we drive into Essen and just visit the Niermanns? I-- so we did. We drove into Essen, and I just called them. They didn't know where-- where I was, that I was in Europe. They didn't know I was coming. And I called Mr. Niermann. And at that time, their older daughter was very sick, and his wife was at-- at the daughter's house. So he called her, asked her to come home because we are here. And he was absolutely delight-- it was like a long-lost daughter came home. He was just so happy to see me. He was just wonderful, delightful. So we spent just a couple of hours with-- with him-- with him and his wife. And it was just wonderful, wonderful. Several years later, I went back to Europe again. In the meantime, he died. But we went back, and I visited his wife, his daughter-- the one who was sick in 1970 died also. And-- but he had-- his younger daughter survived, and his wife lived with the daughter. So we visit-- had a lovely, lovely visit with them one time also. It was a wonderful family-- wonderful family. 
INT: Did you ever go back to your old hometown in Uzhorod? EA: No, I did not. I did not.  INT: Did you ever go back to Essen later on in the-- EA: In 1981, I went back. In 1981, I had a letter from the former synagogue of Essen, asking me-- telling me that they are converting the synagogue, into-- making it into a Jewish museum. And would I come for the opening of the Jewish museum, having been in camp in Essen? So I said I would. And my husband was working, had a job in Israel at that time. And I was with him in Israel, so I went from Israel into Germany. I got on the plane in Tel Aviv, a Lufthansa. And there were large group of people, and I heard somebody speaking Hungarian. And I went over to talk to them to find out who they were and where they're going. I found they were two women who were in camp with me at-- working at Krupp. One of them married a man from-- a Jewish man from Essen, and they were-- and she lived on a kibbutz in Israel. The other woman-- so she was going home, with-- back to Essen, with her husband. Because he was a-- an Essen-- former Essen resident, and they invited to the museum opening, residents-- residents-- former residents of Essen-- Jewish residents. They invited about a dozen people from Israel. This woman went with her husband. There was another woman. She apparently lived in Sweden all the time, but she was now in-- in Israel. Her husband died, and she went back to Israel. And she was very sick, but she was also going to the opening of the museum. And when I told them who I was, they could not believe. Because apparently, they were told that-- after we have escape-- we had escaped from camp, the SS people told them that they caught-- that we were caught and we were hung. So they thought that we were dead. So they were just-- they couldn't believe that I was one of the six people who escaped, that I was actually alive. 
INT: Now, do you keep in contact with any of the others? I know your sister-- EA: Yeah.  INT: --but the others? EA: The other two, yes. They both live in-- in Florida, and I speak to Rene occasionally. [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] Also, I-- I have to mention the-- when we-- when I went back to Germany for the opening of the museum, I also visited with Mrs. Niermann and their daughter at that time also. And that was a very interesting experience, because they had schoolchildren, classes of children, come to the-- to the museum, to the synagogue, and had us talk to them. And they were very interested to see-- to hear what happened. And they all said that their parents or grandparents never talked about it. They never knew about it-- never knew what happened. And I told them that that couldn't possibly be because here we were marching-- every day, every morning-- from our camp to the factory in the green-- I mean the gray-- dress that we got still in Auschwitz, looking the way we did. People had to see us. They had to see us coming back and forth from the factory to the camp.  INT: Why do you think you survived? EA: Lucky coincidences-- that's all. That's all I can attribute it to. Because first of all, I was lucky that I was at the age I was at. I was in my prime of my life. Being 20 years old, I was very healthy, so I was picked out to go to work rather than put into-- into the gas chamber. So that was one lucky coincidence. I was lucky that when we were in camp in Essen, the camp was bombed, but it was bombed during the day when we were working. We came back, and there-- there was a-- another women's camp-- I think it was Polish prisoners of war-- camp next to ours. And that was bombed, and many women were killed. We came back to our camp. We saw legs, and arms, and whatnot from people who were killed. And we were saved. [INAUDIBLE] I mean, it was just a coincidence. Also in-- in-- at work, the factory was bombed. And-- so many times-- even our camp was bombed. And just being at the right place, at the right time-- even when we escaped and we were hiding in the-- in the cemetery. We were in this building. One side of the building was bombed and collapsed, and we were in the other side of the building. So I guess just-- just being lucky. 
INT: Do you have a message or a lesson for your children or grandchildren from this? EA: I just hope they never have to experience anything like that ever, anywhere. Not only they, but any people just because of their religion or whatever. And they have to remember that Jews went through a lot and-- [PAUSES FOR 5 SECONDS] and I'm very glad that I-- that my children are very good Jewish people. They-- they both belong to synagogues, conservative synagogues. They have wonderful Jewish homes. They bring up their children Jewish, and I just hope it stays that way.  INT: We appreciate you telling your story. Why did you-- why are you willing to tell us your story? EA: I have never told my story to my children or grandchildren. I guess in the beginning when my children were growing up, I didn't want to revisit my life-- that life. I didn't want to tell them about-- I never wanted to talk about it. I'm sure they knew because occasionally they would ask about grandparents or relatives or families, so I-- But I never went into details telling them the story. They were probably afraid to ask me questions because they didn't want to hurt me. And the same with the grandchildren. So I-- but I think that-- I know that I know very little about my parents and my grandparents, and unfortunately, there's nobody to ask question of. And I think that maybe when-- by the time my-- my grandchildren would be interested in knowing what-- about their ancestry or their grandparents or whatever, there won't be anybody around to ask questions and tell them about it. So I thought, well, maybe if it's recorded and if they're interested, they can find information there. And I think it's good for Jewish people in general to know what happened, that everybody should remember it-- especially here when there are so many people saying that it-- it never happened. 
INT: Well, I thank you very much. You were wonderful. EA: You're welcome. Erna, could you explain who is in this photo, please, and the significance of this? EA: This is a class photograph of my Hebrew school gymnasium class. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] In the center, there's the professor. His name was Dr. [? Farkas. ?] And as you see, all the boys are wearing their uniform caps. Since it was a Hebrew gymnasium, they couldn't go bareheaded anyway. But they were-- they had a-- a cap that girls didn't have to wear, but the boys did.  INT: And where are you? EA: I am in this middle row, third from the left.  INT: Thank you. EA: OK?  INT: Now we're going to take the picture. EA: Yeah.  INT: And-- EA: This is a photograph of-- in the forefront is my grandfather and grandmother, Herman and Rebecca Roth. And behind my grandfather, to the left, is my Aunt Helen from Pittsburgh-- the one who sponsored our trip to the United States. And behind my grandmother are three of my aunts. The one in the middle, between my grandmother and grandfather, is my Aunt Ida who lived on the same street as we did-- my father's sister. And to the right is my father, holding my cousin [? Mary Anne. ?] My Aunt Helen, and [? Mary Anne ?] and her sister [? Sarah ?] [? Anne, ?] and my uncle came-- this picture must have been taken in 1932 because they came to visit, and they brought their daughter [? Mary Anne ?] for an operation in Vienna. And while they were in Vienna, they came to visit the family. This is a photograph taken in 1981 when I came to-- back to Essen for the opening of the museum. All the way to the right is the woman who was in charge of the museum. I'm standing next to her. Next to me is the woman who used to-- both women with me were in camp with me in Essen. I didn't know them. I met them on the plane going from Israel to Germany. The one next to me used to live in Sweden. After the war, she lived in Sweden. Her husband died, and then she went back to Israel. The other lady on the left married a-- a man from Essen, and they live on a kibbutz in Israel. And she was also going back. CREW: 10/96. 
INT: Erna, would you please tell us the significance of this book that we're looking at now, please? EA: Yes. When I went back to Germany in 1981 for the exhibit for the museum-- opening of the museum, some people apparently put together this booklet about the six of us who-- six women who escaped from a camp. The picture on the booklet is supposed to be one of the camps in Essen. I don't-- it was not really the camp I was in but was one of the camps in Essen. But in the booklet, it describes the camp we were in, what we did, and how we escaped. So I was given this book when I was in Germany for the opening of the Jewish Museum.  INT: Thank you. Erna, the mishpocheh is in place, and everybody would like to talk to you. Would you be kind enough to introduce your lovely family to us? EA: Yes. Here's my husband, Bernie, my daughter, Miriam, my son, Jonathan, Jonathan's wife, Susan, my youngest grandson, Daniel, and my only granddaughter, Jennifer, my middle grandson, Joshua, and next to Joshua is my son-in-law, Elliott Cooperman. BERNARD ANOLIK: There's one-- one thing I wanted to mention. EA: And one grandson is missing, David Cooperman. BERNARD ANOLIK: My-- when I was talking to my wife, Erna, I found that there are certain things she left out. Like for instance, she wanted to mention that when she was once kicked in the behind during a-- did you mention that? EA: No, I didn't. BERNARD ANOLIK: Behind-- EA: That was for my 21st birthday. There was an air-- there was a bombing-- air raid, and I thought, I'll sneak out and get a drink of water. And the SS men caught me and kicked me. BERNARD ANOLIK: And he said-- EA: So that's how I remember my 21st birthday. BERNARD ANOLIK: Anyway, she-- she-- she told me about it. And that's, of course, quite a bit later. And Erna said that you don't-- you won't feel it, because before I leave this camp, I'm gonna shoot you dead. So-- EA: I already told them that. BERNARD ANOLIK: You told them that? EA: Yeah. BERNARD ANOLIK: Oh, OK. All right. That's all I wanted to mention. You want to take it back? 
INT: How do feel-- how do you feel about your wife? BERNARD ANOLIK: She's the most intelligent person I've ever met in my life. [LAUGHTER]  INT: And you know that 'cause she married you, right? [LAUGHTER] EA: Right. BERNARD ANOLIK: That's true. EA: We had a wonderful marriage.  INT: Would you like to say something to your mom? [LAUGHTER] MIRIAM COOPERMAN: Yeah, but I don't know if it's going to work. [INTERPOSING VOICES] [LAUGHTER] Where's the box of tissues? UNIDENTIFIED SPEAKER: The tissues-- MIRIAM COOPERMAN: Well, I hope that this interview that you just did-- the-- the one trait that I think is the most important about my mother has come through, and it's the trait that I think got her through the Holocaust, that allowed her to establish such a good life in America and [SOBBING] raise two successful children. And I'm not going-- [SOBBING] [LAUGHTER] and make her as loved and admired by everyone she meets as she is, and that is her independence-- her strong sense of-- of independence. And I know it started much earlier, when she tells me stories about her tomboy childhood. And although I know she feels that she survived the Holocaust just from pure luck, I know that [SIGHS] the, you know, the contacts that she made, the-- [SOBBING] the ability, the daring, the escaping from concentration camp is just another manifestation of this. And I think it's the same spirit of independence that allowed her to get reestablished in Germany without the post-war agencies that made her leave the auspices of her aunt in Pittsburgh and strike out on her own in New York. And that same sense that allowed my brother and I to be such successful adults. [CRYING] EA: Most wonderful. [SOBS] Just wonderful, wonderful. MIRIAM COOPERMAN: Yes. And I hope-- I feel that I've led a very charmed life compared to hers. And I hope that if I ever am tested the way you were, I would be able to meet those challenges. EA: I hope you never get tested, sweetheart. I hope you're never, never tested. I hope you're never tested. But I-- I was-- I have the most wonderful family. And I keep telling everybody, I have two children who have never in their lives-- there wasn't a day when they did something that I was upset about. [LAUGHTER] I mean, they are just wonderful. MIRIAM COOPERMAN: That's why I wanted to read it. I thought I'd be better if I read it, but it would have been just as bad. [LAUGHING] EA: Wonderful. And I-- [INTERPOSING VOICES] and when I was in camp, I didn't care if I survive or not. But now that I did survive, I think I'm so lucky that I did, because I have the family that I have.
MIRIAM COOPERMAN: Thank you. EA: Oh, good. [LAUGHTER] MIRIAM COOPERMAN: Thank you. All right, your turn. [LAUGHING] JONATHAN ANOLIK: I'm not sure I'm quite as eloquent as-- as Miriam was, but what she said was very, very accurate. There's a life force about my mother, which is just-- I think radiates from her and makes her very much liked by other people. She makes friends very easily. She remembers-- has a amazing memory for people, remembers people years and years later, which I admire. But I think that life force has come through, I think, both to my sister and I. And I certainly hope that we can pass it on to, you know, my daughter and, and-- I'm crying-- EA: Don't cry. He's [INAUDIBLE] [LAUGHTER] JONATHAN ANOLIK: Oh. But I just-- certainly the most, most wonderful mother I could have-- EA: Thank you. Thank you, sweetheart. JONATHAN ANOLIK: --possibly imagined. EA: Well, I have two wonderful, two wonderful kids, so-- SUSAN ANOLIK: OK. [LAUGHTER] EA: OK, Susan your turn. SUSAN ANOLIK: Yeah, I just wanted to say that [CRYING] being that my mother died when I was six years old, this is really the only mother that I, that I ever knew. And she's the most incredible person I've ever met. EA: Oh, thank you, Susan. SUSAN ANOLIK: And if I could think of one word to describe her, is just-- she's just very strong physically, emotionally. And I don't know whether it's because of the experiences during the war or in spite of the experiences, but she doesn't complain about anything. She never complains she's too tired to do anything. She never complains she's too tired to play with my daughter. EA: Never. [INTERPOSING VOICES] SUSAN ANOLIK: She just has the-- an amazing amount of energy I've, I've-- and she's my role model. So-- EA: Oh, thank you, Susan. Thank you. SUSAN ANOLIK: She's very special. DANIEL COOPERMAN: Well, when I come over here to sleep over, I really enjoy it. We watch together every night. Well, whenever we get the newspaper, I help her with the puzzles. She usually does all the thinking, though. [LAUGHTER] She takes me to her pool during the summer. She gave me the courage to go off the high dive. And I just really love her. EA: I love you, sweetheart. [INAUDIBLE] [LAUGHTER] [INTERPOSING VOICES] JOSHUA COOPERMAN: My grandma is one of the most important people in my lives. And whenever I'm here, she always listens to me when I talk about physics or biking. And even though I'm the only one talking, she'll still listen and make an input. And she also makes the best stuffed, stuffed cabbage [LAUGHTER] there is. And that's why I love her. [LAUGHTER] SUSAN ANOLIK: Jennifer? JENNIFER ANOLIK: I love my grandma, and I think she was very lucky to get away from the Germans. EA: Mm hmm. JONATHAN ANOLIK: Very good. SUSAN ANOLIK: Hold up the picture, Jen. Into the camera, Jen. [LAUGHTER] ELLIOTT COOPERMAN: I wanted to say something about, again, about using John's words about life force and Miriam's words about independence and add the word resilience. When I first met my wife, Miriam, in-- [LAUGHTER] [SIGHS] --her apartment was a, a poster and it said, if life gives you lemons, make lemonade. And the more I thought about that, I really feel like there's, there's a lot in-- that, that said to me a lot about my wife's qualities and, and-- which I think are so much from her mother and her mother's experiences. And I, I think Erna has that special resilience which she, she lives her life with and has been a model to all of us. EA: Thank you. MIRIAM COOPERMAN: I'd like to read something. My, my oldest son, David, is sick today, and so he couldn't come. But he wrote a few words. My grandma has always played an active role in my life. She helped me enjoy bicycling and walking and learning. She continually wants the most out of life for herself and those around her. [SOBBING] This guiding principle has made me a better, more aware person. I love her dearly. EA: I told you it's  a bicycling family. [LAUGHTER]