INT: Today is November 8, 1996. I'm conducting an interview with Eli Sommer. The interviewer's name is Sylvia Messeri. The interview is being conducted in Fairlawn, New Jersey in the United States of America. And it is being conducted in English. My name is Sylvia Messeri, M-E-S-S-E-R-I. Today is November 8, 1996. I am conducting an interview with Eli Sommer. The interview is being conducted in Fairlawn, New Jersey in the United States of America, in English. What is your name, please? ES: Eli Sommer. E-L-I S-O-M-M-E-R.  INT: And what was your name at birth? And spell it, please. ES: Elieser Sommer. E-L-I-E-S-E-R, Sommer, S-O-M-M-E-R.  INT: And when were you born? ES: I was born April 2, 1919. In--  INT: How old are you? ES: Right now, I am 67.  INT: And where were you born? ES: I was born in Poland, P-O-L-A-N-D.  INT: What was the name of the town? ES: Tarnow. T-A-R-N-O-W.  INT: Mr. Sommer, where is Tarnow? ES: Tarnow is southern Poland. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] And before the war, belonged to Austria and Hungary empire. But I was born right after Polish independence.  INT: What kind of town was it? ES: It was a town about between 55,000, 60,000 people with a big Jewish population. I would say about 40% of Jews were in-- were in Tarnow, about 25,000 before the war. And during the war even more, because they brought a lot of people to Tarnow.  INT: Before the war, what did the Jews do there? What was the type of work that they did? ES: Actually, the Jewish population was-- [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] [INAUDIBLE] they were workers. A lot of-- a lot of tailors, because it was confection-- I don't know how you-- confection is in English or not. And-- and there were a lot people who were working in this industry. Beside that, there were a lot of people who in all kind of work-- had all kind of work, lot of merchants, a lot of all kind of profession. There were doctors and-- and dentists. And but mostly, I would say, mostly workers. And big percentage was the tailors and the-- and the industry, confection industry. There were a few factories in this industry. And Tarnow was known in Poland as a-- as a big, good, good ready-wear-suits. 
INT: What about your father? What was his name, please? ES: My father was Chaim Ayosef Sommer. He was born 19-- 1882. And he was a merchant. And actually, my whole family, as far as I remember, as far as I know, was in this-- this business for quite a long time. And it was a whole-sale flour business. We were supplying the bakers with flour. And it was pretty good business. I remember when I was a kid before the depression, we used to rent some mills and with partners. And we used to sell the flours to our store, to the bakers.  INT: And your father, was he a religious man? ES: Yes. He was Orthodox man. He was not-- he was not, like, that he would-- he was Zionist religious. He belonged to-- to-- what is the? I forgot the Zionist Organization, Zionist Religious Organization. And-- [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] but he was very religious. He was [NON-ENGLISH]. That means he was who was running with another elected officials to shul that he belonged to. And--  INT: What was the name of the shul? ES: The shul was [INAUDIBLE]. I was on [INAUDIBLE] Tarnow. And it was pretty good size of a shul. It was, I would say, a few hundred of people, families belonged there. It was not like shul here. It was not rich, but people were coming everyday to shul and especially on-- on Saturday and holidays.  INT: And your mother? ES: My mother was in-- taking care of the family. She was a housewife, as you would call here. And-- 
INT: What was her name, please? ES: Her name was Sedonia Chaindl And her maiden name was [INAUDIBLE]. And it was a pretty good marriage as far as I know. I never saw anything which discords or-- or loud voice in our family. And that's what I can say about my mother.  INT: Was she religious also? ES: I-- she was religious, because my father was more religious. That's my impression. Because as-- as far as I know, she was always going to the shul when the holidays were on. But I-- I think my father was more religious. And naturally, being a wife of a religious man, she was religious. She had a kosher house. That goes without saying. And--  INT: Did she wear a wig? ES: No. No. No wig. We were not that religious. I mean, we were Orthodox, but not-- no wigs.  INT: What were your mother's hobbies? ES: I guess her family was her hobbies. She lived for-- for the kids. And that's main thing what she did. Later on, when the kids were grown-- and I was the youngest in the family. And I was a teenager already. Being that she didn't have special-- anything specific to do, she liked to come to the stores and be involved a little bit in the business. But that was-- we had a help in the house. So she was not tied down to the house.  INT: Was that usual to have help in the house? ES: The help was very cheap before the war in Poland. And you didn't have to be very rich to-- to have help. And it was a help that-- live-in help. She was sleeping in-- and-- I-- it-- it depends what circles. In our circles, it was not unusual. Naturally, there were much-- there were a lot  of people who were very poor. And they didn't have help. And-- but I don't think it was that unusual, because it was very, very cheap. And usually, even people who were not well-to-do, being that the peasants were so poor, they were happy to have a house to live in and food to have on the table. That's about it. 
INT: Did your mother cook? ES: Yeah, she cooked. With-- and the help cook helped her. But mainly, she was always preparing. She was doing the shopping, and she was preparing. She was involved always in the house. That was her hobby, I guess.  INT: What was your favorite food? ES: Oh, I don't know. I-- in our house, everybody had to finish whatever was put on the table. It was not like this, I don't like here. And I don't like this. And I don't like that. And I remember my mother used to-- always used to say that in her family, everybody is eating everything put on the table.  INT: Did you have brothers and sisters? ES: Yes. I--  INT: Could you tell me about them? ES: I have one sister, which was-- she was the oldest one. And I had two old--  INT: What's her name? ES: Her name was Minka. And then I have two older brothers. One was Moses, [? Monek, ?] and one was [? Benek, ?] Baruch. And naturally, was a big difference in-- being that I was the youngest one, it was a big difference in-- in the year-- in the age. My-- my sister was 11 years older than I was. My brother was seven and a half years older, and one five years older. So I was the youngest one.  INT: Where did you go to school? ES: I was going to a private school. It was a school which was formed about two years before I-- my-- I was going-- before I started school. And my brothers didn't-- my other brothers didn't go to this school. It was a Hebrew school where they taught the regular-- regular public Polish curriculum. On top of this, you had to have the Hebrew history and Hebrew language and Hebrew-- and Hebrew religion. So we had about six hours every day school. And it was six times a week. 
INT: What was your favorite subject? ES: History. History was always my favorite subject. And I'm still very interested in history and politics and what takes the world goes-- [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] the current history I like, too. So that was my favorite things.  INT: What did you do after school? ES: After school, we used to play soccer. That's what-- we called it football. And I was very interested in all kind of sports. I was playing ping pong. And I was playing soccer. And I was playing all kind of sports, actually, whatever I could, didn't cost too much money. Because my father was not very-- he-- he allowed me to do everything. But he wouldn't encourage me to do. Because he always thought that I should learn more and I put more time for books and-- and all kind things that with use more-- more head than sports. And being that he was Orthodox, actually, he-- he never went for sports. It's not like today that they take people, kids are going, father-- father, son going with the kids to play soccer, encourage to play all kind of sports. We had to do it on our own.  INT: Did you listen to him? ES: Not always, no. When it comes to these kind of things, I always did whatever I wanted. And-- I remember when my-- I was pretty wild kid, too, when I was young. And I remember when my-- I had the family in the United States. My mother-- my mother had brothers here. And-- and they came in 1928 to visit. And they were ashamed. I was so wild. And I was always-- and my mother was ashamed that she didn't brought me right. But I guess that was my time-- time of life that I was wild. And once I grew up a little bit, then I changed. 
INT: What other activities did you participate in? ES: When I was 12, I got involved in the-- in the Zionist movement. I belonged to [NON-ENGLISH], which was middle of the road Zionist, general Zionist. And-- and I was involved very much. We had a group of boys and girls that we used to meet every day. And we used to have all kind of-- [PAUSES FOR 6 SECONDS] we went through the history of Zionism. And we had all kind of discussions, and all kind of-- of-- it was involvement in Zionist movement. That's-- that's main thing is. And we had a good time, too.  INT: Did you plan to go to Palestine? ES: Oh, yes. When I was a little bit older, around 16, everybody was trying. First of all, in Poland was a big-- it was anti-Semitic country. And it was not a future for one-- for a man who went to school, finished school. And for instance, when my brother was studying later, he couldn't-- when he finished, he started medicine in France. He couldn't come to-- to Poland and start his own-- to work in his profession. I have cousins who were doctors and were engineers. And they finished, and they worked. One doctor was-- one cousin was my-- was a doctor. And he was working for a director of hospital. But he couldn't-- being that he was Jewish, he couldn't make the-- the examination in English-- in Polish, because on the account that he was Jewish. They wouldn't let him take the examination. And without an examination, he couldn't open an office. So he had to struggle. He made-- he was a doctor after quite a few years after the-- after finish school. And he made a living by making injections. And he couldn't make a living on it. But that-- that was the way it was. And so on the question that you asked me, if-- [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] the question was if I wanted to go to Israel? 
INT: Palestine. ES: Palestine. Everybody wanted to get out. Being that I was a Zionist-- Zionist, naturally, that was my-- my goal, to go to Israel and at that time, Palestine. And-- and the only way to get out was to do the matura, and to-- because after the matura, I could go to the-- apply to Jerusalem, for instance, University. At that time I was a member, because my middle brother applied later on. And he went to Israel at the Jerusalem University. Which he didn't, actually, but he went out. He applied. He was accepted. And this way, he went to Palestine at that time. So that was our goal. And-- [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] and that's the only way. Because, otherwise, you had to go to the army. You got-- once you got in the army, it was-- I don't remember. I think it was three years when I'm not mistaken. Three years-- I don't remember exactly. And so everybody wanted to get out before that time if you could.  INT: You mentioned ping pong. How much did you play? ES: Oh, I was-- [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] we had-- we had a-- a sports club, Samson. And somehow we were very good in it, in ping pong. And we-- I have a very good friend. Actually, he belonged to the same [INAUDIBLE], same organization, together. And he was a champion of Poland in ping pong. And he was very good tennis players-- tennis player, too. 
INT: What's his name? ES: Schift. He was-- and he-- he went. He was a champion in Poland. And then we have quite a few good players. And--  INT: Were you on a team? A ping pong team? ES: Yes. We were on a ping pong-- were on a team. And we were champion of Poland, actually, for quite a few years.  INT: Did you play against only other Jews? Or, you played-- ES: No, no. No. That was general, general. We played all kind of teams, Polish team. And we were-- we were champion of Poland. And this [? Milek ?] Schift, he was a champion for quite a few years, through the war, actually.  INT: Did you have Polish friends? ES: Not too many. Not too many Polish. Somehow I was always involved in the Jewish organization. And in Poland, it was very hard to have actually Jewish-- Polish friends. We did-- in commercial-- commercial life, we were involved, you know, in business with all kind of Polish people. But being that it was sort of very anti-Semitic [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] condition, usually Jews kept separately and-- and the Poles kept separately.  INT: Did you face any anti-Semitic incidences before the war? ES: Yes. But I wouldn't say-- I wouldn't say that I was-- being that I-- I am not involved with them-- with Poles, I didn't have too many-- too many occasion to be with them. But you could-- during the-- whenever you met, you could feel and you could notice certain things. But I, personally, never had any-- any-- any-- time-- any opportunities to see it, I mean to-- by hitting or something, no. There were some-- sometimes when we were playing soccer games, for instance, or kind of games and sports games, there were very occasion that, you know, they were hitting, they were fighting, and, you know. But-- but this I wouldn't say had to be-- you could see the anti-Semitism in this. But-- 
INT: How? How? ES: They were calling names. And they were hitting. They were always fighting. They were always hitting, when-- when-- especially when Jewish team played against the other team, the Polish team. There were always-- if somebody, a Jewish would win, they were starting some kind of fights always. Always were hitting, they're always fighting. With-- it usually started with name-calling, and then they started fight somehow. So in out sport-- in ping pong, I didn't have that. You could-- because we were always so much better that nobody could-- could-- it was no contest even. So I couldn't see it even, in this way.  INT: What was your favorite holiday? ES: My favorite holiday was holiday to-- to be out of school, I guess. That was-- [LAUGHS] I don't know. I always find the-- the holidays, I guess Sukkot was very nice holiday, happy holidays, usually. I-- I never liked to be too much in-- in-- in synagogue praying all day. So the less I had to go to pray, the better I felt, I guess.  INT: Who did you spend your holidays with? ES: Always with the family. Always in our house.  INT: Who came? ES: We had-- my sister was married when I was 12. So she was always coming with-- then she had a family. She used to come to-- to our house. So my brothers were not home, as far as I remember later. Because one-- one was in Palestine. And one was in France. And but we used to visit. My father had-- had some brothers and sisters in town, so used to visit. And they used to come. And we had family from Krakow. They used to come also, sometimes for the holidays. But that's [INAUDIBLE] many, the family-- the very close family that we have. 
INT: Were your grandparents alive? ES: My-- no, I don't remember. I-- I remember my father's grandmother-- my father's mother. But I remember her when she was already in bed. And they were always telling-- they were telling stories how smart she was when she was-- she was not sick, that she was a business woman. She was running the-- the stores. And but at that time she was-- they called it-- I don't know whether it was Alzheimer's. But she was in the 60s. But she was considered in 60s very old. And I remember she was always in bed. And they were saying that she had [NON-ENGLISH]. That means the artery closed up. And-- and she died when she was in the 60s. And my-- [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] I don't remember, my grandfather, my father's father. He was dead when I was born. And I-- I remember my mother's father. He was alive. And he was married second time. And he had-- he lived in different town. And he was married to another-- to-- to-- his wife was also a widow. And she had children from the first husband. But we didn't see each other that often. Because at that time, even that she-- he was living about, I would say, 80 kilometer, which would be 50 miles. But that was a big distance in Poland. You had to take a train and ride quite a-- a few hours. But once I spent a holidays-- during the summer, I went for-- for to visit him. And that was about two weeks. And then my first-- the grandmother, my mother's mother, the-- the first wife of my grandfather, was dead when I was born. 
INT: Your parents were born in Tarnow, also? ES: My father was born in Tarnow. My-- my mother was born in Jaslo which was a town I don't know exactly how far. I would say about 40 kilometers or something from Tarnow. But also-- but she, then her father moved to Nowy Sacz That's what she lived. She was born in Jaslo. But she actually lived in Nowy Sacz I understand, which was about 80 kilometer from Tarnow.  INT: We'll continue on the next tape. ES: All right.  INT: Interview with Eli Sommer, tape number two. Mr. Sommer, were you aware of what was going on in Germany and the threat of war to your area? ES: Yes. I-- as I said before, I was always very interested in politics. And I was reading the papers. And I remember, with the election in Germany, and-- when Hitler came into power and how the whole world was apprehended. It felt very bad about and-- what's coming, especially the Jewish population. And when the came-- time came in 1938, when the [INAUDIBLE] came in-- first, before [INAUDIBLE] was Sudetenland, which was next to-- to Germany. And then-- then [INAUDIBLE] when Hitler and Germany invaded, actually, the-- Austria. And then it was Czechoslovakia when they actually gave up on Czechoslovakia when [INAUDIBLE] went to-- to Munich. And everybody-- we expected war at that time.  INT: Did you have a radio? ES: Yes, we had a radio. Yes.  INT: Where were you when the war broke out? ES: Actually, just before the war broke out, I was, at that time, 20 years old. And I and my friends went for outing in the mountains, Zakopane, and to go to mountain climbing-- climbing. And it was about two or three weeks-- two weeks, I would say, before the war. And I remember when the-- when the army came over and-- the Polish army and sent us home. They said, listen, you better go home, because the-- the conditions are pretty bad. And they expected that the war would come out-- that Germany would invade pretty soon. So we went home. And-- and when the war started, it was, I believe, the 1st of September, 1939. I-- we decided-- first of all, it was a call on the radio that all able-bodied people-- for young people-- should go up to the army. And they were hoping that they are going to make a stand somewhere later on. And of course, I was-- in Poland, one had to be 21 to go to the-- to be drafted into the army. And I was not 21 yet. I was 20. So I went up to the army.
And we decided, actually, the family that it was unsafe to stay. And so I went. And I was walking through-- all the way to-- all the way to Dubno, which was not far from Russian border, which was quite a few hundred kilometers. Took me about a week, I would say. And all the time, the-- the Germans, they were invading. And they were progressing pretty fast. And finally, when I arrived to Dubno, that was when they-- the Germany and Russia came to an understanding. And they decided to divide Poland and a ceasefire was announced. And I was stuck in the Russian territory. And I went-- after-- I remember, after, that we decided to go to a bigger city, Lvov. And-- but they wouldn't let us in to Lvov. It was-- fighting was going on. And somehow, they didn't know-- there was no transportation to Lvov. So we went around somehow. And we got to-- to Stryi, which was south of Lvov. I think it was south of Lvov. And I remember with one another boy like this-- man my age, we arrived to Stryi and-- with a hook-- hook sack on our back and a few things that we came-- took with us. And somebody came over and said, what are you doing and where are you from? And-- and we said-- so-- I said from Tarnow. So this man said, oh, Tarnow. I used to work in Tarnow for many, many years. He was a plumber. And so I said, where-- where did you work? So he said-- he mentioned a name of my uncle, which I never met because he died due to diphtheria epidemic in 1918. But he-- he remembered him, and he took me to the-- to his house and-- and took me to-- actually, later, I was living with his daughter's house, married daughter's house. And I was there till-- for about two or three weeks. I don't know exactly when. And there was a fellow who was coming in who was a-- a Russian army. He was-- I don't know what rank he had. He had a-- a few-- some-- a few things on the-- on his lapel. I don't know what. And he was coming. And he was coming as a suitor to-- to his sister of-- who was living with her, too, who was the oldest sister. And he was coming. We got very friendly. And naturally, I started to talk politic with him. And I said that was no democracy there. How is that? Stalin this, and Stalin that. And all of a sudden, he said you are a [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]. In other words, you're an enemy of the people. So I-- I decided-- next morning, I decided to go. And I went to Lvov. And I was there for a few days. My friend had a-- lived in an apartment-- rented apartment. And I rented one-- one room for a few nights. And-- and then I met another fellow from Tarnow who was going from-- to the border. And-- and then we decided that-- I used to play ping pong with him before the war. So he took me over. And I told him I didn't have money, said my father would pay for him-- for me. And that's what happened. I went back to-- because the whole family-- at that time, the condition were not that bad in the beginning somehow. When the Germans came in, I understand, because I was not there, they-- they-- they were pretty rough. And they burned the-- the-- the synagogue. When someone-- when I came in, they synagogue was completely destroyed. We had a very big synagogue, one of the biggest in-- in Poland with a big steel-- steel dome. And they destroyed it completely. And-- so-- But they let people-- they were not organized yet. They still-- the people had to-- they couldn't walk on the sidewalk. They couldn't walk-- they couldn't do business-- they-- be in business. But somehow, it was no-- they didn't-- they were shooting once in awhile, but it was-- it was not organized yet. Anyway, I went back. I-- I thought that they wanted to send us back to Russia in-- at that time. And there was registration to go to Russia. And they were sending to the-- to the-- people were saying that they are sending to the coal mines in-- in Ukraine. And I decided to go back to-- to the family. And I came in the beginning of January, 1940, back to Tarnow. 
INT: And what did you find? ES: You know, the first-- the first impression was very scary because everybody had to wear this-- this armband to-- in order-- to identify that you are Jewish. And you couldn't walk on the sidewalk. You couldn't walk here. So it was pretty scary. But I guess I slowly acclimatized as long as you didn't-- they didn't-- at that time, they didn't kill yet, so-- I mean, it was not organized killing. It was sporadic.  INT: And what did you do then? Did you work? ES: I started-- my-- my brother-in-law, my sister's husband, was a dentist. And everybody was supposed to work. Everybody was supposed to be occupied. And you're getting-- when you-- and in order-- you had to get the stamp that you are working. So I-- I was working. I started to work and learn that little bit profession, sort of. And that's what I was doing, actually, for-- for-- till the ghetto.  INT: When did things change? ES: It was slowly. It was not-- it was sort of a progressive. They were catching people on the street they needed to work. And you never knew if you were going on the street, if you're going to come back without sending away somewhere, some kind of camp. They had all kinds of camps, working camps. And you heard stories. This one was caught. And one was caught. And sometimes, somebody came back, and you heard what was going on. But it was not killing at that time, not organized killing. But it was sort of a-- a-- whenever somebody wanted to do, they just took away from the street, and that's it. And once in a while, you-- you heard people-- somebody-- you know, the-- the soldiers or the SS people were going on the-- on the-- street. And day he didn't like somebody, just took out the gun, and he shot them. But that was not organized. It was sporadic. Depends on the person, who he was. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] Gestapo was always looking for somebody. And for instance, that they knew that I came in from-- from other side, from-- from-- from Russian side, I certainly would be picked up and probably killed because I know a lot of friends of mine who came from the other side. And they were picked up, and they never heard from them. 
INT: When was the ghetto formed? ES: The ghetto was formed 1942. And [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] actually, it was-- they were talking about it, that it's going to be formed before. And everybody prepared themselves. But they didn't have enough-- enough space to put all of those people because they wanted to put in a small part of Tarnow. And they took the-- the worst-- where the poor people were living mostly. And before they formed the ghetto, they made the first action. And they-- they announced that able-bodied man had to come and register to come in the morning and be-- whoever didn't work, who didn't-- whoever didn't-- because I was working, for instance, for the-- for my brother-in-law. But that was not necessary. That was not something that I could show that I'm working because it was not considered worthwhile work. And so they were talking that there are going to be ghettos. Somehow, people had some kind of a connection. And one found out. And everybody-- a rumor started. There's going to be an action. A ghetto in Krakow was already in place. So and-- so-- I remember I didn't have a-- a working place-- a working stamp, a real good working stamp. So they-- and my-- and my-- everybody was trying to find out because they were getting [INAUDIBLE] cards at that time, an official thing that you are really working. So my sister started-- we had a cousin who was working as-- in the-- in the-- it was established, a police, sort of a Jewish police. And they were watching the-- the people, how-- like they have to tell people not to walk on the sidewalk or not to walk here, not to walk there, and-- small things. And so they established like an auxiliary that-- so my sister got me, somehow, a stamp that I could work like this. And-- and that was the-- right after that was-- they started to get the-- the whole town-- they-- they came out with the announcement that everybody-- everybody had to go. I don't know. They had a list who had to come back, who come, who had to go and-- downstairs at certain time and certain day and to be in front of the house. And-- and they are going to be sent out to a work camp somewhere. And everybody thought that that is what it's, of course, going to be. Everybody had to-- to take-- they told you what you-- what you had to take with you, you know, the blanket, and this and that, like to go to work. To-- and that was in-- and they took those people. And they-- most of them shot quite a few thousand outside of town-- outside of town. And the rest they send out somewhere. Nobody heard of them anymore. 
INT: How do you know that they were shot? ES: Quite a few thousand were shot because it was-- and Tarnow was the place, I think, that-- I-- I don't-- they said it was [INAUDIBLE]. That's what it was. Some [INAUDIBLE] somewhere, that-- that's where people were shot. I didn't see it. But that's where it was. But the-- the main thing is most people who were-- who were not shot, they were shipped out. And nobody heard about anybody.  INT: At the time, did you know where people were being shipped? ES: No, nobody knew. If somebody would know, you wouldn't go down with blankets and all kinds of things. I mean, it was the first-- the first time that we heard about that somebody-- that it was organized killing.  INT: Then what happened? ES: Now, after that, after their action, there was lot of-- lot of new space for people. And then they established ghetto. They-- whoever left-- leftover had to move to a new-- to a new place. And--  INT: Did you move? ES: Yes, we moved. We moved to [INAUDIBLE] in [INAUDIBLE]. We had a room there.  INT: What did you take with you to the ghetto? ES: Well, whatever you could. You couldn't take too much because we didn't have enough space. We had only one room for the whole family. And at that time, we had living-- my uncle and aunt was living with us. They came from Krakow. Because we're always live-- it was so close. And being that they established ghetto-- they were talking about before that they would establish ghetto in-- in Krakow. So they came over because the ghetto was not in Tarnow yet. So they lived with us. And that's what it was. We lived in a small-- in a big room, one family. Yeah. 
INT: Did you work in the ghetto? ES: In the ghetto, I was in this-- in this auxiliary police. And I remember we-- they were cleaning up from the people who were-- who were sent out. And there was furniture. And so they had a warehouse, furniture in a warehouse. And-- and I was always watching at night. Everybody-- it was-- Germans had to have always people to watch these things, 24 hours a day. So I was watching the warehouse most of the time, where the furniture was.  INT: Were you able to leave the ghetto? ES: No. Unless you had-- you had official duty somewhere. I mean, it was-- you had to justify your leaving the ghetto. You-- there were working places outside of ghetto, like [INAUDIBLE], all kind of-- all kind of factories. And people were going. And there went in the morning, and then they came back-- back in the evening after work. And they had to be escorted.  INT: What happened to your father's flour mill? ES: No. My father's flour mill, he gave up in-- during the Depression. After the-- Already, when I remember, we had only the-- the warehouse when we sell-- sold the merchandise. And when the war started, actually, we sold out everything because we're not allowed to have a-- a business, especially this kind of business. It was-- and that was easy to-- to sell. And well, before the ghetto, we used to do some business. We used to have connection where with to get some kind of merchandise. We sold to the bakers at very, very little value. 
INT: How did you get food in the ghetto? ES: People were working outside. And they were always bringing food. They took out things, and they exchanged. And they sold, and they bought food. It was not legal, but everybody knew. Once in awhile, they made some kind of an inspection. And they would hit people or they killed people when they found it. But that's how everybody was living, because you couldn't live on what you got from-- from legally. So as long as you had what to sell or to exchange, you had food. As long as you were in-- in-- a town of-- I mean people in-- town that you live, and you knew people from the Polish-- Polish-- people outside, you can always-- they used to come to the place where you work, and you used to take-- barter or-- or sell and buy things. And you--  INT: What did you use for money? Did you have money? ES: Mostly, mostly, it was barter. You sell-- you sold what you have, things. Some people had money. I guess you had to have money. Even-- even-- even when you close up-- it was closing up the ghettos, and you're dealing with things from people or your own things. And you sold, and you exchange. And whoever didn't have it, he was like an everyday poor. In place and-- and time like this, not to be poor-- it was bad to be poor, too, because if you don't-- didn't have what to exchange, you didn't have what to eat. 
INT: Were there actions while you were in the ghetto? ES: Sporadic action when they needed some-- somewhere and the people to send out to-- to some kind of camps. You know, they came in, and they-- mostly, they were sent out the camps, working camps. People-- young people were sent out officially. I don't know if they were-- you can call an action. [INAUDIBLE] was second action. It was three months after the first one. That was a big action, yes.  INT: And what happened? ES: That-- that was the time that I lost my whole family.  INT: Could you tell me about that please? ES: Yes. Now, they surrounded the ghetto overnight. And they brought in all kinds of people with-- SS people. Figured they were drunk. Everybody thought they were. They came in to-- to people-- to-- you know, we have the-- the Jewish [? mind, ?] as you say, Jewish people who were supposed to be like a government for Jews, established by-- by the Germans. And they didn't want to bother to do all the dirty work. So they told them, we want this. They always-- first of all, they always coming with money. They needed money. They needed gold. They needed-- we had to give gold, whatever you had, all kind of things that was-- has any worth. And-- but-- and they had to provide person. They went to Jewish people who run the ghetto. Run? Actually, they didn't run. They were-- they were told what to do. And they told they had to prepare the whiskey, all kind of things. And we all knew that something going on. It's going to be on. And then they got all drunk. And-- and then we knew that-- that the action is going to be. And after they surrounded the ghetto, they told people to come out. And whoever-- whoever didn't come out, and they put everybody on the-- on the-- it was a big square. And everybody had to kneel down and-- and wait there. And there, whoever-- they-- they decided who is working where and which one is-- is necessary for the Germans to keep them because they were working in factories where they needed. And those people were left over. And they had to have the-- the stamp. That's how they decided who is-- who is staying, mostly-- mostly young people. And I remember when my-- I had a very good friend. And he was-- they told him to kneel down on the-- on the square. And he didn't want to kneel down. And he hit the one SS man. The other one shot him on the-- right there on the spot. 
INT: What was his name? [INAUDIBLE]. And-- and the rest was sent out. And my father, who was old-- at that time, old. That time, he was 60. And he was-- he was-- went through with one transport. And [INAUDIBLE]. At the time, I-- it was-- they were taking the young kids, too. And my sister had two kids. [PAUSES FOR 10 SECONDS] And they-- they ran through them. My brother, now, took one-- one girl. My sister [? went ?] the other one. They went. [PAUSES FOR 5 SECONDS] So [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] that was my worst day. [PAUSES FOR 5 SECONDS] Then, after that, they started to bring more people from outside. Because the-- the small towns, they did the same thing everywhere else. And they were liquidating several towns. [PAUSES FOR 8 SECONDS] [CRYING] Anyway-- [SIGHS] [CRYING]  INT: We'll continue on the next tape.  INT: Interview with Eli Sommer, tape number three. Mr. Sommer, what happened after your family was taken? Where did you go? ES: I stayed in town to get [? those-- ?] my [? small ?] [? at the ?] [? time. ?] And now, actually, they brought people from outside, because they liquidated a lot of small towns. And they felt our town was very good size. They brought us over. They brought people to town. And same thing. They had to go to work. They established ghetto A, ghetto B. You know, ghetto B was supposed to be for people who went to work, and ghetto A for-- for people who didn't go to work. But it was blurred actually. Not too much. [SIGHS] But it was divided, so that if you had to go or had to [INAUDIBLE] permission to go from ghetto A to B. But I don't know that it meant that much. It was not too hard to go from one ghetto to the other one. And actually, it was quiet. Quiet. There was [? their ?] normal thing. Before I called outside and now, in papers, the report. And they were usually killed in ghetto, and you had to bury them. And people were going to work. And that's still, there was the other one. The-- the-- a year later, it was in September, I believe. 
INT: What year? ES: It was 1943, it was.  INT: Just tell me, when-- when was the second action, when your relatives were taken? ES: And the second action was in September 1942.  INT: All right. ES: And in 1943, they-- it wasn't actually the last action, actually. And it was the same thing. They divided people, people who were still going to work. It was separated, and people who were not going-- who-- who didn't have, or they worked in places that was not so much acknowledged by them as very necessary. So somehow, they invited part people, or a part of the transport went to Krakow-Plaszow. This we knew. The other one was going somewhere else, nobody knew. As a matter of fact, I remember I-- I had a very good friend, and he was going to-- to right in front of the gate from ghetto. And he was asking me, let's go together. And I said, listen, I don't-- I didn't take a-- I didn't have a blanket with me or anything to take with me. And so I said, I'm going to go home, and I'm going to come back, and we go together. And on the way, a friend of mine told me that her father is staying. So I said to her, why-- what do you mean he's staying? He said-- he said, yes, they are. A certain amount of people are going to stay here. So-- so I got very interested in it, and I finally found where the people are staying. And it was a one barrack that they used to keep the people separately. And somehow, I got into-- into this barrack, and I stayed. And all the people, one part of the people who went to Plaszow, to Krakow-Plaszow. And one part was east. And from later on, I found out it was [INAUDIBLE]. And it was the same place that my family went. And nobody-- nobody survived from this transport. That was the transport that I was supposed to go with my friend, going east. And I-- I-- the ghetto was liquidated. And they left a few hundred, I believe 300. I don't exactly remember already how many, but there was a few hundred people. And we were staying, and we're liquidators. We were cleaning up the apartments. And-- and there were all kind of places that they were repairing things and washing, big laundry, and-- and preparing for-- for transport. And I was one of the people, 12 people, loading the trains where the merchandise were going out to the train and-- and-- or cleaning up or taking out the furniture from that apartments and later loading to the trains. And-- 
INT: Where were they sending the things? ES: Everything to Germany. Everything was going to Germany. Clean things, and the apartment. You clean up the apartment, naturally. Then-- then once the-- the apartments were cleaned, [? when ?] the sections would [? ghetto, ?] they-- they made it [? by ?] smaller ghettos. And that's how it-- that's how it was. And this period was very bad. I remember this-- this period left a very bad time, a very bad. You know, you saw a lot of tragic things. A lot of people were, when they made the ghetto smaller, a lot of people were hiding in the apartments, in the houses. And they were caught. And they were bringing those people through, I remember, like through Polish section, because the sections were-- in Polish sections. And I remember people were found while-- I remember 11 or 12 people, they took it by the rope and like-- like-- like-- and they were leading them by the neck, one bound to another one, through the streets. I guess that's to show people within Poland, the Polish people, to-- to be careful and not to-- not to-- to take any people to hide. To-- to-- to-- and they brought them over. I mean, that was a daily appearance, daily things. It's not something once happened. It happened almost every day. And we have on this square, they built as like a pyre. I don't know, a pyre, you know, when they put one layer of wood, then one layer, or after they brought them, and they shot them, one layer of, you know, of people, of-- of dead people. And the fire was going on as long as I remember. For-- it was sitting there from, I don't know, October, I believe. I don't remember. I think October, till we left the-- the ghetto. There was always fire going on. It would smell the-- the flesh. 
INT: Who was guarding the ghetto while you were there? ES: The ghetto, [INAUDIBLE] Polish police on the outside. And there was-- and there's supposed to be a Jewish police inside. But outside is Polish police. And naturally, it was so we had a commander, a guy who was actually a peasant. And he was in charge of the-- of the-- of the German police, sort of. And gestapo was coming every day, almost every day. And I don't know what kind of business they had. And usually, they shot a few people. Or-- or-- or they look for somebody, or whatever. Or if they needed something, or they [? leave ?] any directives, they-- they were coming. And-- and that's what it-- everybody had to be on the toe all the time, because we never knew when it's going-- somebody is going to come. And.  INT: And who was the head of the-- of the-- the Jewish head of the ghetto? Do you know the name? ES: Yeah, it was [? Falkman, ?] at that time, [? Falkman. ?] And another one was, how do you call? I forgot the name already. Anyway, but they had to do what they were told. I mean, there's nothing, nothing they could do. I mean, they-- they put up, I don't  know, if they wanted to be or not, whatever they, or what was the reason why they were, but they had to do whatever they were told. Otherwise, the families would be jeopardy. And they-- they had somebody to represent the Jewish people. And-- and so the Germans, they would come and ask them for-- for certain things. [INAUDIBLE] was the other one. [INAUDIBLE]. 
INT: Did you ever think of running away? ES: Yes. I thought that many things, many times, actually, to run away. But I never somehow did. First, that was even before ghetto, we had a woman, a younger woman, who was working for my sister yet. And she offered-- [INAUDIBLE] she was about 20. And she-- I think she was married, and her husband was-- went to war in the army. And she lived outside of town. Or-- and she asked me to come. And she told me that you can-- she was going to find a place, and she's going to hide me somewhere. And-- but I was afraid. I-- first of all, at that time, we didn't know. Later, and we find out what has happened, I mean, they-- I would know what was going to happen, naturally, maybe I would act differently. And then, while in ghetto, almost-- almost everybody had some kind of papers, you know, false papers. And I had the papers, false papers. But when you keep the papers, you're afraid to-- to keep on yourself, naturally. So I-- I put them in the-- in the-- in the-- how do you call, the-- in the attic. I thought that I-- I-- I had-- that they were hidden right. And somebody found it. It so happened, it was a Jewish guy. And he told me about this. And he said, see, I'm very careless, you know. [INAUDIBLE] anybody here in Germany could find it. But what can you-- it was no-- no safe place to find. So-- so-- I-- I kept it, just in case, those papers. 
INT: Where did you get them? ES: Somebody was always making something. You know. They were false, but they-- they look identical. And [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] you could use it in an emergency. Naturally, I don't know if-- if they would catch you. You could just [INAUDIBLE]. You could-- you could-- who was I? I mean, the different name and the Polish name, or something. But you had, just in case. And I never used it. As a matter of fact, I remember before I went to Plaszow. And when I was in [INAUDIBLE], they call it, I and other friends of mine were planning to-- to run as-- to Polish section. And he had somebody where we should go. And I took the papers. And somehow, and we prepared ourself. We had some-- I had some in my family-- from family, which we were hid. You know, we hid in-- somehow in different places. And there we-- we put-- somebody had a very-- some very honest people. And they were-- and they were supposed to keep the money in case we were going somewhere, at whenever would be, a Polish section or in camp. We knew we didn't know how it's going to work out. And so we put some money. And-- and-- and some we had from my mother, the diamonds ring, and all kinds of heirlooms, whatever it was, and some money in gold. And-- but we were, somehow, the last day, we were, as I said before, we're-- we're loading. And we had two or three carriages that we-- that we were taking to the-- to the train. And there's my friend, was one way, and I was going the other way. But it was 12 o'clock. And the last day, we found ourself in ghetto. I guess our heart was not to-- to-- to be. You know, and then we both went to-- to Plaszow. And we-- we came there. I believe it was February the 8th, 1940, '45. No, '44. 
INT: When did you leave the ghetto? what was date that you left the ghetto? ES: The ghetto? No, that was February 8, I believe. That's what I think.  INT: And how did they tell you that you were going to Plaszow? ES: Well, the loaded us on the-- on the-- on the car. It was a freight car, you know, like a panel cars, panel cars. And--  INT: What did you take with you? ES: Well, nothing. I mean, whatever we have on. We didn't take nothing. Whatever-- we didn't have anything. That's why I had a very hard time in Plaszow. I didn't have money. And Plaszow was also-- people-- you know, it was a concentration camp. But this camp was located in Krakow. It was a-- a-- a was Plaszow. And that's where they located, they make, a concentration camp, on the-- on the hill. And a lot of people, most people, were from Praszow-- from Krakow. So they had connections with Polish people in Krakow. So they could help themselves. The same as we were doing in ghetto, they could-- they took to the camp. So they were helping themselves somehow. They were trade-- trading, and they were selling, when there-- and they allowed-- some people were going, not too many, but some people were going to work in-- in-- in Krakow. So whoever who-- had some money or something to-- to trade could help [INAUDIBLE], some who had additional food. But we came, and I didn't have nothing. And I didn't know anybody. And-- and I got the worst place to work. 
INT: Well, describe what happened when you arrived at Plaszow. What was the first thing that happened when you arrived there? ES: Well, they assigned us to-- to certain barracks. And then they assigned us to certain work in-- to go to. And the barracks were the worst, because whoever didn't have money, and they were [? last ?] one. Slowly, whoever had some money could help himself. And we didn't have money. I didn't have money. I mean, I didn't have nothing to trade, so I was assigned to worst work. And then whenever they had some kind of-- somehow, they were always sending people away, to new camps or bad camps or better places. But you never knew. You know, when you-- when you were at a place, you knew the place where you were, and you knew what you had to expect. If you came to Plaszow, it was very bad, but you knew what it was. Now, you didn't know where they were sending you, and if-- if this was a people-- a-- a place to-- to kill or to live. So whenever they wanted to send us out, somehow they went-- the people couldn't help themself. And I was on the list, because I had the worst place. I couldn't buy myself out. Now, I had, as I mentioned before, I put away some jewelry and money, whatever I had, and put in with somebody who I didn't know, but through my friend. And he was supposed to be a very honest man. And-- but it took time till you get. You come to Plaszow, and it was-- everything was very dangerous. I mean, you came to a new place. You had to know what to meet. You had to get some contact. And-- and some people who were more closely with this process, they were first to get their things. They were first. So by the time I was supposed to get, they were saying it's already in Krakow, and I-- I'd be able to get, a few-- some money, then it would be better. But then they shipped me out, and I didn't want to stay in Plaszow anymore. I didn't want to stay one more. I could stay, because I-- friends of mine, who got already their something, wanted to give me money and all. But I said, no, I want to get out of [INAUDIBLE] here. I had a very bad time there. 
INT: What kind of work did you do there? ES: I was putting on the pick-- picks, on the [? styles ?] on the picks. And all day, that was the work I did.  INT: Were you with friends there? Did you know anyone there? ES: No, no, I didn't, unless the people who I came from. I don't remember who-- who was there. But--  INT: And who were the guards in the barracks there? ES: Barracks were people who, you know, it was always assigned somebody, usually people who had a little bit protection, a little bit, knew somebody, you know. And they were-- they were people who were staying. And they tried to have an easy job, not to go out and not to work hard. So they were in charge of it. But--  INT: What-- what nationality were they? ES: No, they're all Jews. In Plaszow were all Jews, all Jews. They were Jewish, came from Krakow. Because that was-- Krakow was established when they liquidated. If you saw the that was-- that was exactly what they showed when liquidation of ghetto Krakow, and they went to-- to-- to Plaszow. That's-- they were showed how they liquidated the ghetto, and it was pretty realistic, I have to say. Pretty realistic. And that was the Plaszow. That's where I was. And I remember I decided to leave after they took me, and they decided that they are going to ship me. They are going to send me somewhere, to the new camp. 
INT: Were there selections in Plaszow? Were there selections? ES: Selection? Not [? when ?] I came. [INAUDIBLE] get, get. When there was-- in-- in he was the commandant. And-- [INAUDIBLE] but there were always selections. They were always killing. And that was every day, but I was not that privy to it. I did-- I was not the one who remembered seeing it. But they-- they called it-- it was a place that they used to take people you shoot. I mean, it was a little bit outside of-- of the camp. And I mean, these things were coming, whoever. I mean, that was pretty realistic, that they showed in  INT: And were there appels there also? ES: Yes, every day. Oh, the appel-- appels were always. Before you go to work, you had to go appel. They're counting every day. They were counting in the morning. And you went after work. They counting, and everybody is there. That was always, always going on. That was part of the German-- German tradition, I guess, from the-- they-- they run like a-- like a camp, a real camp.  INT: Where did you go from Plaszow? ES: Now, when I was in camp, I was, first of all, as I said, I-- I mentioned that I have some money outside of camp. And I had some-- some things, but I couldn't get it yet. So I have a friend who got already money. And there was a couple, actually. And she came over. [? She ?] said, listen, I know you don't want to wait, and because I decided to go, if you want to, I can give you meanwhile whatever you need. So you don't have to go maybe, because always could [INAUDIBLE]. I said no, I want to go. I had a bad time. So she said-- it was very nice of her. She gave me her ring. And she said, in case you don't know where you go, in case something happen, you have to get it and take it with me. And-- and I took this-- this ring with me. 
INT: I just want to ask you, who would you give the money to so that you would get a better place? ES: There were always people in between anywhere, in camp or concentration camp or in ghetto. For money, you could always buy yourself out somehow. There were always people who knew somebody, and who, I mean, instead of you, they took somebody else. And meanwhile, he got something. I mean, I mean, that's what's going on here, too. With money, you can buy yourself out, no matter what. So I-- so she gave me the ring. And we-- they shipped us by train. That was the first transport from Plaszow to Germany. It was the beginning of May. I think it was-- I know the 8 is somehow in my head. I don't know exactly the date, but that was the beginning of May. And they shipped us in-- in wagons. And they-- freight wagon.  INT: How many people were? ES: At that time, it was not too bad, actually. I don't remember that it would be so crowded. It was not that crowded.  INT: And what year was this, Mr. Sommer? ES: That was 1944, May 1944. And they shipped us to Gross-Rosen. And that was a concentration camp. And it was-- it didn't have a good name. It was pretty rough concentration camp.  INT: What does that mean? ES: Mean that there were pretty-- the condition were not so good. And they were-- they were killing. And they were-- they had-- and they had, you know, their burning people-- the-- the stoves, they were in there, whatever, how they called it. And we were in quarantine for two weeks. 
INT: Why? Why? ES: Because I guess we were not assigned to stay in Gross-Rosen. We were not assigned to stay in Gross-Rosen. They usually took people, like a staging, like a camp. And then they distributed to different camps. Unless you were staying there for a steady, then they are-- you know, first day, you came-- when you came in, and the-- and the entrance was [SPEAKING GERMAN]. The-- you-- the work makes you free. And the-- the-- the music was on-- at-- at the gate. And we were so surprised. I never heard so music.  INT: What kind of music? ES: Music, some kind-- you know, like a band. And the guy-- and the guys who were-- usually, they-- I think they were Volksdeutsches or some Ukrainians or [INAUDIBLE], from Latvia, [INAUDIBLE]. The people were guarding us. So they said, this was a-- this was Volksdeutsche. You know, a Volksdeutsche was a man who was of German descent. And they said, oh, you have it German. No, that's-- that's a bad camp when music is  staying at the gate. So right there, they took us to [INAUDIBLE] to clean up whatever we had, in case we have some fleas or whatever. And they-- they shaved our heads and shaved our everywhere. And we're naked. We came out naked on the side of the-- of the barracks, where [INAUDIBLE] was. And then they started to look what we have, what else. And I had this ring. And I didn't know what to do with it. So being I was naked, completely naked, and they were looking in the ears and everywhere. So I-- I-- I had teeth at the time, good teeth. And I-- I somehow broke the ring-- and-- and swallowed the diamond. And-- and then they gave us the striped pants like a pajamas. That's what we wore, or had. And then they assigned us to barracks. And there were about four in one, and one small, very small, bed-- bed like a [INAUDIBLE], they call them. And I went there for two weeks, and I couldn't find the diamond, because the latrine was right next to the-- next to the electric-- electric wire-- electric, how do you call, electric gate, an [INAUDIBLE] gates. Anyway. And at the other side were the Germans. Whether-- whenever you are started to looking, when you went to the bathroom, it said, [SPEAKING GERMAN] and with a gun. And I never found it. It was this story with the ring. 
INT: Did you work at Gross-Rosen? ES: No, we didn't work in Gross-Rosen. Gross-Rosen was strictly quarantine. And we had to get up in the morning. And that was in the mountains. And at that time, it was very cold. That's in Silesia. And it was cold. And they-- they got us up at-- at 4 o'clock, 4:30 in the morning. We had to stay till 6 o'clock at night, 7:00-- till it was dark. We stayed. And everybody-- everybody was next to each other, like-- like you see cows out in winter time. And one was next to each other. That's how we [? survived, ?] all day.  INT: We'll-- we'll continue on the next tape. CREW: Interview with Eli Sommer. Tape number 4.  INT: Mr. Sommer, you were telling us about the quarantine period in Gross Rosen and how cold it was there. Could you continue, please? ES: We were in Gross Rosen for about-- I don't exactly remember how many days, but it was at least eight days and probably close to two weeks. And then they transported us to a new camp, and-- which was located in Wuestegiersdorf. And that was in Silesia, in German Silesia. It now belongs to Poland, I believe. And it was a new camp, actually. The camp was located in an old porcelain Fabrik, where they used to [? be ?] they used to make porcelain. And [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] there was some Hungarian Jews. At that time, they started to bring people from Hungary in camps. And they were in charge. And I remember, the Lagerfuhrer, the German, was-- Schwartz was his name. And actually they sent us again, first the last [? guy who ?] came in [? towards ?] work. And you used go, and we do some work with the stones and with the-- and put in for the train something-- the wooden things for the train. I don't know how you call it. In any case, I was working there for awhile, for a few weeks. And then, somehow we found out they needed people to work at the-- at the-- at the station, train station. 
INT: How did you find out? ES: I don't remember how I got there. They needed young people who knew how to work, because with Germans, in the wartime especially, very important was that the train should be roaring. Train shouldn't be staying empty for a minute. So as soon as the train came in with something, it had to be unloaded. And then you have to wait for another train. So they were looking for people who-- young people who would do the job. And somehow I got in. And they were all young people. There were 12 people. And in the beginning, we used to have-- we used to get-- we used to get coals coming in and sand coming in, and nothing attractive for us, at least, because we were always hungry. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] But after-- and we were working under the Organisation Todt, which was-- [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] I don't know how it worked, actually, with the Germans. But they were-- they were getting paid for every-- every person who was working. And then in some cases, there was-- they were sending to work to factories and some places in constructions. We were sending in the Organisation Todt. We were to their disposition. And that was a working organization, Nationale Socialistic, working organization. They had the brown uniforms, and-- with the swastika on the side on the arm. And the guy in charge was a very-- a German, but wasn't Nazi, wasn't a Nazi. But was a German. Work had to be done. And whoever was working good, with him, he was all right. So he was satisfied with us, because when the train came in, we unloaded. And then we had a meister who was overseeing over us. And he was an Austrian. And [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] they were always satisfied, because as soon as a train came in, we unload in half an hour, an hour. In the beginning we had one, then two cars load, three car loads. Someday came seven car loads. And we unloaded everything, because when we finished, we were sitting. We were waiting. They couldn't let us go, because they didn't know when the other train would come. So sometimes we can-- we could sit the whole day doing nothing. And sometimes we had to work hard hard-- 7 something became 14. 14 trains came in. And they had to bring additional people. And additional people came from other camps. They didn't have any interest to do this, because they knew when we unload the car, we go home-- we stay doing nothing. But they came in, and they were standing. They never wanted to finish.
So sometimes they were sending seven, eight people on to one train, and they never finish one car in the whole day. But for us was very good place, because we liked-- we liked to be. So every now and then, they wanted to send-- to send people to other camps-- to other camps. So they were looking for people to send out. When we heard-- because that was a normal thing. They were sending people from one camp to another. But when we heard that they're talking about sending people to other camp, we came to this German guy from Organisation Todt, and he said-- we told him that they're talking that they want to send us out. And when he heard that they want to send us out, he went, and he called the German in the camp. He said, don't touch our guys. They are the best people I have. And they are doing this and this and that. This way we knew we that we are going to stay. It had to be a politic doing it. And then the Germans were coming back from the East. They were-- the army was coming back, and they were sending back the things from the East. And everything came in from eastern front to Germany. And the-- the train was-- was escorted, always escorted, by SS people. And they had cognac, most of the time-- all the good things, cognac, and cigarettes, and [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] chocolate. And when they, in our camp, they found out that they have all those things, we had to-- we had to sort it first, not that we had to-- they had to do too much forcing in this respect, because we were trying to help ourselves. And we took the cognac or cigarettes or whatever. And we came in. We brought it into the camp. And for this, we got soup, more soup, more bread. And that's how we could survive pretty easily. Now, don't forget that we had to-- to steal. We had two-- we had the SS guard for us. We had to steal-- the guy from Organisation-- not the German, because he wouldn't think-- he thought that was the biggest crime. But the Austrian, oh, he needed a lot of cigarettes. He was a chain smoker. Then we had to bring to the camp for the German, for the real German, for the-- for the people who are running, the SS from the camp, and the people who are running the camp itself, which are not German. So we had to sneak quite a bit in order to. And they knew exactly when the came, what every train had. And that's how we-- and so the-- my-- our SS man, our guard, had to watch us from the SS man who was coming with a friend, with the train, because when he would find us stealing, that would be the end of whoever stole. So everybody was watching somebody. And that's-- we where there for nine months. So actually, that was, considering that they needed us, considering that we were doing our job pretty good-- I mean, it passed for them, and considering that the things were very valuable that we exchanged for food, everything considering, we were pretty good at that time. Then the evacuation started, Because the German army was coming closer. 
INT: Before we go onto that, what other nationals were with you in Gross Rosen? ES: In Gross Rosen, I-- I was-- I was only with-- in Gross Rosen were many nationalities. But in Gross Rosen itself, we were in quarantine only. So we were not-- we were not-- that was separated. It's quarantine. So in the-- in the camp, we were with the Jewish, Hungarian people, and Polish people-- Jews, Polish, and Hungarian people.  INT: And this camp, in this labor camp that you're taken to, this one also? ES: That was the one. In Gross Rosen itself, we were on quarantine, so we didn't mix with the-- with the people who were in camp.  INT: What happened after the nine months of working on the train-- unloading trains? ES: They were the worst nine months after the ghetto. I consider the ghetto the worst. They put us on a train. And there were about 150 people to one car. And you couldn't stand. You couldn't-- couldn't sit. Everybody was sitting on laps, like-- because they want to squeeze everybody, every inch. And you know, there were some people who were strong. And they felt that they needed more people. And they started to push people around. And we had this group of people, that as I mentioned, about 12 people that were always working, who saw what's going on. And we decided to stay together. And whoever wanted to push us around, to give them a few things. We were still young. And-- and we were the only train that will came to Flossenberg that there was no one killed. Because after we came to Flossenberg, from every train, every car, they took dead people which were trampled, because there were no space, and someone would start pushing around, and it was-- so. But I saw people. I spoke to one person the night before, for instance, and they were on their way. And when we came out, he was completely white. I never saw anything like it. Before, he was normal. And he was completely white. And he was-- you could see that he lost his mind. But nobody was-- nobody-- there was not one body from our car, because we decided to keep sort of-- it was self-preservation. But nobody was-- they started to push around. But they saw they can't do it and that they have-- we wouldn't let them push us around. And nobody was killed. But after we came to Flossenberg, there were a lot of people who were taken out, killed people from the cars. 
INT: The 12 men that you worked with, where were they all from? ES: They were Polish people-- Polish boys, young people. I was one the oldest one. And I was, at the time, 25-- 25.  INT: What happened when you arrived to Flossenberg. ES: Again, in quarantine. First, they took us-- whoever arrived in camp, they took to quarantine. They put us separately. And you had to go through certain time and be on guards. And it was bad time. Also in the mountains-- most of the camps that I was, they were always in the mountains. It was very cold. And that was that was in February.  INT: Did you have a coat? ES: No coat. We didn't have coats. Coats? Nobody had coats. At that time, you had the pajamas, actually. That's what they wear. And in Flossenberg, we got the new-- new things, new under quarantine. We didn't get coat. We had normal, I guess, used-- could be a Jewish-- Jewish clothing, old clothing. But we got in order-- they had fluorescent paint, like in front and long and then twice here. And the same in the back. When you would try to escape, you could be seen from far away. So that's-- that's-- but no coat. I mean, a jacket and pants. And that's what I went through the end of the war and quarantine.  INT: What kind of camp was Flossenberg? ES: It was concentration camp. That was a mother-- mother camp, like Gross Rosen. It was a real, big camp, where they had-- they-- they-- somebody, for instance, when you were working in quarantine, a lot of people got dysentery. When you've got dysentery, they give you a sign here. And you wore it. That means that you are gone. Next day, you were-- I don't know what they did, if it came so natural when they didn't get food or something. But next day, you were a goner. They found you. The put the dead body in the latrine. And then they-- they had the-- they burned the stoves-- the big stove. It was a real concentration camp. And they burned the bodies. 
INT: There was a crematorium there? ES: Crematorium, yes.  INT: Was there a gas-- was there gassing there? ES: There were crematorium. I don't know if there were gas. But maybe there was gas. I can't tell you. I was not long enough to be. But I saw a lot of people who got dysentery. And next day, they were dead.  INT: Did you ever get sick there? ES: The only thing-- the only time that I really was scared, it was not in Flossenberg. That was when I was in Wuestegiersdorf, when I was working. I had some kind on my head, [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] some kind of things, like a-- I don't know how to explain-- boils. And I couldn't find-- I didn't know what it was. And I went to a doctor, a Jewish doctor. And I said, tell me what it is, because I was afraid to take off my cap, because the appellplatz twice a day, and when they would notice this, they would send me out. So he said, listen, I can tell you one thing. This is nothing. But you need a some kind of salve. You have to get the salve. And once you get the salve, you'll be all right. And somehow, I-- as I said, I always had something, because we were unloading things-- and I got the salve for this. And in a few days, went away. That's was only time that I was really scared. Otherwise, I was never sick in camp. I was young. I was always healthy. 
INT: Were you given a number at any of the camps? ES: Yes. Every camp had a number. I think-- I don't know which camp, whether it was Gross Rosen or Flossenberg that I got the number, or Plaszow. Every camp had a number.  INT: Was it the same number of each camp? ES: I don't remember. I don't remember. But we had the number right here in the front. And-- [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] and I don't remember. I know that after I was liberated, I had the last number. So I remember this. But I don't remember if there were-- if each camp they would change. I would say that they would change. But that's only I guess.  INT: What did you do in Flossenberg. ES: Just quarantine, quarantine-- we didn't do any work. In the morning, that was like the same as Gross Rosen. Got up. It was very cold. It was dark. They pulled us out in front of those things. They wouldn't let us stay in the barracks. And everybody was close to each other because to be warm, because it was very cold. It was snowing. And it was in the mountains. And it was February. And It was rough over there. But it was not too long that we were, I think, two weeks. We were sleeping people four in a-- in a-- in a-- on-- the bed, small bed, very narrow bed.  INT: What did you eat? ES: Very little. They had soup and two pieces of bread, as far as I remember. That's all we got in there. 
INT: What did you talk about? ES: Usually we'd talk about how it used to be that you had a nice breakfast, a nice dinner, and how you used to be home, and what's going to be-- in case we survive, what we are going to do. And how it's going to be heaven when-- when the war will be over and we'll be still alive. But nobody believed in it.  INT: Were you aware of the gas chambers at that point? ES: I was not in Auschwitz. I knew there gas-- there were chambers. There were, I think. I didn't know at that time they were gas chambers. But we knew that they were killing people. How they were killing, I don't know. I don't know if we remembered that they were the details that we found out later. But people were talking that people were sent out, and nobody survived. And how it happened, nobody knew actually. And we knew when we came to Gross Rosen that they had-- that they had-- there was always fire. You know, the steam was coming out from the-- from the ovens, I guess. And everybody was showing. But I really don't know if we knew, actually, what was going on.  INT: What did you dream about in Flossenberg? What was your dream? ES: My dream, as I said before, the dream-- how it would be if we survived. I knew that my family didn't survive, because at that time, they were talking that anybody who went east didn't survive. They were saying that some policemen, some guards went with the train, and some person from the train, who-- where the trains were going. There were rumors. And rumors, nobody knew-- nobody ever came over and said, listen, I was in this train, and I was in this transport. I knew that people didn't-- they disappeared. So people were guessing. They were saying that nobody's-- those-- whoever were actually the survivors were in camps, in working camps. And then we knew what was going in Auschwitz. Yes, you were hearing about Auschwitz and that people-- what was going on. That they have stoves, and they-- and actually, I didn't know details, no. No, all the details I found out after the war. 
INT: Was anybody very good to you in any of the camps? ES: No, I can't say that anybody was good to me, no. But on the other hand, everybody was looking for survival, himself.  INT: Any of the guards treat you humanely? ES: You know, I remember, we were-- the only humanely guards were when I was in Wuestegiersdorf. But that time, they were-- all the people already at that time, end of the war, and even '44, the Germans were coming back already. There were pushed out by the Russians. And they know, and they put the young people, old people. So they were a little bit more humane. But I don't know if-- they were talking sometimes like to human beings. But I wouldn't say that they did anything good for me. And I don't know if they could do any good for me. I saw people only through war that they were really bad, because they were just shooting without any reason. They didn't have to.  INT: Where did you go from Flossenberg? ES: From Flossenberg we went to Ohrdruf.  INT: Did they tell you where you were going? ES: They never told us where we were going. That was-- they just put us on the train. And they took us. That's all there was to it. Nobody knew where you are going. And it was always a big secret. And you never know if are you going for life or for death. You arrived, and you went to work, you know that you were alive. 
INT: What was Ohrdruf? ES: That was end of war, don't forget. That was-- already it must have been March, beginning of March.  INT: What year? ES: 1945. And we came to Ohrdruf. And they were building a tunnel. We didn't even know what for. We thought it was for the Fabrik, but-- for the-- for the airplanes or for the warehouses. We didn't know at the time what it was. And they were putting us on the lorry and-- for the-- and they were breaking the stones and bringing the sand and the back and forth. And that was a very hard work. It was not a good camp-- very bad camp. First of all, there was no way of getting additional way to get some kind of additional food. So it was-- I wouldn't consider this a good camp. I was there only two or three weeks, something like this.  INT: Were there men and women in this camp? ES: No, only men. I was never with women-- only men. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] I think in Prussia were women. Otherwise I don't remember being with women.  INT: And what nationals were in Ohrdruf? ES: In Ohrdruf, were all-- a lot of Russians, army men, I believe. They was-- they were-- and that was the first camp that I was a really put together. They had, like, 10 people-- it's a wide-- 10 by 10, I believe. Like a [INAUDIBLE], like a-- and 10 people were sleeping in one-- one big space. And-- and there were a lot of Russians there, yes, lot of Russians. And every morning they took away-- they gave us-- they took away the blankets. And in the evening, they gave us another blanket. Nobody had their own blanket. And there were a lot of-- lot of flies and lot of-- first time that I really got infested. 
INT: How long were you there? ES: For a few weeks. They were-- for liquidation. Whenever we go-- we went at that time, they were liquidating, because they were pushing. They didn't-- they had all the-- the army was coming closer and closer. The Russians were coming closer and closer. And they were going east-- west, all the time west. And they were liquidating the camps. And when you came into camps, they didn't have where to put you. From Ohrdruf they sent us walking to Buchenwald, which was not too far. I remember, I went through Weimar. And they were bombarding the city, the Allied planes. And on the way, there were, like bombs were coming. And then Germans were shooting a prisoner, you know, one of us. And a woman who saw what was going, she started from the window-- because we're going through a town-- and she was yelling and crying when she saw that they were shooting the prisoners. It was really something.  INT: What we she yelling? ES: Because they were shooting a prisoner in Weimar when we were passing. I don't know for what. There was nothing for us, I mean. But she saw it. And she was yelling, crying, you know? And the bombs were falling, like-- like it there be altogether, as I remember. And we came to Buchenwald. Buchenwald was about 12 kilometers from Weimar.  INT: We'll continue in the next tape.  INT: Interview with Eli Sommer, tape number five. Mr. Sommer, you were talking about the death march. Where did it begin? ES: It began at von Buchenwald, because as I mentioned before, we were going from Ohrdruf to Buchenwald. And we arrived in Buchenwald, but they didn't have where to put us. They-- the camp was over-- they had more people they could handle. And I remember I was sleeping and almost in the water, because they just didn't have where to put us. And they didn't have trains anymore. Because all the trains-- I imagine, that my guess that they were-- they needed in the front to evacuate. And so they decided to send us somewhere. And they just sent us to Flossenburg. And that was a pretty far-- I mean, to walk for-- 
INT: How far was it? ES: I don't know exactly how far, but it was a few hundred kilometer, I would say. But I really don't know. I don't remember. You know, it seems so far when you're walking, and you-- you didn't have what to eat, and you could hardly make a step. So--  INT: How many of you were walking? ES: We, I believe-- of course, I was not privy-- privy to-- to all those information at that time. But I-- I believe it was 1,600 people. And there were a lot of guards, a lot of SS guards with us. And we were walking. And in the beginning, it was not too bad because you still had a little bit of strength. But as the days were going-- I mean, after a few days, everybody was exhausted and didn't get any food. And sometimes we stop in some kind of a-- with a farmer and just sleep over once in two nights, I imagine-- or three nights. I don't remember exactly. Sometimes we slept on the-- on the ground. And once in a farm, we found some-- some grains. Some raw potatoes. And in the morning, usually-- usually they-- when they found somebody has grains in the pocket, they would get a lot of beating, you know. And it happened to me that I got beating on the way back when they find that I have some grain in the thing because we were stealing. We were there-- we-- the farmers showed us the hospitality, and they were stealing from them. So we got beating for it. But that's the only way you could survive. And whoever couldn't walk was just shot. And all mostly it was taking-- we had a wagon, and the prisoners was pulling the wagon. And in the evening, they took-- took those people who couldn't walk to the to-- to-- the woods. When we're passing whenever they found some woods, and they shot them. Or when people were running away from the-- from the transport during the day, so they shot them on the spot. There were some people who escaped and survived somehow, you know. But-- but most of them, they got killed. They got. And I remember when I had a very good friend, and-- which I escaped later together. And-- 
INT: What's his name? ES: Oh, Schreiber. Schreiber. We escaped, and he survived, too. But he died a few a months-- a few years ago. And we had another friend. And we were with me and my friend were pulling him, pulling him. And he was a man a head taller than we were.  INT: How-- what was his name? ES: Bohanek. Henech Bohanek. This name I remember. Henech Bohanek. And we were--  INT: Where was he from? ES: He was from Krakow. And we were pulling him, and we're pulling him. And then the guard saw that we were pulling him, and that they were slowing the-- the transport, you know. And they took him in the-- in the wagon, and he was shot in the evening when wherever we stop. So whoever couldn't-- there were many people on the road you could see they shot. I imagine there were all kind of transport. We were not the only one. And by the time we-- it got to-- to Flossenburg-- because that's where we were supposed to go originally. And we were-- we were camping outside of Flossenburg, and they-- they-- they wouldn't accept us, because they were evacuating themselves. And they were-- and we were supposed to go. The guards told us that we are going to Dachau, which was quite a long way yet to go. So I knew at that time, I knew couldn't make it, because I was very, very, weak already. And I and this, my friend Schreiber, somehow we-- we-- overnight, we slept in a-- in a school. An old school, in a village school somewhere. And we investigated. We went down to the cellar. We found a window in the cellar, which was the [INAUDIBLE] outside of the building. And at night, we-- three people, actually. Another one who was just a lucky boy-- we escaped. And we heard some shooting later. And people-- I found out who survived, they said that they were looking for us. Yes. But then they had to go, and we were-- we were in the woods. There was-- and we escaped at night. And we were walking at night. We wanted to go as far as we can go. Naturally, they had to go farther. And there we were in the woods. Let's see, the second of August, it was my-- second of April was my birthday. I remember the guard told me that my uncle died. Roosevelt was my uncle. And so that was about a few days later that we escaped, about three or four days later that must have been. And I was liberated, I believe-- I don't know exactly what day I was liberated. I was about 12, 13 days in the woods. Every time we found a place and-- and we got [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] to the-- they had kept chickens, for instance. They had this very small place where they kept the chicken. And they had a little bit of hay, and we went. We got inside. And-- and in the morning, the woman came in to look for the eggs, and they found us. And so she got scared. And then we were supposed to-- you just go further. We just-- and she'd actually-- they all-- they all got scared that we were the prisoners. And they didn't know. I imagine they were scared of the Germans. They were scared of us. So we were going down by-- by-- by night. We were walking. And in the morning, usually they-- they caught us somehow. And once when we went there, we stopped and they were where the forester had a house. And [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] he was a Pole, I remember. Oh, he said, he's going to help us. He's going to help us. Don't worry. Everything is all right. You are safe here. You are safe here. All of a sudden, he disappeared. And then we were suspicious. And then we went to the-- to the-- didn't want to stay in the-- in the barrack. And we came and he came with a Germans somehow. So I don't know what happened, because one of the Czech boy-- man-- was already sick. And he-- we met him in a hospital, so somehow he survived. But we were scared. I don't know what happened with the Czech guy, if they-- if he brought SS people or not. But we were scared. We didn't know. Somehow, we were-- we were always going further, further, and farther. And-- 
INT: Did anybody help you at all? ES: At that time? Not to-- to help. I mean, they help us when they found us that we were there, and they gave us something to eat. But it's just to go away. I mean, they didn't want nothing to do with us. But they were scared themselves. But to help, I don't think, no, no. We didn't have any occasion, because we were always on the run. And I don't know the intention of this Polish guy who was there, because I think that he brought some Germans, because we saw it. [INAUDIBLE] he brought somebody there. But we didn't stay long enough to-- to-- to know who it was. And finally, we-- we went to a place, I remember. We took off the jackets, because not to be recognized as the-- that we were prisoners. And I remember, we went to eat something somewhere. And a guy was looking at us, and they were looking at-- And I thought that-- you know, at the time, all the guards were changing in civilian suits. And they were always holding something under their arm. And I-- somehow we recognized that he must have been a guard. And I remember, there was a public place where they ate during. And we saw them, so we went out. And he went after us. And so he shot something. But he-- you know, we thought he didn't know what to do. He knew it's end of the world. He knew that he was afraid like for his safety, and he didn't know if his duty was to kill us or to save himself. That's how we felt. So we went to the woods again. And-- and after that, in 12 or 13 days, we saw the American army coming in and the-- and the Jeeps. And so we started to talk to them or what. We didn't know English. But we started to somehow we gave signs. And so they were very all business. Stay on this side and that's it. They didn't. And then we came to a first small town once Americans were there. We [INAUDIBLE] a small town of Eslarn, I remember, which was east of [GERMAN]. And we went-- we went to first house and said-- that because we were too dirty. We had louse and all kind of lice on us from-- as I said, we were [INAUDIBLE] at that time. And first, we took the bath. And the women were there scared, because the men were all on front of wherever they were. And-- and we finally we took the first time in bath. We didn't sleep for quite a long time. I thought that I was falling in somewhere. And I took a bath and washed ourselves. And next morning, she told us that's the registration. They went in, and we stayed in line. And everybody was looking at us, because we were strange faces. And then we-- 
INT: What country were you in? Where were you? ES: That was in Germany. Everything in Germany, Bavarian. Eslarn. And we came in to the front, and I told American soldiers, who are you? So we told them the story. Oh, they closed up the whole thing. And he said, why do you stay in line? We said, what do you mean? They said, line. They told us stay in line. We stayed in line. And they took us to the-- to the burgermeister, which is like a mayor. And they told us to give us somewhere to sleep or something. So he gave us somewhere. And there was small town outskirts. It was like a bar tavern. And they had the rooms upstairs, so we were there in the room. And-- and then-- then the-- the same soldiers went down. It was the Patton 5th Division, I believe. They went down Czechoslovakia. And new people came in, you know. Every day, somebody else. But we were assigned there, so we had a room. In the morning, they gave us something to eat. Then my-- my friend got sick. He didn't feel good. And they didn't have a hospital. It was a small place, so they had a school. And the nuns were there. And they were running the first aid. So he stayed there in the-- in the-- in the school. And after that, [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] one morning, after a day or two, I went down. And there were young kids. You know, American kids in the army. And they-- they already fraternized with the girls. And-- and-- and they were in the bar, and they're getting drinks, and this and that. So they-- they started to ask questions. Everybody wanted to be a hero. So we started question the Germans. Who are you? Oh, they start saying, we don't know. So they started to talk to us. Who are you? And we said, [INAUDIBLE] is a Jewish fellow. He's from concentration. Lager, he said. I didn't know camp at that time. And-- and they didn't know what to do. They wanted so-- they-- what language you speak? I said, I know Jewish. I know Polish. But they didn't know. So they took us to the road-- took me to the road. And they had a convoy. And they stopped the convoy, and they asked, who knows Polish? And somebody said, yeah, I know Polish. And he-- I started to talk Polish, but he didn't-- he didn't know really any Polish. So I said, does he speak Polish? I said, sort of. He said he didn't know Polish. They still didn't know what to do. They-- they put us so stop at a PM and MP. And they put it on the car, on the Jeep, and they took us somewhere. And I saw a trunk-load of German prisoners of war. They took us to camp-- took me to camp. And they started to make their all kind of up, down, this, with the Germans, because there were in uniform. And I was standing on the side. So I said, listen. Then he comes to me. He says, well, who are you? So I said, and I told him, I am a-- from the concentration camp. And-- and so he said, so what are you doing here? I said, I don't know. They took me in, [LAUGHS] because they didn't know what to do with me. Anyway, he couldn't let me out, because I was-- I was counted. And finally at 12 o'clock, he talked to somebody, and they let me go. And so the next day, I figure, I'm not going to stay here. I went to the-- to the school. And I said, I am sick. And-- and a few days later, two days later, they took us to hospital in Weiden. And then we spent a few weeks in Weiden. 
INT: In the hospital? ES: In the hospital, yes. And then after a few weeks, after my friend was feeling better, we went to Bayreuth. And that's where we were staying after the war for-- for about a year.  INT: What did you do there? ES: In the beginning, we had only 13 people. Then people started to come in, come in, come in. And there was a Jewish chaplain, and he-- he-- rabbi. And he sort of organized a [NON-ENGLISH] for the people who are-- who were there. And you know, everybody was looking for somebody. Everybody thought that he was the only one who survived. And eventually, there were about 300 people. And they thought they were the [NON-ENGLISH] and-- no. And then I was a [NON-ENGLISH]. I was one of the five who was elected to be as a representative of the Jewish people in Bayreuth. And then we were getting some packages from UNRRA and that's-- that's what it is. And a lot of people were getting married. They found each other. And we were going to the weddings every week. [LAUGHS] And then I-- I got-- when I was in the hospital in Weiden, I met some-- some soldiers. And I asked them if they can-- I didn't remember the others. I knew that I have a brother in the United States, and he was a doctor. And-- but I-- the last others I remember, he was in the Bronx somewhere. But meanwhile, he was in the army. He was in Europe. He was in Italy at that time. So my-- and then I told him that I have a uncles in Staten Island. But I gave them the name of my brother, I believe. Somehow they-- they got-- there was another story. They told me how they got to my uncles, because my brother was in Europe and was in the army. And so he was not-- they couldn't locate him. And somehow, they found out that he had a family in Staten Island. And-- and they sent me affidavit. I met somebody that they sent where-- and he wrote them. Where-- I mean-- I met-- he was a captain in the army from Staten Island, and we had the address. And they send me the affidavit. And meanwhile, my brother, they told me, he wrote me a letter from Italy. That-- they wrote him, to my brother, that I am in Germany. And he was at Italy. And so-- and he got my address. I don't remember if he sent me a letter or not. If I got the letter or he didn't have time to. But he asked for furlough to be able to come and see me. But meanwhile, there was still war going on in the far east, and he was sent in to Japan. So by the time when he got the answer that he can't, be on account of the condition in Europe and in the far east that he can't get the furlough, he was in Japan anyway already by that time. So I got the affidavit from my uncles. And then one month before I arrived to United States, I got the affidavit from my-- my brother, who came back already. He came one month before I arrived to United States. So I came actually on his affidavit. 
INT: How did you get to the United States? ES: I got the-- no. Through Bremerhaven. I had to go to consulate in Munich at that time. And then they send-- I was actually in second transport to United States on a small boat. You know, those army boats. 8,000 whatever. And I was sick on the boat. And arrived the 15th of July to-- in 1946 to the United States.  INT: Did you ever go back to Tarnow after the war? ES: About-- I believe it was about six years ago. We went with Jenny, my wife, this wife. We went to Europe. We went to Austria. And her sister and her husband and-- four people. So we went to Austria. And then we went to-- I rented a car and went to Hungary. And my brother-in-law had somebody, family in [NON-ENGLISH], outside of [NON-ENGLISH], eastern Czechoslovakia. Then we stopped for four days to Krakow. And I went to my Tarnow. And I went from Krakow. We drove from Krakow to Tarnow. And the town was completely changed. After 50 years or 40-- whatever, 45 at that time-- everything was changed. The-- the-- the-- the places that I-- when I saw, I remember there were new houses, which were old already. And I was very disappointed. I wanted to see the cemetery where my mother, who died in 1941, during the war. And she didn't have a real. At that time, it was just before the ghetto. And-- and when she died, my father said, listen, we don't know what's going to be tomorrow. And you can't wait for the-- for the real stone to put up. So here we put in a small foot stone like a temporary. He said, in case everything will be all right, we'll put down a stone. I couldn't find it. The half of cemetery was made new road. And I was very disappointed. I was actually only a few hours there. I went with somebody that used to live at the same house, the big house. And-- but I was very disappointed somehow. I-- Maybe I wish-- I planning to go sometimes and take most of time. And I remember those places. But I know I'm going to be disappointed, too, somehow. It's-- it's not the same anymore. 
INT: What happened when you came to America? ES: You know, you dream about coming to America. And when you come, the dream somehow disappear. I mean, the reality is not what you dream. And it was very hard. I didn't have any-- any-- any trade. I was working as a-- as a dental technician during the war for my brother-in-law. But here, they-- somehow, by that time, I was getting $12 a week. I couldn't live on it. And my brother was single at that time. And we were living together in one room. And then he got himself a-- he came in in '46. And all the doctors came out from the war. And there was too many doctors, all of a sudden. And they sent. So he was sent somewhere in the outside of Rochester as a-- as a farm doctor in the farm. A small place. And he was struggling, and I was struggling. And he decided to go and specialize, later on. Three years later. And I-- then I had some kind of second or third uncle. And I got a job where I was getting $28. And I was-- I wanted to learn a trade. But somehow, he didn't-- you know, he-- they didn't give me a chance. He said he gave somebody a chance to learn the trade. And then when he learned, he left him. So he didn't want to do it anymore. So I left him. And I got the job in the store. I remember Broad Street, which was also paying $28. That was my big job. They were my big jobs. And somehow, I never could get-- being that I-- I didn't have a trade, I had to struggle. Then I was married in 1949. 
INT: How did you meet your wife? ES: I-- [LAUGHS] strangely enough, I had a girlfriend after the war in Europe. And-- and we were-- but I-- she had a father who went-- he was also a survivor. He went to Israel, at that time, Palestine. And she had a sister, and she wanted to go to the father. And I wanted to go to America. And we were very much in love, but somehow not enough in love to-- to-- to sacrifice each other. And so she said-- but we were corresponding. She sent me letters and love letters here and there, too, you know. And then once, she said, you know, we have a friend. I have a friend in New York, and they live here. And he also survived, who came out at the same time that I did. And they were somehow a family that it was almost intact. And they-- they rented a small house, and everybody was working. And there were a lot of boys again. There were a lot of girls then. A lot of boys were getting there. It was like a-- like a place that you get together. And I met my wife over there. And then after-- after all of those letters, we decided-- she was supposed-- the other one from Israel was supposed to come to United States, but it never materialized. And-- and I-- and I met meanwhile my wife, and we got married '49.  INT: What's her name? What was her name? ES: Sonia. Her maiden name was Bruschtein. 
INT: Where was she from? ES: She was from Krakow. And she was, I believe, was family of four also. And she lost all her family. And she was the only one who was very Jewish looking. So the family decided to let her go on errant papers and send her to friends, to Warsaw somewhere. But meanwhile, as she was shook whenever they-- they-- they found her. Some kind they wanted money that she's Jewish, shaking up with money. And as long as she had money, she was giving. But later, she didn't have money, so they-- she was denounced. And she put-- she was put on the train to Treblinka. And she jumped the train. And she was all blooded from the-- from when she jumped. And she came back to-- to Warsaw. She went right to the arbeitsamt which was workplace, when they were sending people to Germany-- the Poles. So she said she's volunteering to go to Germany. And she wants to escape from the family who are very, very Polish. And she's pro-- pro-German. And so that's how she got into Germany as a-- as a Polish girl. And she was working for a German family. And then she-- she-- then she changed places. And she went to another German family, which were very prominent. An engineer who was working on the V1 and V2, which was sent to England. You know, like missiles. Missiles. The first missiles actually were developed by Germans, and they were the one that she was-- she was serving the old big shots of Germany hierarchy in their home. But she-- he was a Nazi, but he loved her, because she-- they didn't have children. And she was very nice, and she spoke German. And she was saying that she was a pro-German, and she was a this, and she had to-- because it was very strange that she didn't have any correspondence with her family. So how was she going to explain this? So she said she escaped because they are all very nationalistic Pollocks, and she was pro-German, and she didn't-- and so they didn't want to hear nothing from her. And that's how she survived. And then, she was denounced by some, by Polish people somewhere recognized her. But the guy had to-- to give Nazi words that she is not Jewish. Yes. 
INT: We'll continue on the next tape.  INT: Interview with Eli Sommer. Tape number six. What happened to your wife once she was denounced? ES: She was sent to a camp, and she was with Russian girls, she told me. And the Russian girls were very nice to her. And she tried to be with Russian girls. She didn't want to be with the Polish girls because they were the one who denounced her, actually. And [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] somehow, she-- she-- she-- felt safer with the Russian girls. And that's how she survived, actually, the war with the Russian girls who were in-- in the camp. A working camp, not concentration, but a working camp for the foreigners. But he was very disappointed, this guy, when he found out that after the war, she met him. Because she wanted to-- he always was saying that he wants to adopt her. And she was ready to-- he was ready to adopt her after the war, too. But she would never hear about-- they were very good to her, but they didn't know that she was Jewish. If they would know she was Jewish-- because she was always-- she heard about his outlook about, his opinion about Jews. The worst they could-- they-- they could hear about it. If he knew that she was Jewish, he would of been the first one to denounce her. But they still wanted to-- to-- to adopt her after the war.  INT: After you met her, did she-- after you were married-- where were you married? ES: We were married on Staten Island. We had uncles, which they were not too big help to us. To me financially or whatever to-- in helping. I wanted to learn-- the one of my cousins was a-- had a-- not him, but his father-in-law had a factory. And he was running the factory. And I wanted to learn to [INAUDIBLE]. He gave me a chance to learn the trade, you know how you call it, a cutter. To be a cutter. But they never did. They never-- he said the union wouldn't allow it, the this wouldn't allow it. And so they didn't want to put out themselves. And-- but they were nice. He invited us for dinner. And they felt that you have a family. I mean, we didn't expect anything, and we didn't receive anything. What are you going to expect? You have [INAUDIBLE] good. So-- so the relationship was good, but they weren't-- they didn't do nothing to really to help me to advance me. And-- 
INT: Do you think they didn't understand what you had gone through? ES: I don't know. You know, sometimes words are just words. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] Words don't-- you know, when you hear stories about something, you know, it's like history. I mean, it doesn't-- it never affected you, and you have to go through. If you are very sensitive, I imagine, you would do it. You-- there's a lot of people who are really good to family who came in to try to help. And they realized what happened. But they didn't show. You know, its-- it happened. They knew that she had-- they had a family, a sister. She died, and then the whole family vanished. What the-- they-- the brother-- my brother came over here in 1938 after he finished the study in France. And they send him affidavit, and he came in. And he-- they didn't help him that much. You know, they used-- they were pretty well-to-do, and they used influence to give him the-- to get to hospital. At that time, it was very hard to get to the hospital for practice and for the-- to make the justification. But that's about it. Everybody was on his own. And my brother didn't expect. I didn't expect nothing, so I was not disappointed. And that's what. But made-- when they heard that we were intent to get married, and they made sort of a-- my one uncle had a big house. And made-- invited the whole family and the-- for dinner in a restaurant. And then we came to-- to the house. I mean, before it was a wedding in their house. Then they went to a restaurant, then it was went back to the house. It was very nice. It was a nice affair. 
INT: When did you get married? What was the date? ES: In 1949, that was, I believe. August 5th, 1940-- August 7th, I believe, in 1949.  INT: Do you have any children? ES: Yes. I have two boys.  INT: Could you tell me their names, please? ES: The older boy is William, William Henry. He was born 1952. The younger one is Andrew Steven, which was-- he was born in 1956. And they are both are married now. And they both have families, and thanks to God, both doing well. And I'm happy about it.  INT: Do you have grandchildren? ES: Yes, I have. William has three children. A girl of 19. And a--  INT: What's her name? ES: Stacy. And then she has Scott. Was-- he was born two weeks after my late wife died.  INT: Which was? ES: A little bit later. It was 1981. In February. He was born in March 1981. He's 15 now. 15 and 1/2. And then Jenna, which is the youngest one. She's 11 now. Then the younger one is Andrew, which he has Rachel, who is going to be 12 in December 7. December 7th, which is Pearl Harbor Day. And-- and then she have Hannah, which is eight. Eight, I believe. Oh, I made a mistake. Eight or nine.  INT: When did your wife pass away? ES: The last day of February. That was a leap year, 29. February 29, '81.  INT: And when did you meet your current wife? ES: I met her in October. I don't know. Is it 10 or something? At our friends, a mutual friend's wedding-- a daughter's wedding. And we were sitting at the same table. And I guess she was unattached, and I asked her to dance. And from there, we developed. And we got married eventually. We got married a few months-- July 18. 
INT: What year? ES: 1942.  INT: No. 19-- ES: '42. [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] No-- 19-- oh my God. '82. I am back.  INT: What's her name? ES: [LAUGHS] 1982. Jenny. Yeah, Jenny. And we are married already-- what is it? 14 years.  INT: And what was the name of your business? You had a business. ES: A business. I had a business later, yes. Sonbell. That was combination of two words. I had a partner, Sonia and-- bell. [LAUGHS] That not too successful. The partner was not right, and I got rid of him. Then I had to struggle with my new business, which I didn't know. So I went to my business that I worked before in office supplies, wholesale office supplies. And that's what it is. I was working in this business till my late wife got sick. And that was-- she got-- she was sick for three years. Exactly three years.  INT: What message do you have after all that you've gone through? ES: Message? I guess after-- I'm going to-- to say maybe the same message that we should all get-- get along a little bit better, because we saw what-- what-- what hatred can do to the world. The world was not only to the Jews, but it-- it was terrible war. And Jewish people suffered so much. And-- and I hope that this kind of testimony that we-- I have now here will bode well for the future. That people will see that-- that the only way to get to live in peace and to-- to-- to have a little bit better intention and think a little bit better about human beings as-- as brothers. And-- and another message is for-- for the Holocaust deniers, that they-- they think while we are still alive they can get away to-- to deny-- to deny something. Especially, people usually who didn't know, didn't go through it, that didn't know the history-- but they're just of hatred. They want to deny that-- they just-- what we went through. No, I guess this testimony and-- and-- and the thousands like me would stop these kind of things. 
INT: Is there anything that I might have forgotten to ask you that you would like to add? ES: I guess we went through pretty good with everything. I can't think. Maybe I will think about it later, but that will be too late. [LAUGHS]  INT: Thank you very much, Mr. Sommer. ES: You're welcome. It was a pleasure. This picture was taken in 1928 when my uncle, my mother's brother, came over to Poland for a visit. On the left side is my middle brother, Benneck Baruch in testimony. In the middle is my sister, only sister I had. On the right side, is my other brother, the oldest brother. And the front, I am at age nine.  INT: What-- ES: My sister's name was Minka. My brother on the left site is Baruch Benneck. And middle, sister-- my sister, Minka. On the right side is my oldest brother, Monek, Moses, which lives here in the United States. And in the front, I am at age nine. This is a picture of on the left side, that's me, Eli Sommer. On the right side is my sister-- my older sister, Minka. Also taken in 1928 when my uncles from the United States were in Poland. And these are pictures that I received from my uncle after I came over to the United States. They were pictures sent over by my family to United States. This is a picture. On the left side is my grandfather, [NON-ENGLISH]. In the center is my mother, Sedonia. Or you can call it-- the Hebrew name is-- oh, Sedonia. All right. And on the right side is Chaim, Chaim ayosef, my father. Their picture was taken also in 1928 when my uncles from the United States were in Poland visiting. 
INT: The year and-- ES: This is a picture taken in 1931. It was a wedding of my sister to my brother-in-law. Messinger, Minka. My sister, Minka, to my brother-in-law, Motek Messinger. And of course, there were mostly family and friends. And right in front on the-- laying on the-- on the ground, on the floor, that's me, Eli Sommer.  INT: How old were you? ES: I was 12 years old at that time. This is a picture, which was taken in I believe, 1936 or '37. Standing left to right. Me, Eli Sommer. Then my sister, Minka Sommer. Her husband, Motek Messinger. And my brother which lives now here in the United States, Moses Monek. Sitting from left to right is my mother, Sedonia Sommer. And my niece, younger niece, Zosia Messinger. My father, Chaim ayosef Sommer. And my older niece, Blanka Messinger. It's better here. This is a picture taken probably when I was 16 or 17 in an organization [NON-ENGLISH]. Most of the people are not alive. One friend of mine, next to me. I am right in the center, Eli Sommer. Right in the center. And on the-- on the right of me is Dudeck Schiff, David Schiff, who lives in Israel right now. I don't believe I am-- anybody else. One is [NON-ENGLISH] who lives-- that I heard that lives in Poland, but I really don't know. There I was 16. Around 16, 17 at that time. Here the one-- this picture was taken when I was about 16 or 17. Also on an outing of the Zionist organization, [NON-ENGLISH]. On the left side is here, Eli Sommer. I don't remember where all those people are now. I don't believe there-- any is alive. And that's all I can say. This is a picture when I was 17, I believe. On the right top is Eli Sommer. Right beneath me is David Schiff from Israel. And fourth from the left is still Golda Goldstein-- used to be. I don't remember her now name. They-- Dudeck Schiff and Golda Goldstein are still living in Israel. I don't believe anybody else is alive anymore. And those pictures was taken on the Zionists of [NON-ENGLISH] outing somewhere when I was 17. 
INT: How did you get the picture? ES: The picture I got from David Schiff. He was-- during the war, he was in Russia, so he had some pictures with him. And he gave me a copy of it, as the other ones, too. This is a picture identifying me as a representative of the Jewish Information Office in Bayreuth, which was taken in 1945 right after the war in Germany. This is a picture taken in 1969 at the time of my youngest son, Andrew's bar mitzvah. And on the left is Andrew. Next to him is his mother and my wife-- my late wife, Sonia. And I am next to her. And my older son, William, is all the way on the right. This is a picture taken at the time of bar mitzvah-- Scott, a son of William and Helene Sommer-- of my grandson's bar mitzvah. On the left side, starting with the left side is the [BACKGROUND NOISE] wife of my son, Becky Sommer. Next to my son, younger son, Andrew Sommer. In the middle, in the center-- I, Eli Sommer. And bar mitzvah-- next to me is bar mitzvah man, Scott Sommer, son of William and Helene. Now next to him is my son, older son, William. Next to him is older daughter, Stacy Sommer. Coming back, again from the left side, standing is my granddaughter, Rachel. My present wife, Jenny Sommer. Next to her on the right is Hannah Sommer, daughter of Andrew Sommer. And sitting next on the right is Helene Sommer, wife of my-- William Sommer. And next to her on the right, Jenna Sommer, daughter of-- my granddaughter and daughter of William and Helene Sommer.