INT: My name is Isabel Alcoff. I'll be conducting an interview with Sam Gottesman at 6223 Nicole Street in-- Nicholson Street in Pittsburgh. The date is November 10, 1996. And we will be conducting the interview in English. OK. Can you tell us your name, date of birth, and where you were born? SG: My name is Sam Gottesman. And I was born on October the 20th, 1923, in a city of Irsava or, in Hungarian, Ilosva. You can have your choice. I was born to a family of seven. There were three brothers and four sisters and mom and dad. The city is located east-- central east in Carpathian Mountain region. The closest big city were either Munkacs or Beregszász. And we had at home a combination hardware and glass, porcelain, and building material store. And my father, of course, were-- was the one who was running the store. And then as my older brother got bigger, and that's-- and he took charge of it. And [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] yeah, the names of my oldest--  INT: Parents. SG: --sister-- my parents were Isak Gottesman, or in Yiddish they called him [? Isaac ?] [NON-ENGLISH]. My mother was Zseni or called Yiddish [? Sheindel. ?] My older sister was [? Helen. ?] We call her Hella. The next one was my other sister, called [? Faige ?] or Szeren. Then was my brother, Jeno, or [? Jacob ?] or [? Yacob. ?] Then it was my other sister. We called her [? Mimi. ?] Her name was Florence. And then come I, Sam, or Samuel, Shmuel in Yiddish. And then was my other sister [? Raize, ?] and-- Rose. And my youngest brother was [? Shia, ?] and [? Yeshua, ?] Joshua. We all, of course, lived in the-- we had about three bedrooms and a kitchen. Of course we did not have indoor plumbing as yet at that time. It was mostly a little bit primitive. Also we did have electricity. And it started to modernize in my days, which was between 1935 and 1940 when we started modernize a little bit. But it still were primitive in comparison to what we have today. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] We were what you call quite religious in the sense that-- not the extreme. We wore modern clothes. We of course observed all the Jewish holidays, and of course the Sabbath, which especially Friday nights and Saturday mornings. But really even so I-- we went to services every day, me and my dad, my brother. But we-- it was not what you call a fanatical religion. It was just an ordinary religion. I attended Czech schools up until the eighth grade.
And we also attended what you call cheder. It's a religious school. Our routine was-- the older you got, of course, the earlier you got up in the morning. Around 6:00, 6:30, 7 o'clock, you went to cheder first. You did your prayers and you did a little bit of study. You went home. You ate your breakfast. And then you went to school, which was a Czech school run by the Czech Republic. And that lasted until about 12:00 or 1 o'clock. It all depends on your age. And then we came home. We ate our big lunch or a big dinner that time. And by 2:00, 2:30, I was back in cheder. And we spent there till about-- again, it's how old you were-- either 5, 6 o'clock. And meanwhile you had a break, and you ate your sandwich that you brought along. And you spent till 6:00 and sometimes 7:00, and later on you got till about 8 o'clock. You came home and you take a snack, and the evening was finished. Usually we went early bed. By 9 o'clock, I'd say the whole town was sleeping, and very few people being outside. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] Under the Czech government, we had a fairly good rapport with the officials. We had no problems and there was no discrimination, at least nothing to speak of because there is-- always was. And not only that, but the population of our little town was what you call White Russians. It was not the original Russian, but the-- it's still a Slovak-speaking language. And it's not Slovak, but it's not Russian either. So it was a dialect by itself. So I had to grow up with about four different languages. I spoke-- we spoke Yiddish. In school was Czech, strictly Czech. And in cheder, of course, we had the Hebrew. And then in business we had to talk the Russians. The locals were mostly farming. And the businesses we had was supplying them with the tools that they needed for their trade. And it was a sort of a, a understanding between the population and the Jewish population, which consisted of about roughly 500 family, Jewish families. We were mostly occupied either by a trade, like shoemakers, tailors, cabinetmakers, glaziers, and the rest-- and businessmen. And the rest of them were the farmers on the other side who were bringing in-- once a week we had a market day. They brought in their produce. And we had a harmonious life there. We had no trouble there whatsoever with the population. There was very, very few incidents that what you'd call antisemitic or harassment from, from the population. We had two shuls in our hometown.
One was called the [NON-ENGLISH] shul. The other one they call it [NON-ENGLISH]. I don't know why. They got that name in there. And as I grew up, cheder was getting a little bit-- yeah, of course I got my bar mitzvah, which consisted of on a Saturday night just the family came over, the uncles and aunts. And we had chickpeas and, and, and peanuts, which peanuts was a big deal was because we didn't have it growing locally. So it was an imported item. And that was-- and I had a little speech that the rabbi made it up for me, and I recited my speech at Saturday night. And that was the bar mitzvah there, no big fuss about it. And here I was a man already. A year later, or a year and a half later, I decided-- or, well, we-- both of us decided, me and my dad, that I should go away to do some studying in a yeshiva, which I did. And I wound up in the Ungvár. And, and as I remember, it was still, I think, 1938. It was under the Czech. And the yeshiva, of course, took up most of our-- all of our time, actually. We got up in the-- early in the morning. You had a choice. Either you got up early or you, you studied late. So-- and I was usually up in earlier. So about 5:30, 6 o'clock, you had to report to the chief there, or the head of the yeshiva. And it-- there were pleasant and unpleasant memories. I didn't exactly like it that much because somehow I was more or less a homebody. I liked to be home, and I didn't like to be away from home. And another thing was that there was no kitchen for all of us. Only those who could pay for it had one meal in the kitchen, but most of us ate what you call [NON-ENGLISH]. And each day you had a different place where you ate. You had like a Sunday you had this family, a Monday you had another family, and Tuesday and so on. And I had all the days except for Friday and Saturday. That means Friday I had to buy my own, which I went into a [NON-ENGLISH], they call it, in a dairy store. I remember buying myself a piece of bread or yogurt and a piece of cheese. And that was my meal for Friday. Saturday I had to go to a little shul. It was in the neighborhood where we-- I lived. And I had to wait till somebody would ask me home for Friday night meal and Saturday mornings meals.
So this is what I didn't like about it. I just didn't like going to somebody else's house to take my meals. [PAUSES FOR 6 SECONDS] But I-- the-- usually the year or the season lasted only about four months. So right after Passover, the week after Passover, I left my home, went down to Ungvár, and I spend there for about four months. And then we went home for the high holidays. I spent about six weeks at home. And then I went back to Ungvár for the winter, again till-- for about four weeks before Passover. And I, I remember that I wasn't too happy there. And so to the point where-- in the-- meanwhile, of course, there was the-- [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] what you call it, dismemberment of the Czech Republic. So that the second time when I went to Ungvár, it was already under the Hungarians and the whole scene was changed already. You had to be more careful. They were in army barracks not too far. And I remember the soldiers coming into the city, walking and taking their girlfriends for a walk. And we had to always dodge them because they always tried to fight us or cause us trouble or cause us misery. It-- so they slowly, slowly they-- we started to feeling there the, the-- this antisemitism and the discrimination already. And that was still 1939 and 1940. And all these two years are sort of a, a blur to me because they-- and there were so many things happening within these two years. The Czech Republic fall apart. First the Sudetenland. And then the Hungarian only took three cities, Munkacs and Beregszász. And we were still under the Czech. Meanwhile the Ukraines somehow-- I don't know where they came from-- they declared it as a Republic of Ukraine. And that lasted only for about few weeks. And then again the Hungarians marched in, and they finally took over the whole area. So we became Hungarians. Of course, the language was totally, totally strange to me because we never-- did not hear much about Hungarian speaking people because most of them were Austria-Hungary. So from way, way back, the ones who lived under Austria-Hungary, spoke Hungarian. So to us it was a totally new language that we had to learn. And I picked it up fairly good, fairly fast. And-- but we started feeling the, the stresses of the war. Up until then the war was far away. We only heard of all kinds of rumors. Of course we were restricted as far as information is concerned. We were restricted to only one paper that came out of Budapest. And of course they, they just wrote about what they wanted to write and whatever they want to deny information that was going on, of course. There were all kinds of laws being passed that you're not allowed to listen to the BBC. So-- and they-- you had-- if you had a radio, which was very, very few people who owned radios, and you couldn't afford to own radios. Even those people were ordered to hand in their radios. We were not allowed to own a radio. 
INT: And who made these orders? SG: The Hungarian government, of course, passed these laws. Slowly, slowly they started passing these laws. And one law particular that they-- affected a lot of people were the laws that we had to prove our citizenships. And of course, being backward country that this part of the world was, there were a lot of people who really had to scramble to find papers from their grandparents or great-grandparents where they lived, and that they paid taxes or not. And not every village or little town kept records on all those things. So they had a hard time finding records to prove their citizenships, that they belonged there or their grandparents lived way back there.  INT: As long as you're talking about grandparents, tell me. Did your family always come from this part of town-- the world, or-- SG: They-- what I understand is that we came-- or my mother's side, from my-- my mother's side came from a little town across the border. Actually was Galicia. But of course Austria-Hungary-- Galicia was part of Austria-Hungary, so naturally it was no problem for them to move further west. And this is exactly-- actually it's southwest from the area that my grandparents come from. And if I remember the, the correct name of it-- I don't remember it right now. But anyway, it's not far from the area that we came from, my mother's side. And the whole family, which was the-- [? Berger, ?] which was my mother's name, maiden name, lived in that little town. Of course I had my grandmother and grandfather there too. And we had about six or seven uncles and aunts, and cousins there. So it was quite a big family taken up by the [? Bergers ?] itself. So we were a prominent family in our little town. And I remember my father, what-- had a position of being head of the cemetery committee, which was quite an honor for a person to get this kind of position. And so we were what you call a respected part of the family as far as the community in Irsava is concerned. 
INT: And when you had holidays, did the extended family all come to your home, or how did you-- SG: No. Well, we all-- most of us had bigger families. Like we had seven of us, and the other ones had also maybe four, maybe seven. I remember one family had 11 children there. So it was not going to-- one place to the other because you had enough the room for your own family without taking on another family, unless it was some sort of a celebration, like an engagement party or a wedding. That's when the family got together. I remember only once that I had an aunt, my mother's sister, who had no children, and I remember they borrowed me actually for Passover night because there was nobody to ask the four questions. So I did them a favor. I went over to my uncle's and my aunt's place-- that was the first seder night-- to be with them and to ask-- to be the one who's going to ask the four questions.  INT: Did you travel other than-- you were saying you went to yeshiva out of town. Did you do any traveling? SG: Later on I did some traveling. But that was already when my brother, who was in charge of the store, was not home anymore. He was in the labor camps. And so I took charge partially of the business. And so I had to travel to Budapest, and I had to travel to Satu Mare, which is Romania at that time. Also we opened up. And also to Beregszász and Munkacs, mainly for shopping for the store itself. So this is the only traveling I remember doing it. But this-- I was in Budapest twice on a business trip. And of course Munkacs and Beregszász, I just took the bus in the morning. It only took about an hour and a half by bus. And we did the shopping and came back in the evening. But I remember one incidence, just goes to show you what was going on there. We had a gendarme. It's like a policeman at that time, only they had a different uniform with a feather in their hair-- in their hats. And, and I took a trip to, to Munkacs for business reason trip. And somewheres in the middle of the road, and the gendarme-- the bus stopped in that little town. They are picking-- either discharging or picking up passengers. And the gendarme came up on the bus, and he started looking over the passengers. And of course he-- they can easily tell which was a Jewish boy. And so they asked me to get off the bus.
Of course, naturally I got off the bus with them, and they came off, both of them. And they asked me for the papers, which I had papers in order, everything else. And-- but he-- meanwhile he tells the bus driver to go on. So the bus drives away and I'm standing there. He looks over the paper. He says you're OK. You can go ahead. And here I had no bus. There was only one bus going in the morning and one bus coming in the evening. I was stuck there in the middle of the town, a little town. I didn't know anybody and I couldn't go anywheres. And I knew I had to spend the day there already, overnight. And since there was no telephone, of course I was concerned about my parents even not knowing what happened to me since I was supposed to come home. But anyway, I found a Jewish home, and I asked them, of course, can I spend the night here? Of course the answer was yes. And only the next day that I got to go back to Munkacs and do my shopping and come back home again. This is just one of those incidents that brings up the point as to what kind of precarious life we had to lead in that-- those days. But the, the ones that I want to get to is the citizens papers. Finally my father succeeded in getting all his papers in order. But I had the-- my oldest sister, Hella, she was married. Lived in a small town and-- called Bilke. They had a little grocery store. But after the husband was called in into the labor camps, and so she-- and not only that, but her-- the store was taken away from them, which was taken away from 99% of all the Jews. And so she came home with her-- she had a little baby boy. So she lived with us. She had a hard time getting her papers to her husband. She had to prove to her husband that she, she is a citizen. Of course she was a citizen as far as we all were. But on his side, she had difficulties of finding papers. She finally got the right paper. But what happened, that the ministry, the paper, that vital piece of paper that they needed, was misplaced somewheres. And she became a non-citizen. And one Sunday morning-- it was in 1941-- [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] yes, I believe it was in 1941 or '42. I'm not sure the years anymore. And they all-- picked up all those non-citizens from the little town. I'd say there was about 60 families or so were picked up from the-- from town.
And I remember that Sunday morning, we were trying to protect her. And we told-- and the gendarme came to the house, and he asked for her. And we told her that she is not home. But she was so scared that she came out voluntarily and, and, and reported herself. And of course they gave her about three hours or so to get herself together and pack, whatever she wants to do. And of course with the little baby. He was about three years old or so. And I remember running to the post, to the post office and buying postcards, pre-addressing it to her, and giving it to her so she wouldn't have to go wherever-- we did not know what they were going to do with her. We thought maybe they will intern her somewheres in, in the-- inside the country until the war or that-- the-- there is going to be a resolution for them. And not only that, but we were surprised that they picked her up at all because her papers were in order. So of course we send a lawyer to [NON-ENGLISH], which was the office there where the immigration, immigration office was, to-- in order to find out what was-- what went wrong. But meanwhile she was picked up. So-- and that Sunday afternoon, they picked them up and they set them on the train to somewheres. We had no idea where. And that was, I think, April. I believe it was April, 1941 or '42. I think it was '41. But it's not important. They took her and the baby, with-- plus the other families. They shipped them-- we-- later on, of course, we found out-- across the border to Poland. Some of them wound up in a city of Kamenets-Podolsk, and some of them wound up in the city of Kolomea. These facts already came after the war, we found out where they were. We did not hear from her all this time until September. Finally what happened is our boys who were in the labor camps, who were spread out all over-- they were in the east, in Poland. Some of them were as far as, as far as the Russian front. It was moving to-- towards east when the Germans-- and she was-- she succeeded in writing a postcard, the one I gave it to her, and giving it to one of the boys who came across for leave. Some of them came home, whether there was a loss in the family, or they simply got leave for a few days. And she succeeded in-- in sending over in one of those postcards. And the guy, whoever brought it over, simply dropped it in the mailbox and we got it. And I remember that was right a week before the high holidays on a Saturday afternoon when we got that postcard mailed to us. It was a sign of life. We had no idea what will happen to them, where they were. And the rumors had it that the boys must have seen a lot of things going on with that. We had no idea what was going on in the east, which is Poland. They were talking about that people being shot in the streets, people being tossed into the river, and all kinds of things. Of course we did not believe, but yet we thought maybe there really-- there are bandits walking around, you know. And the minute they see a Jew, they'll pick on him and whatever. So we expected this kind of thing to happen. But we did not know the extent of this kind of thing, what was going on in Poland. 
INT: Were you reading any newspaper reports or any-- hearing any radio reports of what was going on in the rest of your-- SG: There-- there-- no, no way, no way did we know anything. I mean, the real-- what was really going on there, we had no idea how severe it was.  INT: Were there any refugees passing through that were giving-- SG: No. No, not in our area. There were no refugees.  INT: OK. SG: And nobody brought any news across except for the boys. The rumors that we did not even want to believe even the way they explained to us what's were happening, that they are in school buildings, and they're came-- they kept picking them up from the school building. And they didn't know where they were taken and all that stuff. So we just simply did not want to believe. And it was not what you call really solid proof that things like that are happening. We thought it was just a haphazard thing that was going on there.  INT: Now, can you tell me how many members of your family were involved in the Hungarian labor force, the forced labor? SG: The-- my--  INT: And how it happened? SG: My father called-- was called in first. He was the first one. The minute they opened up those labor camps, my father, he was the oldest one. And of course they picked on the older one first so they can catch them. I think the maximum age was 50 or so. And he-- I don't remember how many, but I think three months he spent in the labor camps. And what they were doing. First of all, he had a beard and, and side-- what do you call, the burns. And when he went in there, they had to shave him all. So when he first came home, home for a leave, we just couldn't recognize him. He just-- we were shocked when we first saw him. After a while, of course, we got used to it. But they were working in the, in the woods, and cutting down trees and splitting and stuff like that. You can imagine, an, an elderly person like that to do this kind of work for him. But he, he was in a good shape and he survived the-- those three months that he served, and he came home. And then, of course, my brother went in there. And of course that's-- that-- he went in-- he was regular age when-- about 18 or 19. And they started taking in all the kids. So he was one of them who were taken in into the army. 
INT: This is tape number two of Sam Gottesman, November 10, 1996. You were talking about the Hungarian labor forces and how your brother was involved. SG: Yes, my brother was-- he came of age when they called in all the young ones in the-- to the army. But he served part of it as an-- in uniform, in the Hungarian uniform. Later they changed totally to labor camps. And he wound up as far as Kharkov, which is quite deep in Russian territory because the Germans moved all the ways down that way. And they were actually behind the German lines. And they were-- what they were doing is building tank traps and-- and roads for the Germans. So he was quite deep in Germany. And I remember it has-- this is why it's important for me to talk about it-- because it has something to do with my sister, who was deported. And, well, he-- by my sister was in Poland. At that particular time he was shipped across to the east. That's when they started moving east, the whole regiment. And somehow we were hoping that he would be able to get in touch, somehow contact her and see what he can do from the other side. But we did not succeed in doing that. And he-- they move too fast east. So he wound up always at the-- deep inside Russia. And as far as Kharkov is concerned, as this is how far they got. So he was not able to help us any-- anyway with the sister. Because once we found out where she was, we thought that there is a way for us to get her back or to bring her back, or to help her any way we could. But luck would have it, her husband, who was also in-- in the camps, in the labor camps, of course in a different group, they were also moving across the border to Poland. And he succeeded, could get in contact with her. He sent a messenger. He-- he hired the Russian farmer. And somehow he was able to get in close to that school that they were located in. And he was able to take her out from there with the baby and bring her across in a wagon of hay, across the border. I remember my mother went through a lot because she was the one who arranged it, for the messenger, from the-- the-- actually it was Romanian side, but it was Hungary at that time-- from there, to hire somebody to go across, who was right-- living on the border. He was a farmer. He was living right on the border of-- of the Hungarian-Polish border.
And she hired him in order to go, because we knew exactly where he was-- where she was rather. And my-- my brother-in-law at that time, of course, gave us the information as to where she is and what we can do. And she succeeded in hiring a farmer to go in there, to go to Kamenets-Podolsk, which was the name of the city they were located, located the school building, brought her out from the school building, and took her across the border on a wagon of hay. And you can imagine that little baby. He was about four years old maybe. All this time, not a peep out of him. He learn so much to be quiet and to-- and to-- he was fearful, of course. Naturally, the kid felt that there was something wrong. Not only that, but the kid was emaciated because they had no food. They were only given like a cabbage soup once a day. And when he came over, we were still afraid to bring her home because of the gendarme. They know that they-- she was deported. We did all kinds of things. I remember-- I remember going to cross the street to a-- the priest lived across the street. It was a church, a Russian Orthodox Church across the street from us. And we knew the priest quite well. So we used his influence to go to talk to the chief of the police or the gendarme. And we even sent him a set of dishes just to pay off and to make sure that he knows, if she comes across, that they shouldn't bother with her. And-- but we still did not trust ourselves with her to come home. So I remember one aunt-- my sister falsified a passport, put her picture on my sister's passport, and went to the little town of Iasi, where she was hiding for a while when she came across. And she picked up the baby, brought her home. And my sister had to go to a different area, across to a-- they call it [INAUDIBLE], which is [NON-ENGLISH] in Hungarian. It's called [NON-ENGLISH]? No. Tiszabecs, which was a grant-- my grand-- from my father's side, a grandmother's sister lived there, and their family. So they hardly even knew each other because we were living in different countries. But they made room for her. And she moved in into that little town, just to hide out until things quiet down and till we make sure that the papers are back in order again. So the baby was separated from her. And we could not keep the baby in our home either. So we had to ship her to another uncle and aunt, the ones who did not have any children and lived near Munkacs, called [NON-ENGLISH], [NON-ENGLISH]. And they, of course, adapted that little child like anything, like their own. And I remember, I went to visit because the-- it took us quite a while to get the papers in order. So I went to visit he-- the baby. And I went to visit her. And I remember when I came in and the baby recognized me, and it-- she-- he simply jumped on me and put his hands around my neck and he wouldn't let go. [PAUSES FOR 5 SECONDS] We finally succeeded, and we had spent the whole afternoon with him, of course. And then he was always making sure that he sees me, that I'm not going to disappear from him. But the next morning I had to go and take a trip to see my sister in the other place. So I didn't even-- I was afraid to go in in the bedroom and wake him up and say goodbye to him. So I had to disappear in a way. And, of course, I went to visit my sister. It took quite a while to get there because you had to take two trains, had to change trains. And I had to watch out, make sure the gendarmes don't stop me and ask me questions, where I going and what am I doing there? Because the sister was still hiding out there. She was illegally there. But anyway, I went to the sister. And of course, I told her about how things-- things stand and that I saw the baby. The baby's OK. And-- but a few weeks later, finally we were able to bring both of them home. And they spent the time with us until 1944, of course. 
INT: And your brother-in-law that was in the labor force? SG: Brother-in-law was in the labor force. He was in Poland. And he stayed there until, of course, after the war. He never saw them again. He never even got the chance to see them after the-- they came back because he didn't get any leave. So-- so he spent his-- most of the day in the east, in somewheres in Poland. While they were home, at least he knew that they could correspond and he could send letters and packages for her. So she knows-- she knew where he was, and he knew where she was home. So she was safe. She was with us. But of course, then he-- things started getting worse and worse. Every Jew who had a business had to apply for a permit to operate a business or your profession. And of course, 99% of them were denied. So they had no way of making a living even. We were the lucky ones. There were two of us in the whole town of those 500 families that me and another cabinetmaker got their license back to operate a business, not even the same business that we had before but another business, yes, a grocery. With our business, what happened is we simply had to-- they were-- we were ordered to make inventory, and on that particular day to close the shop, take inventory, and hand it over to the government. And the government will take it over, and some day they will pay, of course. And that some day still hasn't come. But this is what happened to our businesses. Whatever we had in stock had to be inventoried and handed over to them. And of course, business was handed over to born-Hungarian. But we, as I said, we were the lucky ones because my father was-- had a-- a-- he was in World War I. And he was wounded. And therefore, he was what you call a 30% invalid. And he had also a-- like a medal. He was-- they had the-- what would you call it? 
INT: Decorated. SG: Decorations from the Hungarian-- from the previous war. So on account of that, he got his license back to operate a little grocery store. We couldn't even get the building back that we had our market. So we had to rent someplace else, a building or a storefront in order to open up the business. And we operated this business, of course, until 1944. '42 was a bad year. '43 was a bad year. There was a lot of starvation. There was not enough food. Hungary was simply handing over all their produce to Germany. And there was very little left for the locals.  INT: And you were running a grocery business at this time? SG: Right.  INT: Does that mean your family had enough to eat, or no? SG: No. No. There was a-- a-- everything was rationed. And we were only allowed so much per ration. And, of course, being like only 1 and 1/2 bakery in whole town. And you had to get up at 4 o'clock in the morning or 5 o'clock in the morning to stand in line to get your rations of the bread. And of course, naturally it was sort of a law, understood, that the Jews were always at the end of the line. And many a times you came to the end of the line, and there wasn't enough in the store. So you-- you came home-- by 8, 9 o'clock you came home with empty handed. So it was quite a lot of suffering. The-- the only luck we had it, because we were in-- in this area. There was farming area. So we were able to exchange material or labor with the farmers. And most of the time, the people operated underground, because they had no way of making a living on the [INAUDIBLE]. And they-- the gendarme themselves needed our services, so they overlooked a lot of things because they needed us. So somehow we muddled through those two years or so that everybody-- not only that, but the community, the Jewish community had put a tax on themselves in order to support those families. Now husband was away in the labor camp, so mostly you had at home were women, children, and the elderly. And you had no way of making a living legally. So most of us who could had to do it underground. A lot of women used to do baking on the-- in their home and selling their baked goods on the market. And these are the kind of things we had to-- what do you call it-- carry on in order to survive. So there was a tax on every Jewish family, of course according to their capabilities, to support those who cannot support themselves. 
INT: And who organized this? SG: The community itself, the Jewish community.  INT: Was this led by a rabbi or an elected official? SG: No, it was just-- we all always have an elected, like a president of the kehilla or the-- the community leader. And usually he is the one who-- who were called to committee meetings and stuff like that. And there was a-- an agreement and an arrangement to be made. And-- and we followed, mostly we followed through with what we agreed upon.  INT: And how were your relations with the Gentile community at this time? SG: This-- we had no problem. With the community itself, we had no problem. It's only the authorities who were the ones who started bugging us every which way. And that, of course, lasted until 1944. And there were all kinds of laws. Like, a bicycle, you-- if you had a bicycle, for instance, there were certain laws. They-- they-- they had a bell on top of it or a nightlight, they had to have it. And if they said that the light-- the bell has to be on the handlebars and then you had it in-- in the rear or somewheres-- so you would always fined regardless. If you had it in the front, you were fined because you should have had it in the rear. And if you had it in the rear, you-- you were fined. In other words, there was a tax on you. They tried to get you as much as they can. The same thing with the citizen papers. Each paper that you-- a-- when-- what you needed in order to establish your citizen papers costs money. They put a stamp on it. And this is a revenue for the government. And it was just the Jews who had to have this kind of things. So what they were doing is sucking out the blood as much as they could, and still claiming that they are holding onto the Jews. They are not handing them over to Germany, which they, of course, they did, in a way. But came 1944. Now I'm going to go jump there, into '44, when the Germans took over Budapest. And that's when things started happening really fast. And it came around April the 6th, I remember, on a Sunday. I remember the 6th or the 16th. I have to look it up. And the order was-- that was right after Pesach, day after Pesach. I mean, that Pesach was already a-- what you call downhill. I remember we went to services early because we were already under the-- the order to wear the yellow star. And we had to register. Every member of the family had to register, put their names and ages on there, on a list. And of course, Passover came. We went to services, I remember. And then-- and all of a sudden, we heard a rumor had it that the Germans are here. So we made one, two, three with the services, and we went home. Of course, the door is locked, the windows shuttered. And we were really scared that night, that we didn't know what to expect. 
INT: Was your oldest brother home at this time? SG: Nobody home. I was the only man actually in the house. And of course, my dad was home. And my sisters were at home, my mom. And of course, the sister-- I mean, the-- my little nephew was home there too. So that-- that Seder night was zilch. We hardly bothered with it. We went through the prayer, went through it one, two, three, just not to do away with it altogether. And so our Pesach was spent anticipating. We didn't know what. We know something is wrong. We know something is bad. And they-- and did not allow us to get on the train anymore. We had to have permission from-- from the police in order to get on the train. And we had to give a good reasons why we are going, where we're going, and how long we're going and all that. It was totally restricted in every which way. And then that Sunday morning, finally the order was given that we to leave our homes. We had to pack up and only take what we can carry with ourselves, and to report to the-- and in the shul or the synagogue-- what do you call the synagogue? [PAUSES FOR 8 SECONDS] What is the word I'm looking for? Inside the synagogue, the-- the-- [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] well, what is this called, the area around the synagogue?  INT: Keep going. SG: Anyway, I remember that we knew we had a-- the rumor had it the night before, yeah, that something is going to happen the next morning. Because, I remember, my uncle, who was in close contact with the mayor of the city, and he sort of gave him a hint that something is cooking. So during the night, we spent the night, actually my mother and my sister, sewing rucksacks, making rucksacks from whatever material we can find in the house and sort of packing. And she even managed to light the hearth in order to bake some bread. And that was right after Pesach. We didn't even put any dishes away or anything. We didn't clean up or anything. That's what we did the whole night, and make rucksacks and such. We didn't have no suitcases. We were not doing any traveling at all. And-- and waiting for something to happen. And it just hit us like a sledgehammer in the morning, when we were told to-- this is it. We have to leave the home. And we have to pack up and-- and report to this. 
INT: How did you find out? Did someone come to the door? Or how did it happen? SG: No, there was-- it-- we had what you call a town crier.  INT: Mhm. SG: And he was going from block to block. And the announcement was made that they had an order from the government that all the Jews of the area are supposed to leave their house and to report by noon in the-- in the synagogue courtyard. This is what they were looking for-- in the synagogue court by noon. So you can imagine the confusion that was going on. And we didn't know where we're going to go. The-- the rumor had it that they're going to take us into the interior of Hungary because the Eastern Front is getting too close, and the Jews are not to be trusted to be close to the-- we might revolt. Or we might go over with the Russians and all that stuff. We knew that-- that is all baloney. Yet, we were hoping against hope that it may be true, that they're going to take us into the interior. We're going to be in the farmland and all that stuff.  INT: Right. SG: Excuse me. [DRINKS] Anyway, we spent the night packing. And we were practical, very. And I just simply-- I remember that we had some wine leftover from Passover because we didn't use it. And all I wanted to do is get drunk. Somehow I couldn't. I just not-- I just didn't know how, and I couldn't. And I was even late. Came 12 o'clock, and the faster the family went, and I was still in the house. Somehow I just didn't want to leave. I felt like as long as I'm here I'm still here. And I don't-- didn't want to give in. And then I started thinking, what if I escape? What if I hide? What if-- and then I thought to myself, here's the family together right now. And I am, in a way, still the man in the house there. And what if they need me? What right do I have to go and go into hiding? And besides that, where am I going to hide? And who is going to support me in hiding? I don't have where-- where to go or who to go to. 
INT: Where was your father at the time? SG: He was home.  INT: OK. SG: He was home. But I knew he was in the elderly there. I figured I'm the youngster there. And I-- I-- they need me. And I better stick with them. And this is what I decided to. So finally I made my walk to the shul courtyard too, like everybody else. And that sight that I have seen, that first sight of the group of people, families in-- in-- or sitting on the ground there. And-- and, of course, the-- the yelling and the screaming and the crying that was going on there-- and then around 3 or so o'clock, we see a couple of German officers coming about. And they just sort of looked around, looked it over. And we heard them talking to the, of course, to the, like, my uncle, who was the president of the community at that time. He was told that, how come they let people sit with kids outside and sitting on the ground? And he says, no, no. You can't do that. You can't do that to you. And they immediately designated three streets as the ghetto. And we-- you have to go back into the houses. We cannot have you sitting in the-- under the sky or so. And so that's when they-- we moved in into those houses. And usually it was one-family home. And all of a sudden we found three and four families moving into one of those homes, until we all got situated in there. And again, if you let your imagination run, you have three or four families in one home, and there is babies, and there is sick-- sick people, and then no cooking, or washing, or anything like that. So it was a little bit of a hullabaloo. And it took us about a week in that ghetto. And the reason for it is they brought in all the Jews from this smaller areas, from the little villages. They brought it in into our town. And they also stuffed them into the same ghettos, some more people. And when you finally got it all cleaned up, you got all the Jews out from their homes, that's the way you-- they-- we had to go through a search. Because we were always ordered, make sure you leave-- you hand over the money, hand over the jewelry. That's the first thing they wanted is the-- the money and the jewelry. Of course, everybody tried to hide as much as they can. They'd-- they'd use all kinds of tricks. Now, some of them succeeded and some of them didn't. And the search was with the locals.
Actually a local gendarme, and the local police, and the local-- what do you call it, who were in charge of the Jews, they stuffed themselves whatever's there. I remember I had a watch on my arm. It's the first thing they saw. And hand it over. And the funny part about it, after the liberation, I saw the guy with the watch-- not with the watch, but I saw the guy. And he apologized. He says, somebody would have taken it off from you anyway. And says this is that. I said, to hell with you. And so they-- [LAUGHS] this is just a sidebar from that. That's first thing he took. He took the watch off and then, of course, went through my pockets. They had to open up the bundles on everybody. And some of them, they-- they took their brass candlesticks with them and that. So naturally you hand it over. Most of the stuff that they saw, they took for themselves. And they finally-- they loaded us up on the train. And then we wound up the next morning in another one of those camps. And it's called the [NON-ENGLISH], which was the brick factory or a lumber yard. And we wound up there. I remember, from the train we were carrying bundles. And one thing I once seen, I will not forget either, is my teacher, my rabbi then when I used to go to cheder. He was an elderly person. And all of a sudden, as I-- we were walking with my bundle on my back, and I saw him in one of those Volksdeutche, which was the German locals. And they were the worst kind of the-- of any bad ones. And I saw him running with a bundle of-- of-- what do you call it-- the cover, bedcovers on his back and a German, with his boots and his uniform, beating on him with a stick. And he tried to escape from him. And he was running so fast. And he held back, could hardly walk. And this is-- this is-- I'll never forget this. I can still see it in front of my eyes, how he was beating on him with a big stick. And he was a young German, maybe about 21 or 22-year-old there, OK, a dog chasing after him and beating him on the-- on the head. And I haven't seen him ever since then. I don't know what happened to him when he got into the camp. But anyway, this scene I will not forget. And also, while we were, all of us families, walking from the train to the camp, there were the Germans with their cars, with their jeeps coming and always trying to run us over. Were just coming right at us and swinging back-- back. And this is the way they treated us. So we had a taste of what was coming. And that camp was a nightmare. It was wide open. And there was no-- just for the roof-- there was no walls in that camp. And there was about-- I-- I saw figures later on in some of the books, about 32,000 population in that camp of Munkacs. What they did is, from all that area, all the Jews that they accumulated in the bigger cities, they brought them in into that camp. And the reason for it was they were simply the-- the railroad line was coming into that brick-- into that yard, in that lumber yard. And this is where they were loading up. 
INT: How long were you in Munkacs? SG: I'm not so sure, either 10-- two weeks, maybe something like that. Again, until they gathered all us up. And it was miserable. I remember what they did there too is they used to have fun. They used to come in, the Germans, and what they picked out where-- people couldn't hide anywheres. I mean, they were everywhere, people from the wall-to-wall in there. And there was no sanitation of any kind. For cooking they had to use-- do some cooking for the population. So they used bathtubs to cook the beans, potatoes, whatever they had handy. And they came in, one of those few soldiers. And they were picking up a few Jews, especially the elderly with beards and stuff like that. And they made them crawl on their bellies. And the weather was still-- what is it-- April. It was still muddy. And it was raining. And there was puddles of water. And they made them walk right into those puddles, dragging themselves and-- and kicking them while they were doing it, or beating up on them. And this is the fun they used to have for this kind of people. Anyway, that was finally over with too one Sunday morning. And I remember when it happened, and I didn't know who he was. All of a sudden, we were ordered, all of us, the whole camp, is to line up five per row in so many people, so many lines. And we were inspected by somebody, an officer of the Germans. I remember, it was a high officer because he has two-- two young SS officers on either side of him with machine guns. And they had-- their ready. And he was walking around and looking us over. And of course, later on, years later, when I was reading the book, John Toland's book, And there it gives a description or it gives you as to where Eichmann was at that particular time. Now, he was inspecting that Munkacs camp. And this is how I knew who he was. At that time, of course, he didn't come in and introduce himself, who he was. But when I was reading the book, that's when I discovered that it was Eichmann himself inspecting us in that Munkacs, in the [NON-ENGLISH], when we were there, about 32,000 population of Jews. 
INT: Can you tell us a little bit more about daily life in the ghetto? SG: While we were still in the Irsava ghetto, in this-- the three-- those-- that, that week there, it was mainly irritations that was going on. It was something new to us. When you take three-- two, three, four families together, you don't even know how to behave. There is not enough room to goes to sleep in. The floor was used for sleeping. And naturally if one stretched a little bit more than the other, or bumped into the other one, there was always this little irritation, a little bit fights. And I remember one of the neighbors who used to live in the same house, and she was fighting about a broom, that somebody took her broom and used it for something else. And, and we thought myself, you're crazy. Here we-- our life is in question, and you are worrying about a new broom that you just bought, and now you don't know where it is and who used it and all that stuff. These are the kind of little irritations that already started getting on our nerves. And of course the cooking was another big problem, because every mother would try to, to prepare food for the kids. And then she took too long, or you cut the potatoes too long, or you did this and that. So it was already what you call miserable as far as we are concerned, that people couldn't get along anymore, and that they didn't know how bad it is. And still they were fighting over little nothings. But it's, it's just-- mostly that's all I remember about that, that. Yeah. 
INT: You mentioned that your life was already in danger. How do you feel that your life was in danger in the ghetto? SG: Well, we knew that this isn't the end. This is what-- the anticipation of something worse. We didn't know what was coming. And I guess this is, this is the worst part of it all. At least if you know what-- who your enemy is and you can face it, then it's one thing. But not knowing what your enemy is and what you're facing, that made it even worse. The, the doubts that you had and your-- of course the depression that you were in and, and, and the irritation every, every day and not knowing what the next morning will be. And you were always-- the minute you saw an officer you were wondering what is your next move going to be. Are you going to have to move, or are you going to go to be moving, or what? So the anticipation was awful on you, and it was grating on your nerves constantly day in and at night. You couldn't get a good night's sleep while you were there because there was always movements going on, or screaming, or kids crying. So you couldn't get a good night's sleep either. So that in itself was already getting on your nerves. And many a times you don't care what happens. Let it come, whatever has to come. But let it come. And you couldn't, you couldn't take, take this uncertainty of your life. And this is what grated you. 
INT: Was there any medical care available in the ghetto? SG: None whatsoever. No. There was no medical care whatsoever. And if somebody died, just, just was-- which happened. There was only one person that I remember died. And I think we managed to bury him. But of course there was no time to put up a monument of any kind of that. And-- but this-- there was no medical, medical help there, well-- one kind.  INT: You were talking about Eichmann coming to the ghetto. SG: Yeah, in the Munkacs ghetto, yes. That's when he came in. Right afterwards, that's when they started loading on us up onto the trains. And one thing I remember is since my sister was a returnee, or a, a survivor from the early 1941 massacre that was going on there, she knew what was going and she saw what was going on. Even so she didn't know exactly either, because she only knew that people are disappearing. As to what happens to them, she didn't know. But she had it bad enough that she knew there is no good sides in there. And I remember when they started loading us up, and she started to cry. And she said, why did you have to save me so I would have to die once more? That I remember, the words, the way she said it. Why did you have to save me in order so I die-- have to die once more? We didn't know what she was talking about. But I guess she knew what was coming, or at least she had a pretty good idea. And the funny part about it is that we never asked her to talk about what she went through. We never bothered asking her what she went through. So it's, it's funny that we are going through the same phrase again right after the war. Nobody wanted to know it-- what's happened to us, that what we went through. It took years, years in order to be able to talk about it. So once-- and OK-- when we-- they loaded us up, like I say, between 75 and 80 people pushed in into that boxcars. And there were two buckets that they gave us, one for water, and one for whatever your needs, needs is. And then they-- the family was still together. We tried to keep together as much as we could. And then they loaded us up on the train. And late in the afternoon, I remember around 3, 4 o'clock when the train finally started moving. So our next worry was which way are we going to go? We knew at one station, one juncture, that either we go west or we go east.
And we knew where it was. And we knew after we passed that station we will know which way we are going. Because we didn't know exactly where we are going, but at least the direction that we are going now. So the minute we reached the Chop station, and it was going one direction. And of course we didn't know which direction it is yet until we see the next station. And once we saw the next station, we knew we are going east, except we again, we had no idea where east is and what is waiting us on the other side. Another incident I remember-- yeah, two actually. I, I remember during the daytime I was looking out in that little window with the bars on top of it. And we went, we went through the beautiful Slovakian territory. And we-- that we heard so much about the Tatras, the resort areas, that the high Tatras where people used to go skiing and stuff like that. And I looked out the window and I saw a farmer. And I can hear the birds even singing while the, the, the train was slowing down. And I thought to myself, why? I question-- this is when I started asking question. Why? What have I done to deserve that, and there is the farmer all free working with his plow in there in the fields, since it was May. They were plowing their fields. And I can hear the birds singing outside. And here I am going somewheres. I have no idea where I'm going or where I'm going to wind up. That's one thing I remember. And another thing I remember is while we were trying to get some shuteye during the night. And we-- of course there wasn't much room to lay down anywheres, but we were in a sort of sitting positions. And we were all tired out, of course. And when the train-- and the, the train conductor that was-- every time we were moving, moving, moving, and all of a sudden he slapped on the brakes. And he was shifting us back and forth. Every, every 15, 20 minutes or so that he was doing. Just, just to give us the feeling that we are under his, his command. And the minute you fell asleep or you took a shuteye, and he-- that's where he slammed on the brake again, and the train sort of shifted you again. Just to wake you up and shake you up. And this is another incident that I remember on going on the train. And of course the, the crying and the sobbing and the-- you know, and the wailing and the children and all that.
And naturally, for the water, the lack of water and the lack of space and lack of-- may-- we getting the, the needs for your-- physically your needs and all that. It was-- well, I can't-- I don't have the words to describe it. But if anybody wants to try to imagine himself, and close their eyes and think if they have 80 people in a boxcar with nothing in there, and not going-- not knowing where he's going. And after all we went through already, so we were not in-- exactly in a great shape. And again-- and we were waiting, what is at the end of the line? Where are we going to wind up? And the scary thing that happened is the one morning when we were getting close to the end, the train stopped in the middle of nowheres. And I remember looking out that little window, and we saw nothing. There were just woods. And it was sort of foggy. It was very early in the morning. There's the-- just about the day come-- came up. It was getting daylight. It was very foggy. And we are in the middle of nowheres. And here I thought to myself, well, I guess this is it. What they'll do is just drive us out from the boxcars, and they probably have a machine gun set up somewheres, and they'll finish up, ups him. Here is the middle of nowheres. There's nobody around here. And this is what I had in mind that is going to happen. And we sat there for about a half hour, I would say. And then all of a sudden it starts-- the train started moving again. So I thought to myself, well, this isn't it. So what's next? And of course the next is when we started moving in into-- slowly the train kept crawling and crawling. And we saw-- what I saw is when we moved in into an area which was totally strange to me. What I saw is like, like people moving around, seen them-- first sight I saw were people sitting on a pile of rocks and breaking rocks. They had striped uniforms on. And their heads were shaven and I couldn't tell whether it was a man or a woman. And we started thinking, my god, what is this? Just could not imagine anything like that at all. In the morning a train moved in. And the more we saw of is like little ants moving every which way. They had young children there, and they had older one coming and going, and there are wires all over the place. And we just could not imagine what it was finally when the train stopped. And then all of a sudden they, they opened up the doors. And then that's where they-- everything came loose and came crashing down on us. They immediately ordered us to get out from the boxcars. And they told us, don't, don't take anything with you. You come back and you'll get it later on and just get off. And then they started the screaming and the, the beating on the head, and the, the dogs, the-- and German, the SS, with the dogs. And it was-- hell broke loose. 
INT: Did everyone in your boxcar survive the trip? SG: Yes. And, and they, they chased us out from the barracks. And immediately, of course, the hullabaloo started. They, they started the screaming. They line up and then-- and separate the women from the men. And everything went so fast. And so-- and that we, we just felt we were hit in-- over the head, in, in a daze. And we just didn't know where we are at, what's happening to us, and what are we going to do here, and what is this place. So many things went through your head that it was a total confusion. And finally, we, we followed order. The-- that's all you could do because you couldn't move right or, or left without somebody screaming at you or somebody jumping at you and beating on you. So we had to line up, of course, five in a row. And we immediately found ourselves men separately and the women separately without even knowing what we are doing. And, and they kept on moving. The line kept on moving, moving, moving. And after-- of course until we got to the front of the line. And I tried to, to be together with my, my father and-- just me and my father because my little brother, the sisters, and my mother and my older sister and the baby were all in the other side. They were separated right there and then. So I didn't even have a chance to see them when they were separated even. And so we just kept on moving till we came to the front of the line. And then we were pushed to one side, and that's all. That's all I knew. I didn't know-- I knew there is another side, but I didn't know-- we didn't have time to think of another side either, what's going on on the other side. We were so busy with ourselves there. They kept us moving constantly on a, on a, on, on the alert that we had no idea what was going on, what's happening in-- behind us. 
INT: So who specifically was with you on your side? SG: My dad only.  INT: OK. SG: That's all I wound up with. Because my younger little brother with-- was-- immediately, I guess, they, they separated him as-- right away as they came off the boxcar.  INT: And the oldest brother? SG: The oldest brother-- there was-- no, just me. The older brother was on the, on the Russian front. He was a separate-- as a matter of fact, you-- if you ask for-- my older brother, we-- last time we heard from him was of December, 1941. That was the last postcard we got from him, never again since then.  INT: So you never knew what happened? SG: I-- later after the war I found out. Those who were in his group, that they were captured by the Russians and they suffered typhoid and most of them certainly did not survive the, the-- what do you call, the disease. So that's-- he, he perished somewheres near Kharkov somewheres. In the middle of Russia somewheres. So this is what happened to my older brother. So the only one I had is my younger brothers, plus the four sisters and the little nephew.  INT: Right. SG: So there we were immediately separated. I didn't knew when it happened, but it happened. And so I wound up with my dad. And we were pushed to one side, of course, and they kept on marching us. And I guess then-- and they, they finally separated and they got through with all the selections and they kept on ordering us to march and march. And you wound up in the barrack, a big barrack. And there they told us to strip. And there were numbers on their walls. And they told us remember where you put your stuff down so when you come back, you can remember the numbers your stuff in. Of course we all listened to it. And while we were walking, while we were marching there, we saw all kinds of scenes there. We saw the smoke. We smelled the smoke. We didn't know what it was. We heard the music playing. We had a whole band. A concert was going on. So we just could not imagine what this crazy place is. Here the music is playing. Here there is fire coming up, and smoke on all and this-- and the stink. The smoke, you can smell it everywhere. And there are people every which way, and there are wires and there is barracks. And so we just could not imagine. Could have been in the moon as far as we are concerned. And this is what the place looked like to us.
Till finally we got to that big hall, and there we stripped. And they-- we had to line up again. And, and they-- we went through the barbers. They shaved us from head to toe. And then we went to what you call delousing, take this, this, this ritual bath, and the showers, of course. Of course we looked at the showers because while we were walking, we started to find out from the inmates that were there already what's going on here, what's going to happen to us. And we heard all kinds of answers from them. One says, don't worry. They're going to get white bread. The other one says, look at-- you see that-- the chimney there? So we just couldn't make out-- we felt those-- these people must be here quite some time and they lost their, their senses already. And why can they be so cruel to us? I mean, what did we do to them? And just we could not imagine, again, what was going on. And the, and the answers that we were given were so contradictory that it was just confusing actually, not get-- getting any answer. And I-- of course when we stripped and took our showers and we wound up on the other side. And we got the same issue uniform, of course the striped pants and the-- a pair of long john and a shirt and a jacket and a cap and a-- and pair of shoes doesn't-- either fits or doesn't fit. Didn't care. And we never did go back to our clothes. Of course it was taken away right there and then, I found out later on. And then again we marched again. And of course line, line up. Stand in line and not move and-- until you're told. And don't talk until you're, you're asked to, and all that kind of stuff. And it was just-- it was awful. I mean, this change, that sudden change from being yourself and all of a sudden you are something, you are something rather than somebody. The, the transition was awful. And we still haven't had anything to eat for number of days. In that train we didn't have anything to eat. [DRINKS] So when we finally-- we wound up in another barrack. And they told us, pick your place. And of course there was that three tier bunks. And whoever wound up on the top, and on the edge, he better wind-- look out because the place was so narrow and at-- all of us, if I want to make a turn, we all had to make-- turn around the other side. This is how tight it was. And it was nothing but straw there. I, I don't remember even if it was any straw at all. 
INT: Do you remember the number of the barracks? SG: No. I don't want this-- when we first came in here, we-- as I say, we hardly knew any information about Auschwitz because, as I say, I only spent two days in there. And we arrived like on a Tuesday, I believe-- no, a Thursday. Was a Thursday. And, and, and we-- Saturday they put us on a train. They asked us for volunteers to-- I mean, not for volunteers. They asked us to, to state our-- whether we have any trades. So naturally we all tried to be some sort of a trade. So I'm-- reported that I'm a glazier. Figure maybe in a building trade or something like that. But-- and we were told to, to try to be some, somebody, not to be a, a merchant or what you call it. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] So when we went through all that selection and we wound up probably about 3,000 inmates. And by Saturday-- yeah, they gave us numbers. But instead of tattooed, because they were so busy at that time. They were bringing in about three trains, I hear, every day. And so they didn't have time to do any tattooing.  INT: What was your number? SG: 37052. And I remember, because they told us you better remember the number. And I-- then I had it sewn on on my jacket. And this is how I remember it. For a whole year I remembered my number. And when they finally selected us, and we spent two days. I remember the first introduction to the cuisine of Auschwitz. We were given a big tin bowl, and there were five ladles of soup in there. And that was the first time we, we were in Auschwitz that we were given any food. And they told us, five of you, and one-- we are standing in a row-- this is yours. And one guy asked them, what about spoons? [LAUGHS] He got hit over the head. And he says that's your answer. That's your spoon. So we had to use our hands in order to get some food in ours. I remember the first time I tasted it, I spit it out because I just couldn't stand the taste of it. But of course you learn fast that this here, you're going to eat whatever they give you. And not only you're going to eat, you're going to be lucky if you get something. So it didn't take us long to get to-- adjusted to that kind of thing. But two days later on a Saturday, they put us on a train. And we wound up in the Silesian mountain region called Wolfsberg.
That was the camp that we were-- wound up there. And a-- we arrived there, I remember, late in the afternoon or so. And we were told that we were to rest till the next day. And the next day of course you woke-- we woke up, I think, around 5, 6 o'clock. Because we didn't have no watches on ourself. Nothing was given to us. We just had a-- the uniforms. That's all we had on ourselves. Nothing else. And the next morning, of course, we were assigned to different groups of working groups. And they marched us out to different areas, of course. And I remember the first assignment was we-- they built some more barracks for the camps, and we were loading and unloading the-- those parts from the barracks and putting up barracks. That was the first few days, I remember. I still remember which-- what-- it puzzled me that the company was Todt Company. T-O-D-- T-O-D-D or-- yeah, T-O-D-T or T-O-T-T. And, and it has-- like, 'todt' in, in German is death also. So I was figuring it's-- you're always here. You-- we were used to it already, seeing the death hat on the SS, whether it has anything to do with them or not. But that's-- remember the company that I worked for when we put up those barracks up. But then of course they, they switched us around. And I was working in the, in the woods. We were building a-- digging, actually, a water line into the city. So we started out from different area in the woods, try to see if we can find some water in there. And this is-- was our job, was to dig channels with that's-- with the-- what do you call it, a pick and shovel. And until-- that lasted a while. Then I was transferred for another work which we were working with the Germans together. We was-- had two meisters. [GERMAN], they call them. They were building apartment buildings. For the cities that were bombed out, they were building for the German population new cities, in other word. And this is where we-- I was working with two Germans, masters. And they were putting foundations for the buildings. So I, I-- and they were very nice two German that I-- one was particularly nice. I remember once he left me an apple. Of course he complained himself that he doesn't have much to eat, because he knew we didn't get enough to eat. Starvation was always with us. Hunger was always there. And so he knew we were hungry. And he, he himself said that he doesn't get much. It's all rationed. And since he is single, he only gets so much too. But he-- I remember once he left me an apple, and he sort of-- he wasn't allowed to give it to me, or he didn't-- he was afraid to give it to me, or maybe the, the SS guard would notice it or something. So he just hinted with his hat and showed it to me, that he has something for me there. So I remember once he gave me an apple. And the, the total ration of the day was-- is a black coffee in the morning. And that's is what we marched out with. Now, if you were close in the beginning, when we were close to the camp, when I worked close to the camp, by lunchtime they used to bring us those milk cans that they used to use, those army cans that looked like milk cans. And just-- it was-- they call it spinach soup. Actually was warm water, actually. If you saw one time a leaf, a green leaf swimming around there. That's about all it was. But at least it was liquid, which you really had no access to anything at all. No water of any kind or-- so anything you can-- especially if it was warm or hot enough, you welcomed it because for the whole day you needed something to-- for your stomach. This was in the early days when it was the good old days. And until you came home in the evening, which is around 6 o'clock, and until all the groups came in, all the working groups came in. We were counted as we walked in in the camp, marched in. And we had to take [GERMAN] taking my hat off. And all had to watch five. And then there was the camp, camp commandant at the gate, always counting five, five, make sure that all the groups came in, and make sure nobody ever missed. Once there was somebody missing. There was a whole hullabaloo about that either. 
INT: And what happened then? SG: What happened is-- of course you don't know exactly what's going on because it was a big camp, 3,000 inmates. You were in your group, and then who knows what happened in the other group. And I remember when we came in and there was that one man missing. First we, we knew-- we were standing too long. Well, usually when we came in we, we were counted and everything was OK. We were-- got our supper, which was a ladle of soup. Could have been potato soup, macaroni soup or some sort of a rice soup, a barley soup. And it all depends how, how far in the line you were. If you were towards the end of the can, you got the heavier part of the soup. But if they opened up a new can and you were right there, you got mostly-- it's the liquid rather than the heavy stuff. So we tried to maneuver ourselves on. But everybody was just as smart as I was. So you didn't always succeed in getting to what you want to do. But this is the one we looked out for, to make sure that we are towards the end of the can and, and make sure that there's still some in the can. Otherwise you wound up with the beginning of this can, which was nothing. And you got at the beginning-- again, it was three people to a loaf of bread. And a loaf of bread was, I would say, just like the ones we have here in the store. What do you call the small loaf, the big company that puts out the bread? And anyway, it's about-- the whole loaf is about three-- 12 inches long, for three people. You wound up with about four slices of bread. That was the good old days. And that-- and you-- and to that you got your soup and the, the three slices of bread. And then you got-- either you got a pad of margarine or you got the wedge of honey. And was-- not was real honey. Was the imitation honey. Or you got the wedge of this cheese. Or sometimes you got a small pad of Limburger cheese. Of course in the beginning, I couldn't stand the smell of it. And I, I really forced myself. But then it became a delicious sight, and which I wish I would have had it. And this was your total intake for the day. So you remember, we were constantly hungry. The hunger was with us day and night. And you had no, no outlet or no chance of getting extras. So-- and since you were locked in in that camp, you couldn't get out. You couldn't organize for anything else except what you were-- got in there. 
INT: Now, was your father still with you at this time? SG: Yes, he was, except he was working in a different place. He was different-- in a different group. And so this was our total intake. And so it wasn't much. So it wasn't-- didn't take long for us to starting to starve, to lose weight, starting to get sick. Diarrhea overtook. So slowly we-- slowly people started to fall by wayside, and getting sick, couldn't go to work anymore. Once you couldn't get to work anymore-- of course the truck came every Friday night and picked up all those people who were selected out. And they took them away somewheres. Again, we didn't know where, except for later on we found out they wound up in Auschwitz.  INT: OK.  INT: This is tape number four of Sam Gottesman's interview, November 10, 1996. Sam, you were telling us a little bit about your life in Wolfsberg. Can you tell me, your father was in a different unit, a different part, how did you keep in touch with each other? SG: Well, when we came home in the evenings, we went to the same barrack. We slept together, and-- until the next morning, of course. But we tried to be as much together as we could. The only thing is, I didn't want to be too close or in the same unit with him. Beginning I was, but then I tried not to be. And it is, in a way, a painful situation for me. But I have to talk about it because usually they try-- everybody envied me that I have my father with me. Most of them say, you see, at least you have your father with you. I don't have anybody. I'm here by myself. And so they envied me. I figured, yes, you know yours thing, but I know mine. And I know, when we came home in the evening and then when I used to hear the story, what happened during the day, I didn't very much like it when he told me that he was-- got beaten up because of this or that, or the SS was after him, or the kapo was after him. So I just didn't like to hear these kind of stories. And many a times, it was a sort of a guilt feeling about it. And I wished I would not hear this or I wouldn't have him here with me, I would be separated. At least I'll be responsible for myself. In a way, I felt I'm responsible for another. I could help him. But I felt, somehow, that I am-- I should be able to do something for him.
I'm the youngster. I'm the-- the-- what you call the future. And-- and I should be able to help him out somehow. And I felt helpless. And therefore, I didn't like to be in this kind of situation. In a way I was wishing I wouldn't be together. And it almost cost me my life. One day they were announcing that-- it was late in the summer, and the rumor had it that they are going to take all the-- there were a few young people, young kids. I'm talking about young people. They were around 14, 15 years old, and that they were going to take these kids and ship them into a different camp where they would be working and into a factory rather than being outdoors. Because the Silesian mountains, they happen to be quite rough there. I would say similar to the Denver, Colorado area, where the snows in the wintertime could reach three, four feet high. And the temperature can easily drop down to 30 below or so. So it was rough territory there. And I figured maybe this is why they are picking up the young ones. They're going to put them in a indoor working conditions, so they can survive better in the winters or so. And I thought to myself, maybe this is my chance to-- the fact that I was much older, the way-- but what I looked like, I looked like a youngster of 15 years old. So I figure I can get away with it. So I, when they asked for him to step out, I was one of them that did step out. And they took my name and number on there, of course, on the list. And that was it. But later on I had a whole day to think about it. And when we came home, and there were sort of second thoughts about it, and what did I do? And not only that, but what I heard when they started talking, the inmates started talking among each other, that what will happen, that those kids are going to go back to Auschwitz. I didn't like that. I knew right away what that means. And so I-- and here I am trapped. I'm on the list. I don't know when they're going to pick us up. But I know, sooner or later, they're going to pick us up and ship us to Auschwitz. And I thought to myself, my God, why did I do? And how do I get out of this? In a-- and you'll be surprised how your mind starts working, and you put aside fear, and you take chances on your life. And here I decided, I'm going to go down to the office, because we were sort of on a hill.
And the bags was on the hill, and the office was right down, down below, where the-- the officers were there. And they had their barracks, the SS barracks there. And I'm going to take a chance to see if I can get myself off that list because I'm not 14 or 15 years old. I'm much older. So right after supper, I decided. I didn't tell my dad anything. I ran down to the office and knocked on the door. I figured, whatever happens happens. I says I almost thought that I am practically dead. I am on the death list. And I hear what-- come on. Come on in. In other words, come in. And so I open up the door, and I came in. And he looked at me with his big eyes, and he says, what do you want? You know, kind of German-- what's los? What's [NON-ENGLISH]? And so I told him that I am-- they put me on the list by mistake. I'm not 15 years old. And I would like to be off the list and there. And he looks at me, and he says strip. So I know right away at least I have a chance. So of course I stood there like Superman, took-- took my jacket off and my shirt off. And I-- and I stood there like I can conquer the world yet as there. And he looks at me, and he says, what's [NON-ENGLISH]? What's your name? And I told them this and this and this is my number. And he takes the pencil and looks for the name and number. And as soon as he starts looking for it, and almost found it, all of a sudden the air raid siren comes on. Lights out! Raus! Raus! Raus! Go back, and chases me out. My name is on the list. Now you can imagine it's already night It was around 7:30 or so, 8 o'clock. I had to go back to the barrack. And I can hardly wait for the air raid to come, to be end it. What they were doing, they were bombing Breslau. The Russians were bombing the city of Breslau, which is about 80 kilometers from there but of course the whole area blacked out. And here I thought, I was miserable. I said my-- my life is still on-- on-- on the edge there. And finally the air raid came on again. It's an all clear. And I ran down fast as I can. And here I'm hoping that that guy's still going to be in his office I knock the door again. Again, again the same thing come on in and he looked at me see, [NON-ENGLISH]? What-- what do you want? I says I'm the one who was-- you were supposed to take me off from the list. He says, oh, yeah, we-- [NON-ENGLISH]. Yeah, what's your name? What's your number? And he looks up and he takes the pencil, strikes it out. There it is. my life. 
INT: Do you know the Kommandant's name? SG: No, we didn't have that close relationship with him. And so that is-- was a life saver. And I almost committed suicide there. That's is exactly what I'm considering, that I committed suicide by putting my name on that list. And how luck would have it, I had the courage to do that and he took my life in my own hand because he could have easily taken his gun and shoot me right there just-- I dared to come in into the office without even being called for. But I did it, and I succeeded. So that was one incident that I-- I-- attribute my long life to this one daring situation that I did. Of course, there were many situations like this that I-- what you call-- committed suicide in-- in-- and succeed and not carrying through. But this was the first one, encounter, that I had. That was a miserable summer. And I remember the way we worked there. Many a times we went out working and our clothes were still wet from the rain from the day before. We didn't have a chance to dry out. And it was raining and-- and cold already. It had started to getting around October at the time when everything was rainy and dreary, and-- and I, many a times I wished I wouldn't have to get up in the morning. In other words, not get up, but not to get up period. And of course, the hunger, well, this is constantly. And here I, again, I took my life in my own hand again because of food. One day we came home, and usually, while we were still walking into the camp, we immediately wanted to know what's for supper. That's the first question we could-- anybody who was there already, we asked them what is for supper? What is the [NON-ENGLISH]? In other word, the addition to what-- to what they give them. So, because that was all we had on our mind is food. And so I remember one night we came home, and they told-- and they told us, [NON-ENGLISH], biscuit soup. I says, what the heck was that? Never heard of biscuit soup. And finally we got our ration, our ladle of soup. And here it was, biscuits. You know, sweet biscuits. They must have been spoiled probably. Who knows where they got them from. But it was sweet stuff, and it was like a mush. It was thick, heavy. And it was [INAUDIBLE] like, but it was sweet. And we are craving. For two things I remember craving, onions and sweets. That's one of two, three things that I could kill for. So when I'm finished with that-- with bowl, I told myself, oh, I wish I could get another bowl of this soup. I don't care what happens afterwards. One more bowl of this soup, and I didn't get to die anyone after that. And here my mind started working overtime again. Again I tell them-- I don't tell my dad anything. You're sitting next to me on the-- on the bare bunk. And I walk out. And, as I say, my mind was working overtime. What I did is, I left about a tablespoon of this mush in the bowl. I sacrificed it, smeared it on my jacket, and picked up some mud from the-- of course, the whole camp was muddy-- 3,000 people marching up and down. Smeared it on there, and I figure I'm going to go down in the kitchen and see if I can somehow finagle another bowl of soup of that. I'll figure that I'm going to tell them that I fell. It's muddy, and it's slippery, of course. And I didn't have want to do. See what happens, see. What-- they tell me, I don't care anymore. I have to have another bowl of this soup. So I went down to the kitchen. But I didn't dare go into the kitchen. And I saw the-- the-- the-- not the camp kommandant himself, by the second to the-- to the in charge. He was walking around the kitchen, probably inspecting or something. And the boys were still working in the kitchen. And he saw me standing there and-- at the entrance to the kitchen. And he started shouting, what-- what am I doing here? So I step forward. And I started back, and I says, I-- I got my dinner, and I was walking up to the-- to the barrack. And I slipped and I fell, and I spilled all my soup. And I just didn't have what to eat. And he turns around to the-- one of the kitchen helper, says, give him a bowl of soup. [SIGHS] 
INT: [LAUGHS] SG: My heaven opened up. But here is the dilemma. I have a bowl of soup, walking back to the barrack. My dad is there waiting for me. What do I do with this bowl of soup? Here is a-- that the-- the--  INT: Right. SG: --fight comes in with my conscience.  INT: Right. SG: I have mine-- if I wouldn't have my dad, I would have had another bowl of soup. And I have him. Do I eat it myself? I just couldn't allow myself to do that. But only I didn't-- I'm hungry! It was a struggle. By the time I walked up to the barrack, you know, I tasted a little bit and licked that spoon and all that, you know. But finally I-- I overcame my selfishness, and I came in. And my dad looked at me. And he says, where did you get this? And then I told him is what happened. Of course, naturally, I gave him half of it. And-- and-- and this is when it bothered me that we are together, because it took a half a bowl of soup that I had to pay the price for that. So-- so now you can understand what the previous struggle was all about. But anyway, this was part of this summer happening. And then he started sort of getting a little sickly. His legs started oozing. His-- he used to get boils on his legs. And he had a little trouble walking. So it was-- I was worried about it. And here an accident happens to me. While I was working in-- on my shift with my German masters, and as I said, he was a very nice German and was very nice to us, to me anyway. So I was trying to-- they used to take-- they-- he used to heat with oil. I mean with coal. So-- but they only get it on rations, so didn't have enough. So while there were a lot of lumbers laying around there, I figured I'm going to cut up on the power saw because since I was helping them out on the power saw, and making up some kindling wood for him, for the master to take home. I was going to be nice to him. And here I put a log onto the table, onto the table saw, not knowing exactly to operate-- how to operate a log. And I got my hand and my thumb caught in the saw. And it ripped right into it. But luckily it didn't go in deep enough. It didn't touch my bone. And it just-- it was a superficial. It cut the skin off.
And of course, naturally, the next day I didn't have to go out to work. And they put me in the hospital, in the revier. Of course, there you got maybe an aspirin if you got-- if that's all you got. But there, if you were longer than two, three days, then that the selection came. That means you're finished. But I was lucky enough, when they came and inspect me, and they looked at me and my finger, they figured this healed, see. And you're still good for work. You're still capable of working. They sent me off to another camp, or a camp-- hospital camp, which was in the city of-- let's see-- Wüstegiersdorf, or somewheres in there close by anyway. I'm not sure of the name. But I wound up in that hospital. And I remember it was Christmastime. All we were doing, laying around there. And the little food we got-- we were not supposed to walk outside, just stay inside those barracks and then stay in bed. And naturally, I left my father in the previous camp. And that means, who knows we ever will see us again. But here it was out of my hands. I couldn't do anything about it. I didn't volunteer to go anywheres. They just picked me up and put me on a truck with the other ones. And they shipped me off. And he was there. And it-- I remember it was Christmastime because we got, as a bonus-- a bonus treatment, a glass of beer for Christmas Eve. That was the treatment that goodwill towards man, that was the payments. We got a glass of beer for that night. And-- but the funny and the lucky part about it-- about three days later. or so, here I take a look, and my father walks in into that same hospital. Later on I found out that he tried. There was a Dutch doctor, a Jewish doctor, of course, the inmate doctors. And he tried-- begged them to see if he can send them off to the hospital. He didn't know where I was. He just took a chance. And he wanted to go too, to the hospital. And he succeeded. The guy send him out. The doctor wrote him up, was that capable of working. And-- and he came into the same hospital that I was. So again, we were united. That was in January. We stayed in the hospital for about a week, I'd say. And then he came also out. And we were in a camp, in a new camp, Wüstegiersdorf. And that camp was heaven in compared to the other ones. We had hot water for showers when we came home, which was unusual. You never heard of camps having any hot showers. And I-- the reason was, it was very simple. The-- the building that we were in, there was only about 500 inmates, a small, very small camp. We were the distribution point for all the camps, area camps around it. In other words, we had the-- the clothing for the camps, the civilian clothing that they took from us. And they were brought into this camp. The trains with the potatoes came in there, and then they distributed to the other camps by truck. And all this stuff was coming into this particular camp. So that this camp was heaven, because for a slice of bread-- we were only given, at that time, only two slices of bread a day-- plus the soup and so forth. For a slice of bread, the boys used to come in with big bulging bags and-- what do you call it-- pockets full of potatoes and all kinds of things. From the trains they used to steal. So for a slice of bread, I had about three potatoes, which was filling. I mean, whatever you got wasn't much. But if you can-- could-- could-- what do you call it-- fill it in with this kind of food, it was a big help for me. 
INT: These were raw potatoes, right? SG: Yeah, they were raw potatoes. But we had a belly-- what do you call it, a stove?  INT: Pot belly. SG: Pot belly stove inside the camp. And we used to-- of course, we used to make sure that the no SS is coming to visit us. But we were able to bake those potatoes on the potbelly stove, and cook for ourselves, and get some extra food, which was heaven-sent, which you couldn't do any place else. The problem was, again, that this didn't last long either.  INT: Were you working there? At-- SG: Yeah. We were marching out. And I was working, again, in a water line. And then, but the temperature was-- that was January. The temperatures down below are below that-- that 30-- somewhere surround the zero, below zero, 15 degrees or so. And I remember the SS used to go in in the houses and the private homes that were in that area, and warm themselves. And he left us in into those ditches. And the ground was so hard, so frozen, that we couldn't do anything anyway. We were leaning on-- on the-- on the-- what do you call them-- the shovel and the picks. And that's about all we were doing. And-- but we came in early because we had a long walk. We had about the 3/4 of an hour of a walk from the work area to the camp. So we went around 4, 4 o'clock, before it gets dark, they started marching us back into the camp. But when we came into the camp we had that hot shower, and we had the-- the market was full of the potatoes. You can go out for the-- so we had it pretty good in those few weeks that lasted. 
INT: And who were your supervisors there? SG: Just a plain kapo from our [NON-ENGLISH]. But we didn't have more problems there, no problems. There was not too much-- what do you call-- envies or too much fighting going on inside the camp. There was one story that I'm not so sure yet, a father and a son. And I don't know what the story, whether the-- the father was hanged the son or the son hanged the father. There was some sort of a story there. And I don't remember exactly what it was. But I think, like, the father was-- was caught something-- here not coming-- was disappeared or didn't come in or was falling asleep during the work, and it didn't account when he-- the counting came in. And they put him up on the-- on the-- what do you call it in the-- with a rope around his neck-- on the gallows-- and a piece of chair. And-- and I think the-- the kid was supposed to kick the chair or something like that. And I don't remember whether he works or whatever. I know there was a father and son involved in it because, me, I had been-- my-- my father. And it touched me. But the way the camp is so big, that you can't always see what was going on. Or you practically didn't care. These kind of things was going on constantly. I mean, people being killed, I have seen it many times in front of my eyes too. So it didn't play such a big role for me to pay attention to it. I remember once that, while I was inside the camp, and as soon as I came out from the hospital, they kept us inside the camp for a few days to recoup in a way. So I was-- one day I was cleaning the toilets. I mean, really going into the-- with the buckets inside. And the toilets were nothing toilets. They were just a big barrack and a row of holes in it. And I was doing that. Another time I remember, it was a Friday, and a truck came in. And there was a little, like a garage type of building. And there were bodies, dead bodies that were accumulated. And they were kept there till the-- till the weekend, till the truck came in. And I remember I was-- and another inmate of mine, we were ordered to loaded the truck with the dead bodies. So I remember shoving dead bodies onto the truck. That was in-- in what do you call it-- in this camp. And what is it called? 
INT: Wüstegiersdorf. SG: Wüstegiersdorf, yeah. So this is another thing that I remember. And I said the digging the ditches, which is another one. And in the end of February, I believe, when finally the order came to evacuate. So it was, again, a-- one morning we got up. I remember once they were evacuating from the east. And one day we see a group of girls coming into the camp for overnight stay. And we were not allowed to get close to them. But they were sort of in the basement. They put them in the basement there, right underneath us. And we were not allowed to even get close to them to find out what's going on or who they were. We were sort of inching towards them and trying to find where they are from. We knew they were our girls from our area. But we couldn't get in touch with them. And we-- the the-- what do you call it-- the camp kapo or the alteste from our fellow was trying to shove some food in them. In other words, to give them some help there. That's all I remember, but not much. And then they were marched off again, as we were following them. And that was the evacuation. We were given a loaf of bread and about, I'd say about 4 ounces of granulated-- what do you call it-- plain sugar. That's all, I guess, they had probably. I don't know what they did. That's all we were given. And the blankets we took along on ourselves. And we sort of marched out from the camp. And we marched, and we marched. And we wound up in the farmlands, you know, overnight in barn-- had the barns that's where we slept. They locked us in into the barn. I remember once thing-- you talking about shooting. I remember, we were in one farms, in the barn. And they discovered there were some sacks, and raw wheat was there and barley, whatever. I don't remember what it was. And there was one inmate fellow stuffing some of it in his pocket. And the next morning we came out to line up-- you were ordered out and line up-- and it was one of the young kids, actually, maybe about 16 or 17, not even the army yet, they recruited against the German-- recruited everybody there at that time, especially for guard duty. And he was a real youngster. And, of course, of course, he had this gun on-- what do you call it-- and on him. And he saw him chewing on something. So I asked him, what are you chewing on? So he had to put his hands on and take out and show it to me.
He orders him to run. And I was standing right there next to him. He orders him to run. And I see he starts running. And he takes his rifle, aims at him-- boom, right there, right in front of me. He went maybe about three steps, shot him with that right there. Mhm. They asked for the farmers, say a pick and shovel. And we had to bury him right there in the middle of nowheres. It was somewhere in Silesia, in there. It was already we are close to the Czech Bohemian border, somewheres in that area. We kept on marching for almost a week. We wandered through train stations. We wanted to get on the station, but they didn't have any trains. So finally a week later, we got a train. They put us on a train, on an open boxcars, those half cars, those coal cars. And we got on that on a Saturday. And the only thing we had is the blanket and that still that whatever we have left of that bread. It was gone, and the sugar. And only once do I remember eating. The farmer, they cooked like they cook for this-- what to you call it-- for the pigs. And we yell, this is the same type of soup we had, just potatoes cooked in water. And this is the only meal I remember eating. And we got on that train. And the train started moving across Germany. And then we found out-- and by Thursday-- from Saturday till Thursday, we wound up in Bergen-Belsen. That was another one of those infamous camps. And each-- within a few days, the train had to stop on the outskirts of some big town. And they unloaded the dead bodies from-- they were dying among us just like they had because no food, cold. It was still in February. And the only thing they we had is blanket. I remember in the morning we got up and there was this-- a cover of snow on the blanket too. And-- but we kept ourselves, body, warm because we were so crammed in into those wagons that whoever kept warm was warm. And a lot of them died out there, right-- right amongst us. And when the train stopped, we unloaded the dead bodies and kept on going. And we wound up in Bergen-Belsen. It was a Thursday, I remember. And it was towards the evening already when we walked in into that camp. And-- and we-- we didn't-- we were so dumb or whatever we were, we were walking inside. And you kept-- kept on tripping over something there. And any time you stepped on it, and maybe you tripped all-- all over the place. And then we discovered, we looked at the-- close to them, you saw they were bodies, people. That whole camp was littered with bodies. Then finally we got into a barrack. We spent the night there in the barrack. And the next morning we got one meal. Once-- I don't remember what kind of soup it was, some watery stuff. That was the meal. Then we were ordered-- we were asked for 500 inmates to volunteer, not to volunteer, but at least 500 inmates are going to leave for work. So they-- what they did, is they kept us all in one barrack. And the officer was standing next to the door, plus a couple of kapos. And we had to strip and line up and march in front of him. And as he was there, standing, he was selecting. If you-- you were inside, if you pushed to the side you stayed. If you pushed outside the door, you were-- you were one of the 500. So as we were marching through, I mean, going through the selection, my father was picked from one of the 500. And he was outside already. And I was about three or four bodies behind him. They rejected me. And they rejected me. I figured I'm going to go and try it again. Next time maybe I'll succeed and I'm going to get out of here. I got in the line again. They rejected me again. But this time I took my life again in my hand I jumped out. I mean, you spell every ounce of the energy that I have, jumped out of the line, cross-- got across the door-- and-- and one kapo kept get a hold of me. And I tore myself away from him, and I disappeared in the group that was right before the 500. And there I was again with my dad. 
INT: Reel number five of my interview with Sam Gottesman, November 10, 1996. Sam, you were talking about Bergen-Belsen and about how you were volunteering to be one of 500. Can you tell us the-- SG: As I got in and lost myself in the crowd, and there was about 500 plus inmates in that group. That was late in the afternoon. And again, we had to line up in order to registers our names and numbers. And it got to be very late already. It was around 10 o'clock at night. And with the boon-- the moon being out, and it was cold-- it was still the end of February, I remember, someplace around that time. And we were standing in line, five in a row. And each one, when the line came, came to the end, the first ones went into the office, had to give their name and numbers. And then they came out on the other side. And that was indicating that they are part of the group to be shipped out for labor. And I was standing there fairly low in the-- on the count, or high in the count, I shall say. And my father started to complain about his back, his back is breaking him. He can't take it anymore. And don't forget, we haven't slept a good night's sleep, no food or nothing. It's cold and not much of a clothing on ourselves. So I started massaging his back. And just couldn't do anything. Jumping around to kind-- to keep warm in, in the-- on the outside. And there again the air raid comes on. And, and everything goes out. The lights go out and the office stops working. And we thought to ourself, who knows how long this is going to take? And here I have my dad complaining about his back. I try to massage him. I try to make him jump around and all that. And then it occurred to me we are very low on-- I mean numbers are high. How shall I say, lower in the count? Way back in the count. I figure what if I could jump the line ahead of me so at least we'll finish up a lot sooner and then we can sit down somewheres already. We were finished. So as they were milling around-- because everybody was standing still, there was nothing to do, the air raid was still on and we were outside-- I succeeded in jumping the line about five or six lines from where we were before. I didn't dare do, do-- dares to too much. But anyway, I-- we jumped quite a bit on the line ahead of ourselves.
And then they-- finally the air raid, about a half hour later, came on again. They started working again. We succeeded in getting on in-- on the names on the list. And about three or four lines afterwards, they cut the whole thing off. They had their name, numbers, and the rest of it. And I discovered if we would have stayed in the line where we were, we would have been stuck in Bergen-Belsen. So that is another life saver to me. My move saved my life in a way. That's the only way I can describe it. Anyway, we got on the list. They took us separate. They separated us from the whole barrack. They took us into a shower area where we took showers. It was cold shower. But they disinfected us. We had to leave our uniforms there. They gave us new clothing, clean clothing, clean, what do you call it, blankets. And we spent the night there. At least we got some sleep. Until finally in the morning, they woke us up. And each one was given a third loaf of a bread. And a big dose-- I would say a half of a-- a, a quarter of a pound-- no, wasn't a quarter, an eighth of a pound of margarine. This is how much. And to this day I remember eating that bread with the margarine. I felt my, my whole body coming alive. This is how eat-- in each, each ounce of, of bread and margarine was a sort of a balm on my whole body. I really felt coming into me and, and giving me energy. I felt it's coming in there. And, and that was quite a surprise to us. When we were already in the train, and this is what we've gotten. And so it was a lifesaver in that particular time. And the train of course, the next day, moved. And we arrived to the city of Hildesheim. From the train we marched into town and we wound up in a concert hall. I figure that's what it must have been, because it was right there in the middle of town. It was a big hall. And it was big building. And the chairs were all removed from the place, and it was just straw around the walls. And this was our quarters. This is where we slept. The food ration was two slices of bread in the-- in, in the evening, plus that soup, a coffee in the morning. That was our total ration for the day. It was really down to practically nothing. And I remember thing that used to drive me crazy-- and probably the other ones, too-- we used to pass by when we walked to work, to the railroad station, we used to pass by a bakery every day in the morning and the evening back.
And we used to get that smell from the bakery. It used to drive us crazy when you smell that beautiful bread, and, and, and you could not get anything of it. And our job was at the railway station, as the Americans or the British were bombing the railroad station, they created, of course, craters. Our job was filling those craters, put the, the tracks back on the line so the trains could be moving. But every time there was a bombing in that station, of course they caught some trains inside the station. And we discovered, by accident, actually, that those burning boxcars contained food. We found canned peas, canned carrots, potatoes. And once I remember we were working on, on the-- on these craters, and right next to us we saw on the floor what looked like ice, like melted ice. And we were just looking at it. It was looked sort of brown. And here to us anything that you could take in your mouth, we put it in our mouth. We picked it up and it was sweet. It was burnt sugar from those boxcars. It was running all over the place. We discovered it was sugar. And we were lucky that every other day we had the German Volksdeutsche-- not the Volksdeutsche. I mean the, the old Germans. Real old people were guarding us. They could not afford to give us every day the SS anymore. So the-- one day we had a good German, old German people. They didn't give a damn what we do. And we were able to steal ourselves from our workplace, run into those boxcars, and fill-- have our stomach filled with it. And that was going on for quite a while. And that is-- was another lifesaver of ours. And I remember that when the air raid came on, which was practically every day around 11 o'clock there was air raid coming on. And there were American flyers going somewheres and they were crossing the-- the Hildesheim. So naturally the whole area was blacked out. We had to leave our work and go out from the railroad station altogether. And I remember the-- our place was near a cemetery. And I remember there was a Jewish cemetery and a Christian cemetery. So we were reading the, the stones in Yiddish for the German names there. But there was also a, a air raid shelters for the German population right next to it. But we were not allowed inside the, the air shelter. We were on the outside. There was sort of a ditch. I remember one particular thing that I still remember, was a little kid, German. May-- must have been maybe seven, eight years old, sort of-- I looked at him and he looks at me, and he points his finger that way in, in a certain direction. And here I took a look over, over the shoulder there, and I see a roll, a little bread roll laying there. He tossed it there, and he showed me to go and get it, a little kid. He didn't dare to come close to me and give it to me, but he showed it to me where it's there. And, and that, that, that scene I still remember what happened. Well, anyway, some of our boys didn't even want to go to the air raid shelter. In other words, to run away-- get away from the station. They stayed there. Once they were caught while they were bombing the station. When we came back, about 10 of our boys we found dead from bombing. They were burned out. So they took their lives in their own hands. We figure this is a chance for them to get into those boxcars and eat themselves food-- for food. But this time they lost out. 
INT: Tell me, in-- at any time did you see any sabotage being done? SG: We were not-- the only sabotage we could do is lean on our shovels as much as we could. When we put the railroad in there we didn't pack it as we should have, or the way they told us to do it. And we knew what will happen if you don't pack it. That's about the only thing we could do. That's the only chance we had to in a sabotage. Otherwise we had no chance of doing any damage to them except resisting the real work. And that's about it.  INT: How long did you stay at Hildesheim? SG: Hildesheim, we stayed there, I would say, till about end of March. It wasn't that long either. What happened is the Americans came one day and bombed the whole-- they were bombing this-- the railroad for one-- for a while, and then just leaving this town alone. Then they came. They just burned up the whole town. I mean, these phosphorous bombs they're throwing, the firebombs. The whole city burned up. I mean, every house that was in the city. Was total loss. And we couldn't even go back to our quarters anymore. Well, and we were right what we had with-- on ourselves, those pajama uniforms. And they-- we marched to a-- and in river edge. There was a river in somewhere-- somewheres in the-- on the outskirt of the town. And we spent there-- the first night there, definitely I remember with nothing. And it was still March. It was still muddy. It was still wet and was still damp, cold. And this is where we spent the whole night there. And I think a next one. I am not so sure. The only thing we found is some-- from cement bags papers. That's the only thing, newspapers that we found laying around that we could use to put ourselves down on. But most of us, we just slept on the bare ground the whole night, on this wet, damp ground near the river. This is how we spent-- the first night definitely I remember. I don't know how-- whether it was another night too. But then they marched us off again. We marched. I remember the-- in a first-- first night we spent in a farms-- on a farm in a barn. And I remember crawling up on the hayloft. And we were given that first time again food. We were given a, a slices of bread. I don't remember how many. That's all, just bread. Because once we were bombed we didn't go there. We didn't have no food at all whatsoever.
So we were finally given bread. And my dad told-- tells me. He says, you know this is Pesach night? But of course we ignored it, and of course we ate. And that's the part-- the only time that I remember ever eating bread on Pesach night. But of course this is how I remember that night, because he mentioned it to me. And he says, you know this is Pesach night? Somehow he kept track on that. And I knew it was Pesach night. And this is-- I remember. So-- and then we-- I think it-- I remember a whole day, or how long? I, I think two days maybe it took us to, to get to Hannover. There we wound up in another camp, another small camp. It wasn't too big. And-- but there it was no more work because the Americans were very close there. You can hear the booming of the guns and you can see there planes coming along. And every time observer planes coming and going. So you can feel that it's getting too close to the front. But-- so we didn't go out to work anymore. And once you didn't go to work you didn't get to eat. So our, what do you call, ration was just-- I remember a bowl of soup or warm water, dish water, for one day, and the coffee in the morning. That's about all. And there were people dying constantly. I remember my dad was in very bad shape already. His legs were swollen. He couldn't walk anymore, and there was oozing. So they put him in, in, in, in Revier. The hospital they call it. But actually what they were doing is just putting them in there to die. And he was very close to death. And what we were doing is sitting in the, in the barracks and picking lice. Because we were so infected with it that you didn't have any change and there were no sanitation whatsoever. So that's all we were doing, this. And-- but luckily it didn't last long. And one-- I remember one Sunday we were ordered again to line up. We, we were going to evacuate. And they asked those who cannot walk will step outside and they will be taken by truck. So I thought myself, by truck. Yeah, sure. The Germans are going to take us by truck. And they told us, anybody is going to step out of line will be shot right there on the spot. So don't think that you're going to hold back the line. And I thought to myself that this is it. My dad can't walk. He is right there practically dying. And I am finished. I says no way will I reach-- and yeah, they told us we're going back to Bergen-Belsen. So I knew what Bergen-Belsen mean. I says, what am I going to go walk out and try fight for life and be shot somewheres in the-- on the street like a dog? I felt this is it. Whatever happens to us here, let it happen right now. And I sort of gave up. And they marched out on that Sunday afternoon. And there was about 80 of us left in the camp, those who didn't want to walk, couldn't walk and so forth, who were sick. And as they marched out, it was sort of a quiet. Somehow some of the boys who were still capable of running broke in into the warehouse. And there they found bread, carrots, and all kinds of goodies. And they started helping themself. I remember I had two loaves of bread under my arms, running around like a nothing. I couldn't even eat it. That's the funniest part about it. I had it on me. 
INT: So there was no one left guarding the camp? SG: We didn't even realize it. We didn't know what was going on with us. We didn't realize that the camps were open. The gates were closed. By the evening we saw some people in uniform-- and not an SS uniform anymore, sort of dark uniform-- poking around, looking around, looking inside the camp. And finally they came in, and we discovered that was Red Cross. Came in and started giving us out some, what you call it, canned peaches, canned-- it was sweet stuff, something that. They told us to stay here, not to go out the camp because they were still, still shooting going all, they were-- they will come back tomorrow, but we should not leave the camp. But the next day they came by truck. The Germans came back by truck. And you should see like rats we started running in every direction trying to hide. They picked up a few of us, but I succeeded in hiding myself out. And that once the truck left again and we came out, and we said we've got to get out of here. Because as long as we are here, we are still in danger of the SS coming back. And I was sure that they're going to come in soon as they march out. They're going to come in with machine gun and finish us off. I did not believe for any trucks or-- that's why we didn't worry about it. And here we thought this is finished, but it isn't. And so we left the camp. We walked out of the camp. And we walked up. And it was the country. It's-- in, in the outside of the town, it was country. And we-- they were putting up new buildings, small, small houses. They were unfinished yet. And me and my dad snuck in one of those houses. And I remember me, my two loaves of bread still on my arm, can-- I dragged my dad out from the hospital. And we coming into this-- those rooms. And we finally laid ourselves-- it was getting dark. And I remember me taking my, my clogs, the shoes off, and him, and we took our two coats off and we both covered ourselves up and we slept through the night. And in the morning-- we slept pretty good because we were totally exhausted or whatever. And next morning we got up and we looked out the windows. So the unfinished window was just open area. And we saw not far there was a farm. And there was a farmer coming out with buckets. I saw him carry-- figured he was feeding the pigs or whatever.
And he notice that. So I was scared. I thought maybe he is going to report us to the, to the authority. And here he comes out again with a bucket, comes a few steps closer to us, drops it off there, and he points his finger at it, and he walks away. And I went, picked up the bucket, brought it in there. That's what-- exact what it was. He was feeding the, the pigs there. But it was nice and warm, and was nourishing. And we had a good meal for ourselves. And then in the-- and this-- all of a sudden we started seeing people, Germans, looking for us. There was a nurse in, in civilian uniforms. And they're trying to convince us we should go back to the camp. They're going to help us, but we shall go back to the camp. Well, reluctantly-- because we knew we were caught there anyway. Then reluctantly we went back to the camp. But instead of going to our camp, we moved in-- we stripped ourselves, so we moved in into the SS barrack because there it was clean. We had found some blankets, clean blankets there. We wrapped ourselves on the blankets. That was a, a Tuesday night. I remember we went to sleep in the SS barracks. And at least the lice were not constantly coming at us. And during the night, around 2 o'clock in the morning, we hear all kind of rumbles and, and things going on. Of course when we went to bed, when-- bed, I mean when we lay down to sleep, there was fire all over. I mean, the cannons were blasting away, the planes were bombing. The, the war was right there. So-- and us it didn't bother. We, we slept like babies. We didn't care what happens. And it was thunder and lightning all over the place. And around 2 o'clock in the morning, we woke up, and the rumble, and we had to go out, and blankets ourselves. And we looked and we saw soldiers. But of course we didn't identify the uniform. I know-- we knew it wasn't German anymore. But we didn't identify uniform. And we couldn't communicate with them because they were talking a strange language. But we were lucky. We had a man who spoke a little bit of English. We woke him up, we dragged him out. And he started talking to the post. It was the American, what do you call it, reconnaissance, on a Jeep. And he-- they start looking at us. They never saw anything like this before. They never encountered a camp. So-- and here we were skeletons walking around with blankets on. So he finally explained to them what we were. And he told us stay here, because the fire is all over the place. You're going to get killed. [LAUGHS] Like we cared much. And, and he says we will take care of you. In the morning somebody is going to come. That's exactly what happened. This American-- a chaplain, a rabbi came in the next morning. That was Wednesday morning. And immediately they started doing things for us. They-- I remember they brought in a half of a, what do you call it, a side of bacon or swine. They brought it in. 
INT: Of all things. SG: 10 minutes later I see it's going out again. [LAUGHS] And what they did is they cleaned up-- they brought in the Germans. They brought in the, the burgermeister from the town and a few other officers, plus civilians, to clean up the camp, to show them what we have. Because there were bodies laying around there, especially in that room. There was nothing but bodies there. And so the-- in one of the barracks they even had to burn-- set on fire because it was so infected with lice, everything in it. He couldn't even get in there. And that was Thursday-- Wednesday. And then it was quiet. And we were so scared that there may be a comeback. In other word, that the Americans have to pull back. We were very scared that the Germans coming back again. But there's nothing we can do. He told us to stay here. We stayed there till Thursday afternoon. The Americans came in with about three trucks or so. They loaded us up on the truck, and they took us somewheres. And then we, we found out they took us into-- they took one of the wings from a TB hospital they had in the, in the outskirts of the town, on the other side. So they reserved one of the wings for the-- us 80 or so inmates that we were there. Took us into that hospital. And I remember there were nuns. They-- again, they took everything away from us. They shaved us. They bathed us. I mean really bathed us head to toe. And they gave us the hospital gowns. And then we wound up in a bed on white sheets in, in a hospital there. That was a Thursday night. And Friday we were running around like, like crazies. Didn't know what-- how to enjoy the freedom. We didn't know what's happening yet. You still don't know what, what's happening to us. And Saturday morning, we all came down with a typhoid fever. 
INT: Tell me, before you go on, what was the actual date of your liberation. SG: The 16th of April.  INT: 1945? SG: 1945. Yeah.  INT: OK. And can you tell me who liberated you? Which unit? SG: The American-- I think it was the, the 8th Armored Division. Because years later I found out that my cousin, who was a lieutenant in that Armored Division, was one of the liberators. And that was, like I say, about 20 years later. I found out by sheer accident. When I started talking about we were liberated and how the Americans liberate, and he identified himself that he was in Hannover. He was that, that date and that day-- those days in, in Hannover with the 8th Armored Division. And this is where he was. And of course--  INT: Were there any soldiers or officers who were particularly helpful to you? SG: Well, yeah. Oh, yes. We had practically every day visit us. The, the soldiers came. And, and I remember another incidence. They gave us soap and they gave us chewing gum, cigarettes. But the funny part about is when I first saw-- he gave me a soap bar, Ivory Soap. To us it looked exactly like we used to have potato sugar, we called it. It was made out of sugar, but it looks like a potato and it looks like that bar of the soap. And of course I bit into it, and to discover my, [LAUGHS] my surprise that it is not sugar. That's one thing. Then they gave us the chewing gum, the Chiclets. And since I never had any experience with Chiclets, we started chewing and chewing and chewing. And I said, what is this crazy? How long am I going to chew and never-- what, what is the matter with it? Of course I got tired of chewing and I swallowed it. So these are the kind of things that we had to learn fast. Yeah. They-- and I wish I would find out which of the soldiers have my pictures, because they took pictures of us in the bed while we were sick there. We were in high fever. And I remember there were four-- we-- four of us in that one room. And my dad was right across from me, also very sick and high fever. And I remember one night, he woke me up, and-- one night. Was after-- maybe two days afterwards, and he-- we-- I was also sick, of course. And he started telling me-- he says to put out the plates. They're coming with the soup. And that was maybe about 2, 3 o'clock in the morning when-- while he was sleeping. And I was in a daze. And I had to start thinking, is he right? Do I have to put-- took out plates? Where are the plates? And they can bring soup? I didn't know myself what he was talking about, and I didn't know whether he was right or is he wrong. I didn't know what was going this-- how much I were dazed. Then finally I realized that he is talking from his high fever. And I assured him that yes, I put out the plates, and he can go back to sleep. And this is how I-- that's another incident that I remember to this very day, the-- how sick he was. I was sick myself, but at least I-- I had to stop and think. Does he know what he's talking about or not? So this is-- finally it took us till June till we finally recovered. There was a, a woman doctor, a Hungarian from Budapest. She was working in Germany. She was the one who took care of us. I don't know whether we got any medicine. I don't remember being even given any medicine. The only thing I remember is the Americans came, always gave us something. The white bread they left-- used to leave us-- with us. And of course we already had food there, the-- of course the hospital food. But at least we slowly started to recoup. Now, a lot of the boys didn't even make it. Right-- even after the liberation, some of them died from the, from the, what do you call it, from the typhoid fever. 
INT: What were your feelings when you recovered? SG: [SIGHS] I don't know we, we even had any feelings. We started to think what's now? What's next? We started thinking of home. We started thinking, who is alive? And all kinds of things we started thinking, not knowing exactly where we going, what's going to happen to us. Well, we figured maybe the whole world will open up to us, knowing what we went through, that this is going to be a salvation to all of us. And-- but it just didn't, didn't turn out to be. The funny part about it, that, that some of the foreign laborers who were in Germany were able to go out and rob and do all kinds of things. I did not have it in me. When I get back-- of course we didn't have any clothing. The hospital issued us, each one of us, a shirt, a suit, a pair of shoes, and socks, just enough to have on. And I remember walking into town, and I tried one home, a civilian home. And I asked a woman, will she have any-- couple shirts to give me? She came out and she gave me a couple of shirts. And-- but I did not have it in me to go and say-- with a gun and say give me. I just didn't have it in me. Couldn't do it. And even so I heard plenty of stories what the Polish laborers used to do, what the Ukraines used to do there. They used to simply go in a house and help themself to whatever they could, whatever they wanted to. We spent those few weeks in the hospital. And then of course we had to register with the-- at least we wanted to get out there. We wanted to, to start living a normal life. We had to register with the Czech consulate. We figured there is a consulate in Hannover, the city. We registered, and they told us that they, they'll let us know when they'll have a train. And once they get a train we'll-- they'll put us on the train and they'll take us home. 
INT: OK.  INT: All right. It's reel number six in the interview with Sam Gottesman, November 10, 1996. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] Sam, when you left the hospital after Hanover and you got some clothes, was your father well enough to leave at that point also? SG: Yeah. My father, he got well pretty good. I would say he came out very nicely. He-- the leg started to heal. I guess it was-- well, the way the doctor told me, even in the camps yet, that this was simply for lack of nourishment, lack of vitamins, and that's what happened to it. Once he started eating, he started getting better, and he started getting well. And he, he was fine afterwards. When we registered to the Czech consulate, and only about a week or so later, they told us the train is here and they have a train for us. And, and they-- to report-- told us which day to report. And we came to the Hannover station, the railroad station. But mostly were regular German-- I mean Czech citizens who were laboring in Germany, either slave labor or a forced labor or whatever, volunteer labors. But they were mostly those type of a people. I don't remember seeing too many of the concentration camp inmates in that group. And the reason I bring it up is when we finally started moving homeward, and we arrived to the Czech border in As-- that was the crossing border from Germany into Czechoslovakia. And the train stopped right there and they broke out singing the national anthem. Of course, still being in a Czech schools, I, I knew the anthem, sing along with them. But I mean, I was the only one who was crying there because I figure they are going home. They have families waiting for them. Where am I going? Who is waiting for us? And I remember that's the first time I have really cried for the loss. And-- but we were on the train. We arrived in Prague. And Prague had opened schools for us because they knew there were refugees all over the place. They opened up school buildings for us, and they had kitchens, community kitchens for us. And well, I spent there-- at least I spent some time in Prague, a few days there. And I remember one time taking the, the-- what do you call it, the subway-- not a subway-- the tram in the city of Prague. And one woman was sort of standing opposite me and looked at me. And here I see she takes out a 20 crown bill and just hands it to me, and says 'Buy yourself something.' So she knew right away who I am, and she felt this is the way she can help me. So this is just one of the incidents there in Prague. And from Prague, I know we have to move on. We have to go further east and find out what's going on. So I'm still together with my dad. We moved in to Budapest. And again in Budapest the same thing. They had a school building called the [HUNGARIAN] School. And they had it opened for the refugees who were coming back. And again, the kitchen was open there for those who needed it and those who wanted it. Since we needed it, we spent some time there. There was also a Jewish agency in Budapest, I guess being supported by the Joint Distribution Committee from America. And they asked me, of course, am I well, am I this, am I that. So they examined me. I went to a physical. And I guess they figured I could use a little fattening up. They packed me off and they sent me to Balaton [INAUDIBLE], which is Lake Balaton. And there's a resort area. And they-- I spent there two weeks, I believe. I don't remember, one week or two weeks in there, of course with the food and everything else there. And, and there I started to live a little bit. More-- we are mostly youngsters there. I mean my age, those who survived there. And so we had a little good time. There was some girls there, of course, and boys, and got together. And you sort of started feeling around in romances and all that stuff. 
INT: And you were-- SG: Of course I wasn't ready for it.  INT: Why, you were 22 years old. SG: Yeah, I was 22 years old. So it was time for me to realize that there are girls in this world. And-- which I had no use for before for the past two years or so. But even that came to an end. And we-- I went back to-- my father stayed in Budapest waiting for me in that school building. And when I came back, again I decided-- yeah, I got word that I have sisters in Bergen-Belsen. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] So finally, what they did is the school had on the wall taped all kinds of messages that people who came through from one direction to the other and whoever wanted the questions, they just put it up on the wall like bulletins. In there I found a bulletin that my-- somebody said my sisters are in Bergen-Belsen. So-- and there were people coming and going. And somebody was having to go back to Germany. And I had a message sent through them that we are in Budapest, and we're going to be here in-- for them, waiting for them. So finally one of my sisters came down. And that's when I found out the story about one-- there were three sisters in Bergen-Belsen. Of course, my mother, the oldest sister with my little brother and my nephew got stuck in Auschwitz. Now, the three sisters were moved to Bergen-Belsen. after being in Birkenau for, I don't know, six months or so. And one sister died in Bergen-Belsen. 
INT: Which one? SG: The youngest one. The oldest-- older sister was so sick, but somehow my other sister were moving homeward and they took her along. And they reached Prague, but she was so sick that they took her into a hospital in Prague and when-- she did not survive. So she died somewheres in Prague. And the one sister finally came down to Budapest, so the three of us were together. I decided to go down by myself back to my hometown, to Ilosva, just look around and see what's going on there, see what there is to see. I came back home, and there were a few stragglers, about maybe a dozen or so survivors who came back. And they had set up a kitchen again, and they were living wherever there were empty spaces because there was a lot of Jewish homes. Some of them were practically empty because nobody occupied them. There was nothing in them. There was-- everything was stolen or removed or whatever by the-- our local population. But I looked around. I was there about a week. The locals even offered me money to go back in business because they needed what we had to offer for them before the war, and they had no way of getting to it. They needed tools. They needed building materials. And looks like nobody's supplied them with anything like that. They didn't have the Jewish businesses. They didn't have anybody. And they even offer. Because I told them, I says I have no, no reason-- what do you call it, intention of opening up here kind of store. And I don't have any money. I says I'm broke. I don't have a penny. Says, don't worry about money. We'll give you money. Just, just go open up. And, and I didn't even go into my own home. It was occupied. I could have gone in, but I didn't even want to see it anymore. I was there about a week, and I turned right back. And I says I cannot take this. This is-- to me it's like a cemetery. And I don't want to stay here. And I went back. And I wound up in Reichenberg, which is in the western part of Czechoslovakia, about west of Prague, or Liberec, in Czech. And because-- the reason for it, the-- I had cousins in there who were in the, in the Russian Czech Army, volunteers. They were captured by the Russians. And the Czech put up their own army from the Russia. And they were part of the Czech Army from Russia. So they were giving all kinds of housing that they confiscated from the Germans.
After Sudeten, they had their lessons and they took the German population and shipped them over across the border to Germany. And they had all these houses and all these businesses for the-- to be given away. So a lot of Jewish boys got those businesses. So I wound up too in Reichenberg for a few days. And I remember being quite hungry, because there still-- it was everything on rations. And a single person had only so much rations, and, and you couldn't make out on it. And meanwhile, I-- my dad and my sister decided they're going to go down to, to home-- to my hometown, back to Irsava. Because somehow they felt they have nowheres to go. While I was still in Budapest I wrote a letter-- no, I was in, in Liberec, I remember, in Reichenberg, because I took the address. I was in Reichenberg, and I wrote a letter to an uncle of mine who lived in McKeesport. And I remember his name because his name was Sam Gottesman, just like mine. And the only thing I remember is no name, street of any kind, numbers or what. All I remember is Mee-kess-port, the way we called it, instead of McKeesport. And I wrote a letter and I told them what the situation is, who we were, and how many we were left, and what we would like to do. We told him we would like to have some papers and we want to come to America. And I figured it's going to be either or. If I can get a chance to go to America, fine. If not, we go to Israel. But that means we have to go back to Germany in order to go to Israel. And I was in Liberec, I was in Prague. And I remember giving the Liberec address. This is why. I had a steady place there at my cousin's place because there they, they were settling down. They had a home there, and they had an address. So I gave the uncle my address there. And then when I came back to Liberec, I found an, an answer to my letter. And he said that he will try to do everything he can to get us across. And he says I have a son who is in the US Army. He is in Germany. And he wrote to him, gave him my address here, and he'll be in touch with you. So I figured this is great. So I immediately sent a messenger to my hometown, to my dad and my sister. They were settling down. They already had a home. They settled some furniture. They found some furniture.
And that was easy to get these kind of things because it was all over the place. And they were settling down. And I sent a message to them. Leave everything that you have there. Don't take anything. Come back here. And we have the letter here. We're going to get the papers here and we're going to go to America. And it so happened that that messenger-- my dad had a brother who also came back from the war and was already home, back to his home. And he opened up his business which he had a threshing machine. And they used to do the work for a, a percentage of the, of the grains. But-- so he went-- there was the high-- after the high holidays, Sukkos time. He went to visit them. And at that station called Beregszász where the train split, the-- he happened to meet the messenger, and the messenger knew him from where he-- from home. And he told me-- he gave him the message, what I told him. And then he-- when he came home, he knew what he has to do. And he packed up, and they came back out. And this packing up and this packing out has something to do with Leah's mother, because she was the one who saw him during the night packing. And she insisted she wants to go along with him. Because everything had to go on the black market. Because there was no way of getting a passport going anywheres. She had to cross the Romanian border, from Romania border to Hungarian border, and then from Hungarian border to Czech, to the Czech Republic. So this is the way it had to go. So she had to hang on to him. And this is how she came out. And the whole thing started [LAUGHS] with my wife that way. So one has to do with the other. This is what you call [GERMAN] in German or, or luck in, in, what do you call it-- it's bashert in Yiddish. This is what it is. You know what that means, bashert? No. Well, I'm going to give it to you in-- it's destination-- destiny. OK, but anyway, they got the message. And-- but I was already-- my cousin who was in Germany, Lieutenant [? Eugene ?] Gottesman, he immediately got in touch with me in Liberec, told me to be in Prague on that particular day, and somebody is going to come with a taxi, pick us up. So we were that particular hotel, that particular night, and a private car came, picked us up at the hotel, and we finally crossed back to border into Germany.
And we finally got to his unit, where his unit. But of course, we couldn't stay constantly with him. But I was moving along with his unit. And until he came to Augsburg, and in Augsburg he finally found us a summer home that was not occupied. The owner lived in the city of Augsburg. He was a wholesale tobacco dealer. And he had a summer home in the country which called-- was called [GERMAN]. And he just simply took that, that mayor aside and he says these people are going to come here. They're going to live here. Make sure they get the food stamps. Make sure they get what to eat and all that stuff. So-- and once a week he used to come in with a truck and-- from the army surplus or whatever, and he'd unload a few cans of salmon, tuna, and stuff like that, that-- so we'd have to eat. So while I was there, my cousin-- well, three cousins actually moved in with us, plus another friend of the cousins. So they were about-- and then finally, of course, my sister and my dad came along too. But when they came already, we were already in the [GERMAN]. We had our own home already. And so this is how we got back to Germany, Augsburg. Meanwhile I was-- registered myself in a DP camp called Leipheim. And the reason that I did because I wanted to go to school. I wanted to learn something. So I was-- I registered in a radio technical school in Leipheim. So I used to travel every Sunday morning till Friday to Leipheim to the DP camp. And I spent sometimes there even over the weekend. And then I came home-- or to home, to that house that we had in [GERMAN]. And we lived there until about 1946. April, 1946. And it took us that long until we got our papers ready and the visas and all that. And on April, I don't remember, the 7th or something like that, on the I still remember that. It was an army troop carrier. And I was sick like a dog all across the ocean. And we finally arrived in Brooklyn, or in the-- what do you call it, in the-- I remember passing the Statue of Liberty. And the only thing I can see in awe is the-- when we looked out, we were close to the land. And we saw those cars. We saw traveling cars going and going, cars, cars. We thought, this is crazy. How many cars are there in there? We had no idea that everybody had cars here. And this is the first thing I remember being in awe. I says, so how many cars there are in this country? But finally we got off the boat. And a cousin of mine who lives-- lived in Brooklyn-- has passed away since then-- he waited for us. And he took us to his house for one night or two nights, I don't remember. And then our cousin from McKeesport came with his Cadillac, picked us up, me and my father. My, my sister meanwhile got married in Regensburg. So she stayed there because she had to go under another name. And so it took her longer than that, almost another year before she came out with him. And, and we came into McKeesport and-- 
INT: What language did you speak with these cousins? SG: Here in, in Brooklyn? It was Yiddish, mostly Yiddish. Yeah. Because they, they come from, from a old, old country. They were born there and they lived there and they, they came in the '30s, in 1930s, to the United States. So they speak-- they spoke Yiddish. But here we had a little trouble with my cousins in McKeesport because they only spoke English. And of course with my uncle and aunt I spoke Yiddish. But the other cousins I had to-- one of the cousins had a supermarket in Mount Oliver. And of course me not having a job and not having any trade at all, so I started going to his place and started working there. And, and working in a, in a supermarket at that-- those days, it was not a self-service supermarket. You had to wait on a customer and ask him what you want and take it off the shelf and figure it out how much it is. You had to talk to a customer. And this is how slowly I started learning my English language. Then later on, of course, I got a little more familiar. And I started going to high school. I spent the evening high school in [INAUDIBLE] evening high school. Took me about four years. And I missed getting the piece of paper, but I practically graduated there. That's-- even the teacher begged me, why don't you stay another season, another, what do you call, a year, and you have your diploma? But in meanwhile I wanted to get married. I wasn't young enough anymore. And I wanted to get married. So my marriage came and, and hold me back to getting the piece of paper. 
INT: Did your father work also, when he came? SG: Yeah. When he came, and we finally got our own apartment. At that time it was very hard to get apartments. And we finally got through the Joint a-- we got about three months' worth of rent. But then we started-- my father was working in a, what you call it, a-- the kitchen set manufacturers. There were metal kitchen sets and something. That's what he was working. And I was working first in a tobacco and cigarette wholesale place, stamping cigarettes and helping out for the-- filling out orders and stuff like that. And then I knew that I know something about picture framing, not much. But I passed a place by, and I just figured I'll stop in and ask them, do they want a picture framer? And of course he knew that I wasn't much of a picture framer, but he needed probably somebody. So he said come next week and we'll let you know. And I did come in, and yeah, he hired me. Of course I was making like maybe $15 a week at that time. And-- but there was a German master there. And I-- at least I learned the trade under him. And this is how I spent my life, being a picture framer.  INT: Tell us how you got married, a story. SG: I was here in America and I was-- we were, we were going out on dates. But we had difficulties due to the language barrier. We didn't speak much of the English language in the beginning. And naturally the girls were reluctant to date greenhorns like us. So we had difficulties. I-- at least I had difficulties in, in contracting-- I was-- matter of fact I was going with a girl from Duquesne, Duquesne's rabbi's daughter. And we were going practically nine months together. But I was scared to get married, period. I wasn't making much money. She was making-- she was working for Ashland Oil. I remember that. She was a secretary at Ashland Oil Company. She was making more money than I was. And I was reluctant to get married. And I put my foot in my mouth. I remember once I met her-- lunchtime we used to meet sometimes just to talk, to be together and talk. And I really-- practically I would say-- I, I can say I was in love with her, really. And I just-- I don't know. Again, I'd say fate would have it that way. And I told her. I spilled it out. I says, you know, if you feel that I'm taking my time or I, I-- if you have somebody that is, what you call, really anxious to marry you.
And she see me immediately. Says you're not holding me back. And I knew right away, just like somebody would slap me in the face. I knew right away, this is it. I ruined it. I lost it. And it's exactly what happened. I tried to get back. No way. No way. She got married. She married another fella. And as a matter of fact, she invited me on the wedding, and I did go. We were, we were good friends. And-- but anyway, I lost her. Meanwhile there was a buddy of mine from-- my school chum, actually. He lived in Cincinnati. Yeah, in Cincinnati, I believe. And he used-- he corresponded with Leah in Israel because she was in the Air Force. And she actually had a boyfriend. But again, fate intervened. Her mother wasn't too happy about him. He was too romantic, and he even didn't-- wasn't too practical about anything. He was a handsome gal because I saw pictures of him and all that. And she sort of-- it broke off. It broke off. It broke. That's some-- that's all I know. And then my, my-- she writes to him. Because I have cousins here in McKeesport, also greenhorns and a-- the same, the same refugees we are. He married my cousin and I married her cousin. That's her. But he-- she writes to him because they were cousins. She writes to him and tells him about the story about this guy in Cincinnati, who he knew who he was. And she asks him what he thinks of him. So he thinks-- so he wrote-- writes to her that if she really wants to get married and come to America then he has another-- somebody better than he is. The other one was what you call a little too smart or too smart alecky, something like that. And so she says, so let him write. So that's when I started writing. We started corresponding for a while. And she came out through the Air Force already. She started working there. And we decided-- I decided that I'm going to take a trip to Israel. And I told her I'm coming out, and we'll see how we get along, no obligations. If everything works out, fine. If not, you don't owe me anything. I don't owe you anything. I'll be in Israel. First I was going to bring her out here as a visitor. I figure this way. Because it would be easier if I don't have to stop working. And to me work was then everything because I didn't have any income other-- outside of that. But she had already a hard time getting a visa to come to United States.
So I figured this is my chance. I'm going to go visit Israel. I don't know when I'll go-- get a chance, but this is a-- and I'll see what happens. And it-- I remember, I left the, the plane Saturday night in New York, TWA. And took me till Monday afternoon until finally I arrives in Haifa, because they were waiting for me there. And I spent two months there. And things were going OK one minute, and not OK the other minute. And I figured this is it. It has to come to a conclusion one way or another. So I sort of gave her an ultimatum. Either we set a date or else we'll forget about it. And so, so we did set a date and we got married that way. And I spent another week or two weeks-- I don't remember anymore-- on a honeymoon. I remember the old hotel in Tiberias. It was no new hotels at that time. And we had a pretty good time on our honeymoon, and everything was working out OK. I left. We went to the consulate in Haifa and registered her, and-- as my wife, and-- but it still took her a year to come out. I had to write to my congressman and senate-- senator to help us out, to see what's going on there. They wanted all kinds of paper from the CIA, whether she is a, a murderer, whether she is a, a prostitute, whether she is a-- this and that. All kinds of things that they wanted, like they wanted from us when we applied for in Munich. How the heck do you get police reports out? We, we are coming out of concentration camps and all that. So-- but finally I-- in one, one Sunday I remember I got a call from Halifax. That's the first time I heard her voice on, on the telephone. And so I knew she was close by. And I went to New York and I met her at the boats and, and took her off, of course, and brought her home. And she didn't know-- I had an old jalopy, an old Ford, one of those little old cars. I never told her that I had a car. When-- I remember when we came, we lived-- we, we had an apartment fixed up on [INAUDIBLE]. My sister lived below, and this was the third floor. And, and another thing, when I went to Israel, I had-- it cost me like $800. And I think I was left with about $80 in my checking account. [LAUGHS] And the money that I took along to put a, a wedding together. And was much of a wedding. But I had a cousin who was working for the [? Solel Boneh ?] in Israel, when at-- that was the-- they, they were building all kinds of things. They were in, in construction. And he was the chief of the kitchen. They had a-- what you call, on a kitchen for themselves. And so he put it together for me. At that time you couldn't get eggs. You couldn't get fat. You couldn't get anything. Everything was on rations, so it was very hard to put together there. Anyway, our wedding happened on a Thursday afternoon. And it happened. And we got married, and saying I spent another week or 10 days afterwards there. And then we-- finally we had to say goodbye, and, and she came in. That's when I picked her up in New York. And-- 
INT: Now, her mother stayed in Israel? SG: Yeah. She was married to him. She had her husband there and she had a job there, and so she stayed in Israel. And of course, later on she started to come to visit, and then she decided she's going to come for permanent and all that stuff. But this is how-- the, the connection was that when my father left his-- the hometown, the mother dragged herself along because she tried a couple of times and she was tossed back. It's a good thing she didn't wind up in jail or so. And she succeeded in crossing the border with him. So he, in a way, is responsible for getting her out here. Otherwise she would have been married in, in, in Ilosva and would have been stuck there. So--  INT: And when was your first child born? SG: He was born a year later, in June of 1956. We got married in February the 18th, 1954, in Haifa. I remember even we had to bring witnesses, the fact that I am single. They didn't want to take my word for it, so I had to bring witness who knew me from home that I am single and never was married. And had to go through the rabbinical hocus-pocus, you know, and, and I was married. And--  INT: Number seven of my interview with Sam Gottesman on November 10, 1996. Sam, can you tell me a little bit about how you felt about your religion, about God and things after the war? SG: Well, before the war, of course, we were all-- what you call in a way religious. We kept our Sabbath, the holidays. And that was the normal. Everybody else did the same thing. So there was nothing unusual about it. You were more or less religious, but everybody was. After the war, for a while I just-- what you'd call it-- I was angry in a way. I know you can't say what God did it to me. It's not God that does or doesn't do it. It's us, people, human beings who do that to you-- to one another. But somehow, once you break from this routine of believing, you find out that there is another side to the world. Even those who do not believe somehow survive also in this world. And especially when you came to the United States, and I had to start working on a Saturday and the holidays, I sort of got away from it all. And I was ignoring it in other words. I knew it, that it's exist. It bothered me sometimes, especially my father kept doing it in the normal way. And at least he didn't have to work on the Saturdays and the holidays. And-- but I had to. I had no choice in the-- in the-- the kind of work I did and the kind of place I was working. So I was-- what you call-- what is the word that I'm looking for? [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] Half and half-- there is a psychological expression for that-- for that. 
INT: Like a schizophrenic? SG: Schizophrenic, that's what I'm looking for. Thanks. So I'm a schizophrenic about it. And I-- it just goes to show you how, once you have it, you don't lose it. I remember one time you lived in the East End area. And we lived right behind a synagogue, the one we attended, or at least my father did. And I went on a date with that girl from Duquesne. And that was right the week before the holiday, High Holidays, which we call-- usually that night is [? Selichos, ?] the first day of [? Selichos. ?] And at that time it was quite a lively synagogue. There was about 400 members in that shul. And I came home on Saturday night from my date. It was raining out there and 12:00 midnight, somewhere around there, 1 o'clock. And I went to bed, not paying attention to what day it is or what time of the year it is. My father, of course, was in the shul for [? Selichos. ?] And at that time, I remember, they had a very, very good cantor in that shul, with a choir. And I wish I could remember the name because he was the mohel for my son too. And maybe it will come to me. Anyway, I was sleeping, and I was dozing off. And all of a sudden, I hear his-- the cousin's, the cantor's voice coming across from the back of my mind and the choir. And of course, I knew right away what it is. I mean, I recognized myself. And I thought to myself, I was so miserable that night, that how can I sleep when I hear all this going on behind me? It's sort of overwhelmed me, this sound, this-- this cantorial presentation was so overwhelming to me that I promised myself that never again will I miss anything like that, like High Holidays or something like that. Of course, I did go when I had a chance, like if there was a weekend that had a holiday in it, and I was home, I attended services all right. So I cannot say that I was totally ignorant of it or totally denied it. But I was not what you call a practicing Orthodox Jew. Until, of course, until I changed my job from one company to another one, that gave me a chance to be home on a Saturday, on the holidays. So since then I started going back to the synagogues on the Saturdays and the holidays. And since I have the background. I had my education in-- in Jewish theology. And I had in cantorial presentation, because I was part of a-- of a choir at one time when I was about 10, 12 years old. And I had a voice. I could carry it. And I could perform myself. I knew exactly what has to be said and how it's to be said. So I sort of came back again. And as long as I can-- and I even sent my son. He graduated from Hillel High School too. Even so, he doesn't practice as much as I would like to. But I guess my father felt the same way about me. So I'm hoping at least he has his education he has his background. And if he ever wants to come back, he knows what to come back to. He's not going to be a totally ignoramuses. So I am schizophrenic about it. I'm not totally committed. But on the other hand, I'm not totally ignoring it either, and I'm not denying it. So it all depends who I listen to. If I listen to the rabbi, it's one thing. And if I listen to a friend of mine who was on the other side, I can agree with him too. So everybody is right. And this is where I'm sort of in the middle, trying to play both sides. 
INT: How long did your father continue to live with you? SG: He lived-- actually, he lived with my sister all that time. And so we lived in one house. My sister lived on the-- on the floor-- first floor. We lived on the third floor until we bought our own home, which was in the neighborhood, just around the corner from these two places. So we were constantly together practically. But of course, on holidays, we were all at my sister's house. The Passovers and so we were there down. And my father conducted the services. Until one day when it started, Father started-- my father started complaining about heartburns. Heartburn, first of all, of course, you take an acid reliever of some sort of a tablets And-- but it didn't help. So I took him down to one of the doctors in the neighborhood there. And he examined me-- examined him. And-- and he gave me the news he doesn't like what he sees. And he immediately sent him for x-rays. And then they discovered, yes, he is really sick. And it turned out that he had a stomach cancer. And that was 1961. At that time they-- I was talking to the doctor. And I was talking to the surgeon. And he says, now I-- I think there's very little we can do. We can open up and see what happens to him or what's going on inside. But I'm not sure whether we'll be able to help him. At that time, I guess, they didn't know what to do with this kind of sickness. And it was-- when we took him in finally into the hospital, I sort of had a bad feeling. Because who knows whether he's going to come out of that hospital? But it was already getting to me. And, of course, right after Hanukkah, about a week after that, he sort of was waiting for us to come home, because after work I-- first thing I did with my sister, ran down to the hospital. That particular evening, he was in bad shape. And I can see that he was waiting for us to come. He started to talk to me, but I couldn't understand him anymore. His lungs were filled up with-- with fluid. And that's when he passed-- passed away. And to me it was such a great shock. Not on death-- even before that-- the minute the doctor told me what it is, it's just like a-- a-- a black hole would open up for me. And I went down and immediately went into a depression. And every time you looked at me, I was crying, sort of every once in a while. I mean really crying. And I pictured up the Passover night without him already. And I just-- it was deeper and deeper that I went into depression, the harder it felt. And I sort of-- he was this-- this Rock of Gibraltar. Well, as long as I had him, I didn't feel the loss of the family as yet. The minute I got the verdict on his situation, I just-- just like the whole dam broke. And everything came up on me, like the whole family. I'm by myself. I'm lost, like in the middle of a ocean and drowning. And I have nothing to hold on to. It was just-- even so, I had my own family I already. I had my wife and a little kid. But nothing mattered anymore. It's just the whole-- the whole tragedy that happened to us came upon me, right down, like coming at me like an avalanche and burying me. And of course, I started getting sick myself, not actually physically sick, but emotionally sick. I-- I got stomach pain, chest pains, all kinds of pains. And I started running to doctors. And they kept reassuring me there is nothing wrong with me. They took X-rays and GI tests and all kinds of things for me, just to prove to me that there's nothing wrong with me. But nothing they did helped. And it took years and years and therapies of all kinds. Because at that time, 1960, '61, '62, not everybody knew about therapy, psychiatric therapy. But anyway, my family doctor suggested. He saw that I am helpless, that he cannot help me. The cardiologist told me that he can't help it. There's nothing wrong with me. So finally they-- they arranged it for me to see a psychiatrist. And I started at the psychiatrist. And then I started at a psychologist and group therapy, individual therapy, relaxation exercise. But not much helped. And I was-- I developed the phobia, agoraphobia. I was afraid to go to movies I was afraid to be in public. I was afraid to leave home. I had miserable, miserable days. And the only thing they could do is give me medication. And these somehow helped me while I was taking. But I-- I didn't want to live on them. So I kept taking them on, then taking myself off them. And it was going up and down, up and down constant for me. And that took me years until finally I started coming out a little bit, by a little bit by bit. And it's-- it's went-- I went through quite a bit afterwards. 
INT: Is it important to talk about the past and the Holocaust for you? SG: Definitely. It-- we never talked about it. Like for my son, I never talked then, didn't tell them about what our experience were, except when-- I mean and except, after he went to college, he went Case Western, and then he took a year out and went to Tel Aviv University. And there he took a course on the Holocaust. So when he came home, I remember Passover night. He was home. And we spent till about 2 o'clock in the morning. That's the first time he started questioning. And that's when he started talking about it. And I started telling him the stories as what happened to us. That's the first time he ever-- he knows-- he knew there was something wrong. He knew there was something that he shouldn't ask and that the difference between him and his buddies who were normal kids, American-born kids, and where he just could not understand what the difference was. And we were sort of walking around on eggs and not wanting to hurt each other and not asking too many questions and not objecting to too many things. So I never knew exactly what he was feeling either. And I remember the first time, when he started to create a-- a-- a survivor's group. Actually the children of survivors started coming together as a group. And me and Al [? Louin ?] heard about it. So we went in just for curiosity. We were curious what you kids are going to be talking about. And we found out that it was quite therapeutic, both for us and for them. Because they started asking us questions that they did not dare ask their parents. And we-- we were free to answer them, all those questions they wanted to know. And on the other hand, we were able to ask them, what is bugging you? What is bothering you? What is it you want to know? What is it that you feel? And this is how we build a bridge from one generation to the other generations. And this is how the Holocaust center or the survivor center started to come as a group together. And, of course, nobody talked about it until the movie came out on television, And that's when people started asking questions. And-- and I remember it took me a long time before I was comfortable to talk about it. But I forced myself to talk about it. Now, many times I-- I broke down. But I felt it's OK. And I learned which area to-- I can go into and talk freely about it, and which area to stay away from one. And time already gave me some enough experience to know what I shouldn't touch unless somebody individual comes along come and ask me these kind of questions. But I've been doing these kind of talks for the past, I'd say 12 maybe even 15 years. I don't remember how long I've been doing it. But I feel comfortable now about it. And I can talk about it. And I'm free to talk about it. It still bugs me every once in a while. I mean, I break down also. But I figure this is normal. And there's nothing wrong with it. And it just doesn't bother me anymore. 
INT: Is there any message that you would like to see out in the open now? SG: Well, messages-- the only messages I can give is to-- to be on the lookout, to be on the alert. And anybody who comes along, like a charismatic leader, like a Hitler or a Farrakhan, or a few other ones who-- who offer you the world, all you have to do is just follow them is to make sure you think twice about it, and actually ask questions. And don't be led like sheep. Like-- and what gets me is I would say I'm more angry with the English or the French more than with the Germans. Because the Germans told us exactly what they are doing and what they are up to. And the British just took us for-- for granted, or took, like Czechoslovakia, they offered-- they brought it on-- on what you call it, on the-- on the altar for their ego or for their own personal satisfaction. And they were stupid enough to believe that Hitler can be trusted. And this is what I'm still angry at, as a Chamberlain, an idiot, who, like him, who was-- what was he, premier at that time, for Britain, for the-- a country who has-- who has the power of the practically the 3/4 of the world at that time. And had a man like that, being stupid enough to take being taken in by Hitler.  INT: Is there anything I left out of asking you or that you would like to say at this time? SG: No. I just hope that this story, I know it's hard to believe what I told here. Myself many a times wondered, did it really happen? But knowing, I know that it did happen. But I understand when some people are wondering how did it happen? How could it have happened? And did it really happen like that? And this is only, like I say, a drop in the bucket. There are thousands of us who can tell more gruesome stories, that they have seen or they have gone through. But this story is to be told. And the future generations better look out for anything like that never to happen again. 
INT: Thank you very much. SG: This picture is a picture of an engagement party of my cousin's. Her name was [? Licia ?] [? Spiegel. ?] And-- and she got engaged to the man right next to her. And the engagement was in Ilosva. I believe it was either 1936 or '37. And this is part of the family who were there at that time. And that picture was taken in their backyard. There is about 47 members of this family that gathered together there. And from these 47, I believe only about seven that survived from that group. The grandmother is right there in the middle with a black shawl on her head. This is-- and next to her on the right side is my mother. And the other ones are her sister or sister-in-laws. And from that group, only about seven survived. On the left side is my sister, my older sister, Hella, with her husband when they got engaged. And I believe it was 1937. They lived-- they got married, and they lived in the city of [NON-ENGLISH]. And they had that little grocery store. And he survived too. He was in the-- in the labor camps. And he survived. She did not. This is my father. This picture was taken here in Pittsburgh. I believe in 1967 or so, when he was getting ready to go to Israel for a visit, for a passport photo. So he made an 8 by 10 at the same time. It was made in Pittsburgh, in Baywood Street when he lived there. This is, again, my dad, Isak Gottesman and holding my Jeffrey, who was about not quite two years old. That was 1958 in the backyard of Pittsburgh, in Baywood Street. 
INT: Did they like each other? SG: [LAUGHS]  INT: Leah's saying I can't get my dinner started until this is done. So let's get moving. SG: I'm sorry. Dinner's ready. This is my wife, and Leah Gottesman. And we are going to be celebrating our 43rd wedding anniversary come February. And I'm not sorry. [LAUGHS]