INT: Survivors of the Shoah Visual History Foundation. The date is November 10th, 1996. Survivor is Peter Masters, born Arany. Interviewer is Dina Cohen. We are in Bethesda, Maryland, USA. The interview will be in English My name is Dina Cohen. Today is November 10th, 1996. I am conducting an interview with Peter Masters, born Arany, in Bethesda, Maryland, USA. The interview will be in English. Could you please state your name and spell it? PM: My name is Peter Masters, P-E-T-E-R M-A-S-T-E-R-S.  INT: And your name at birth? PM: Was Peter Arany, A-R-A-N-Y.  INT: Were you known by any other names? PM: No.  INT: And when were you born? PM: On the 5th of February, 1922.  INT: And how old are you now? PM: I am 74.  INT: And what city and country were you born in? PM: I was born in Vienna, V-I-E-N-N-A, Austria, in the eighth district.  INT: And could you describe your family? PM: My father was born in Hungary. And of course, it was all part of the Austro-Hungarian monarchy at that time, in the southern city of-- small town of-- Szeged, S-Z-E-G-E-D. That's near the Romanian and what subsequently became Yugoslavian border. And my mother was born in, in Vienna. Her, her parents had moved to the capital, to the imperial capital, from Poland or Galicia. My grandfather, on my mother's side, was born in [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] Cracow, K-R-A-K-O-W. So the-- my, my, my father came to Vienna to work for my mother's father in a jewelry shop. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] Actually, he-- and my grandfather had put an uncle in charge of the shop, but the uncle was not very industrious and spent his days by going across the street to the cafe, to the Vienna coffee house. And he said to the remaining staff, which was my, my father, if anybody is looking for me, I'm over there. And hardly anybody ever was looking for him, so he stayed over there all day long. My grandfather felt the system was not too ideal, so he sent my young mother, who was 18, to keep an eye on the two of-- the other-- on the two others. And my father was a very handsome man, and so they fell in love and were married shortly afterwards. My mother's 18 years old in-- she was 18 in 1913. And, and then, of course, World War I came along, and my mother was very enthused and patriotic and actually went into the field, with my father, on troop trains, to Serbia and goodness knows what, and then to Poland, until his commanding officer said, this is getting serious. You better go home. And she went-- was sent home, to-- much to her disappointment. I have letters where she says, the commanding office-- officer thinks very highly of my husband, who is the bravest officer in the Austrian Kaiser's Army. So that didn't really last, because my father, who was a first, first lieutenant in the Austro-Hungarian Army, was shell-shocked on the Russian front, and my mother was called to visit him in hospital. And the nurse told her that my father could not speak. And when the nurse was out of the room, my father said, psst, I can speak, but I, I have just had it with the war. And the patriotism seems to have evaporated. Things were pretty miserable, I'm sure, on the Russian front. But my mother was appalled. And I believe that that contributed to the end of their marriage. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] She divorced him once, when I was very little. But my-- her father said, we will not have divorce in our family, and he made her remarry him. So they remarried. And after a while, that didn't take at all. And I remember some of that. And they divorced on a second time. And since then, I, I had-- I had no father, really. And contrary to all the popular ideas about what it is to grow up without a father, I never really noticed any setbacks or sufferings. My mother did have occasional boyfriends or male friends who contributed much to my life. But I-- and apart from the fact that I never learned how to use certain tools and things in the household, it, it never bothered me to that extent. It was fashionable to ask small children, whom do you like better, your mom or your dad? And I always said, both the same, because that seemed to be the correct political answer. And my sister would nudge me and say, why don't you tell the truth? We like our mom better than our dad. 
INT: How old were you when your parents divorced? PM: The first one, I must have been about three or something. But the second one, I was, I think, eight. And I entered in my diary, which, which I'd just been given, for my eighth birthday, with little pictures to illustrate it, I entered that three big things happened. One, my father left for Paris. Two, our nanny left. And three, we learned cursive in school, cursive writing. [LAUGHS]  INT: You said you had a sister. Did you have other siblings? PM: No, there were just the two of us, my sister, two and a half years older than I, who is alive and, and more or less well, except she has gone totally deaf. And she lives in San Francisco.  INT: And-- what was-- what part of Vienna did you live in? PM: In the eighth district, which is almost downtown. And it was on a, a crescent-shaped cobblestone street that led up to a, a theater. The theater was mostly playing operettas. And the-- it was an apartment house, that was probably then a couple of hundred years old, which for Vienna is not at all extraordinary. And it was walk-up, with a spiral stone staircase and no elevators. And it had a backyard, which had a cobblestone strip where there were the poles, sort of a pole structure, for beating carpets, which everybody did, and a so-called wash kitchen, with a big kettle, where you had to put your name down, and you got a certain day allocated depending on seniority of tenure in the building. And then there was a, a-- this garden behind a metal fence, which was always locked. Nobody ever was inside that garden, which was mostly dirt, I think, and trees. But I can't picture why it was so private that nobody was ever allowed in it. The only time I ever-- well, that's a minor story. But we, we had-- downstairs, there were stores. There was a baker on the corner, a, a tobacco thing, which also had-- sold stamps, because these were franchises by the government, and a green grocer, all in the same building, downstairs. Well, just underneath us, there was a ladies' band. [LAUGHS] They lived there and rehearsed all night. And I woke up. I, I went to sleep, every night, with their signature tune in my ears. 
INT: How did your mother support your family? PM: My mother, without a doubt, had support from her father. But she didn't really relish that. And that-- and he-- I mean, he, he would attach conditions, as you have seen, about remarrying. So her younger sister was a fiercely independent, very modern woman, one of the earliest female motorists in Vienna. Her-- my Aunt Ida, who never married. And-- but she had a very active social life. And she took my mother as-- into her millinery business, which was a block from the very center of Vienna, which is St. Stephen's Cathedral. And it was thriving, and, and a very modern sort of shop with a street front, but with regular customers. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] And a whole bevy of young women who worked there making hats.  INT: Was your family religious? PM: My father?  INT: Your family. PM: My family. My maternal grandfather was religious. He was not ultra-Orthodox. He did not wear any garments other than ordinary Austrian street clothes and his yarmulke, which a word, incidentally, I didn't learn until I came to America. It wasn't called that in Europe. He wore a sort of a little sports cap. And he would-- but I believe he was-- he had a kosher house. I know that he made me promise to do the tefillin when I was bar mitzvahed, which he organized, of course. My father was nowhere around at the time. And I, I think I actually kept that promise until it became impossible, because of, of the Nazis, and, and us moving, and so on. I never had the slightest idea what it meant. I, I didn't learn Hebrew. I didn't go to Sunday school. I could read Hebrew up to a point. And I read the appropriate verses and did the tefillin without knowing what it stood for. I thought it was very important that nobody saw me do it. I'm not sure why, because I have since seen paintings of people doing it, but that somehow came with it. 
INT: You mentioned a nanny. Did you have servants in your home? PM: We had a cook, who, who lived in, in a-- in a-- what was called-- it's a small room called a cabinet adjacent to the kitchen. And she was cook, housekeeper, and everything. And we had a, a nanny. And the nanny-- my sister had one, who was a real sort of a nurse, with-- dressed like a-- like children's nurses used to be dressed, somewhat like nuns, although I don't think she was a nun by any means. But when I came along, we got my nanny, who was the daughter of a family of 13 in the Danube valley. And the house was still in the family's possession, where her sister and her husband lived there. And we would go there for minor holidays. And it was absolutely lovely to, to be on a place on the Danube, in the country, where the fruit trees are blooming in the spring and so forth. And she did not get married until after she left us. And by that time, I was a teenager. And, and the-- but I was in touch with her until she died, which meant after the war. She died at 94. All, all that family lived to a very old age. And we loved each other dearly. It was so much so that whenever I had real trouble, I thought, well, if all else fails, I could always run away and go to where, where she lives in the country, which sustained me. 
INT: Did you have any pets? PM: We always wanted to have pets. And we were living in an apartment. So it was considered impractical. And so we didn't really have any pets, except a, a canary, which we inherited from my mother's nanny. [LAUGHS] And she always said the canary is called 'Fifi.' And so she gave it to us. And then we had goldfish. And I was bored with the goldfish. So I traded them in, at the pet store, for a fish that would jump out of the tank and be found on, on the floor in the morning, which caused considerable trouble, because people stepped on them. And when I-- as a Boy Scout, I went on one vacation in Yugoslavia. And I brought back a little turtle, which is a very exotic animal by Austrian standards. There are none in Austria. But in Yugoslavia, they are native animals. And everybody was very startled by this, which, of course, was my purpose in bringing it home. And our cook, [? Paula, ?] said the poor animal will freeze to death. It's not used to this climate. So she knitted it a sweater. [LAUGHS] And then she-- that-- the, the turtle didn't seem to object to that. But, but she did object-- it did object to being woken up to be fed when it was hibernating, which the cook insisted on doing, because she said, I don't care about hibernation. The animal has to eat something. And the turtle died. That was pretty much the end of the pets. 
INT: Did you go to school in Vienna? PM: I went to elementary school. In, in fact, I went to kindergarten first. And I was tapped into that, because in, in-- on Saturday morning, or Sunday morning, my mother would read us epic poems in, in bed-- in her bed, one right, one left. And, and we would get raisin bread and, and milk, and she would read us poems. And she-- my sister was going to elementary school. And she said, wouldn't you like to go to school also? And, as I said, as small children, we were very much aware of the politically correct answer. And I thought, of course, I must say I would like to go to school. I had not really thought about it. It obviously wasn't topical, because I was clearly too young. I was four years old or five years old. And I said, yes, I would like to go to school. And the next thing I knew, they sent me to kindergarten. And I hated it, because, as soon as I arrived there, they were all playing silly ring-around-the-roses things. And I was very shy. And in the corner, there was a kid sitting on a high chair. And I said, what's with him? And they said he had misbehaved. And I knew I was going to be sitting there shortly, you see. So I decided to, to run away from kindergarten. And it was in downtown Vienna, a block from the Ringstrasse, which is the main drag around Vienna. And I ran away. I, I pretended to be going for my lunchbox when-- and they asked me, what are you doing? And I said, just my lunch box. And when they turned their back I was out of there. And then I bumped into my mother. I never understood how come I bumped into my mother. Maybe time was almost up. But she-- a block and a half from the school, my walking by myself, four years old, along the way, there was my mother. And I said, I am not going back there. And I didn't. [LAUGHS] 
INT: When did you go back to school? [LAUGHS] PM: Oh, elementary school, when it started. The Austrian system has you for four years, with one teacher, who takes you through, which is not very good if you and the teacher don't get along very well. [LAUGHS] And I didn't, except in the drawing class, because I was artistic. And other than that, happily, the principal of the school was sort of a, a mentor of mine. And when the teacher would drag me by the hair or by my-- by my clothes to see the principal, the principal was usually much calmer and more conciliatory. And so I managed to survive without any serious trouble. Then you go to-- you have to go through a test, and then you go to gymnasium, Realgymnasium, the junior high and high combined. I went to one that was down the street from the first one, and that was a big school. And it was boys only, except from the fifth grade on they had girls-- a weird system. They also had a thing where you started, unlike other schools in Vienna where you learned Latin and then a foreign language for the last three years, in our school you learned a foreign language to begin with, and then Latin for the last three years. So you could choose between French and English. And I chose French. But the teacher, who was also the foremaster of our class, was one of the prominent Nazis in the literary field in Austria. He was an author, and he was an [NON-ENGLISH] Nazi. And he taught both German and French. And I could never get above a sufficient grade, which is the third grade down. And these were my strong subjects. So I switched to the English class, which turned out to be rather fortunate, since we emigrated to England, subsequently. And we-- I had had four years of English. I thought I spoke fluent English. I found out, very quickly, that I did not. 
INT: Were there many Jews in your school? PM: Yes, quite a few. It was really-- perhaps because of the odd system of the modern languages and so on, it attracted people from all kinds of backgrounds. And we had, religiously, we had-- you, you name it, we had it. We had a Greek Orthodox boy in the class. We had, of course, mainly Catholics, and then Protestants and Jews and people who were atheists and people who were non-denominational-- [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] what would you call it? Well, some-- they were not atheists, but they did not practice any recognized religion. Some of these were, of course, not what they professed to be. That is to say, some Protestants had been baptized Catholics, because it-- that was the state religion. Some Jews had been baptized Catholics, usually, because the parents thought it might protect them in the future. So you could never really tell. You could tell racially, perhaps, what they had been originally. But what happened was that we were extremely keen soccer players. We, we had a-- we formed a team and, by voting, picked an English name for it, because that was kind of cool. And we called ourselves the 'Blue Boys.' And one boy's mother embroidered little things, because we couldn't afford uniforms. So we wore our white sweatshirts with the blue triangle, 'Blue Boys' embroidered. And we were very, very keen on this. And we collected money and organized. You had to rent a football field. In school-- in school we weren't allowed to play soccer. It was deemed too dangerous by the-- by the school authorities. Crazily enough, it's the national sport, yet you weren't allowed to play in school. So we organized our own rented football field on weekends. Somebody brought a ball, and we played. And we, we collected money, and it worked like a charm. Then came the Catholic edict by the predecessors of the-- of Hitler, the Austrian nationalistic right-wing government, anti-Nazi government, even so, under Dollfuss. And they created a pure Catholic class. So the football team-- soccer team was broken up, and boys on both sides cried, because we were so fond of, of having created such a great team. Not long afterwards, the classes were broken up again when the Nazis came, because now it was a question of being Aryan, and the people who had been Protestants were moved into the Aryan class, insofar as they were genuine Protestants, not change-religion Protestants. And some of the Catholics and Protestants-- and some of the Catholics in the Catholic class were moved back, because they were baptized Jews. So now we had a Jewish class and an Aryan class. And the soccer-- the repaired soccer team was broken up, and everybody cried again, even through the boys, by that time, were almost 16. But when you suddenly lose your best center forward or goalkeeper, you-- it, it becomes like a terrible disaster. 
INT: When-- you mentioned soccer and Boy Scouts. Were you involved in other organizations or, or sports? PM: Not, not really. No, not to any-- to any extent. I joined a, a theatrical group, which was sort of Jewish socialist, at the very end, before immigration. But they had a couple of meetings and, and were rehearsing a play about Queen Esther when the whole thing came to a screeching halt because of the Nazis.  INT: When you were in school and involved in all other activities as, as a child and a-- and a young teenager, did you ever experience any antisemitism? PM: Certainly. You couldn't escape it. First of all, on the corner of the street, especially in the latter years-- You have to bear in mind that the Schuschnigg and, and its predecessors, and Dollfuss government, the last nationalistic Austrian governments, prohibited other political parties, so that you couldn't-- you didn't see any Nazis in uniform at that time. But then Schuschnigg was summoned to Berchtesgaden, and Hitler pressured him into concessions and blackmailed him. And so the Nazi party was made legal. And, and you could see Hitler Youth in uniform running around. And on the-- on certain-- on many streets, there would be street newspapers. And the street newspapers were Julius Streicher's which was full of, of touched-up, long-nosed, cross-eyed Jews, who had raped Christian girls or whatever. Or, or had run away with, with money, or, or cheated, or whatever. And it was really glaringly antisemitic and, and coarse. 
INT: Thank you. Let's go to the next-- we'll continue on the next tape.  INT: November 10, 1996. Interview with Peter Masters, tape number two. We were talking about antisemitism in Austria in the '30s. Did you ever personally experience any antisemitism? PM: Well, one incident that particularly sticks in my mind is that I was walking towards my school. And on that route you passed a little park where we used to play as small children. And as I passed that park, I met a guy with whom I'd been in elementary school. He was not a-- a Jewish boy. His name was [? Janak, ?] which is a-- a Czech name, very common to have Czech names in the Austro-Hungarian monarchy-- a tall, lanky sort of colorless chap. And to my amazement, he was wearing the three arrow silver badge of the Social Democrats. Now, that was illegal. This was in the period after Hitler had forced Schuschnigg to reinstate the Hitler Youth and uniform-wearing Nazis. To wear a socialist badge was provocation. I mean, it was daring. And I was surprised. My sympathies were with him, but I was amazed that [? Janak ?] was a socialist. And he sort of said how-- where are you going to school now. Because he was not in our school, and we chatted like one does with someone that one hasn't seen for a few years. And at this point, a boy I knew by sight from an upper class in my school came by, a red-haired, sort of pudgy boy, much taller than we, as it goes, you know, in the teenage years, when the 18-year-olds and 17-year-olds are twice the size of the 16-year-olds, in the Hitler Youth uniform. And [? Janak ?] ostentatiously spat on the sidewalk at the feet of this Hitler Youth boy. And I thought, well, [? Janak ?] is not only a-- a-- a Social Democrat, but he's a-- a daring. Not only daring in wearing the badge, but he is obviously unafraid of the present situation. The Hitler Youth boy took a whistle out of his pocket, from-- on a lanyard, and blew it a couple of times. And suddenly, there were Hitler Youth boys coming from every which direction. But I mean, by the dozen. And [? Janak ?] said, see you later, and took off to one direction. And it was understood by us relatively streetwise kids that if he went that way, I'd go this way, which I did. And I knew the neighborhood extremely well. It was, after all, on my way to school. So I ran around the block before-- I-- I got a-- a good start, because they were just approaching from a distance.
And in the next street, there was a cleaning shop owned by the mother of a boy in the class above me. I knew him slightly from-- from soccer and-- Frau [? Lauer ?] And I ran into the cleaning shop and said, Frau [? Lauer, ?] you don't know me, but the Nazis are chasing me. [LAUGHS] I-- can I hide somewhere. And she said, I don't want any trouble. You can go out the back. But don't stay here. So I ran out the back and recognized where I was. I didn't really know that back way. And a block from my home, there was a-- a house that was a-- an apartment complex about four stories high, with several courtyards and exits in every which direction. You know, every part of-- in the courtyards had at least two exits to the outside and one to the next courtyard. So once I was in there, unless somebody was very hard on my heels, they couldn't possibly figure where I was going to come out. But I knew where I was going to come out. I ran in and came out on an unlikely side. And then feeling confident that I had shaken my pursuers, I walked the extra block and a half to my home, past the theater, where the operettas were. And there was sort of a stage door back alley and recessed doors to the theater. And as-- I forgot to mention that when [? Janak ?] and I stood at the corner before the Nazi Hitler Youth came by, we moved aside because a man came by, a little older man with a hat and a long, galvanized pipe, steel pipe, in coveralls. A working man, plumber or metal worker or whatever. And this enormously long pipe, it caused us to give him the right of way, to pass us. And he was walking in the direction of my home. So when I passed the theater, out of the recesses of the stage door pounced my Nazi enemy, who clearly knew where I lived, from having seen me go to school. And I didn't know his name. He didn't know mine. But he figured that I was going to go home after being chased. So he set up this ambush, with-- without the other guys. He felt he could handle it. And he-- he grabbed me and started to beat up on me. And he was much bigger, as I said. Well, at this point, down the street came-- because the man carrying the pipe, because it had taken him longer, with this weight, and we were running all the way, albeit zigzagging around the back alleys and what have you.
And he didn't say anything at all. But he stopped. And he put the pipe very gently and carefully on the sidewalk. And then he suddenly moved, and he jumped the Hitler Youth boy and punched him with a couple of left uppercuts, and a straight right to the nose. And the boy was howling and possibly bleeding from the nose. And he-- he said to me, you go on home, and you pick on somebody your own size next time, which was eminently satisfying. [LAUGHS] And it caused me considerable concern, because that guy knew where I lived. And we were absolutely free game to anybody. You know, if-- if he had wanted to organize any kind of anything, he could have us arrested. He could have-- he could move in with a few people with armbands, who would empty the apartment. Happily, we moved to my grandfather's shortly afterwards. And so my various enemies didn't know where I was. I mean, boyhood enemies. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] After the Nazis took over, I was cycling to my mother's shop. I had to carry some things. And it was considered safer if a teenage boy would carry it than if they carried it, because they would stop at [INAUDIBLE] in the street. And me on my bicycle, you have as part of the streets scenery. You know? And on the way back, I was cycling with a cigarette holder in my mouth. I didn't smoke, but my sister had given it to me as a present, and I played with it. And suddenly, there was the son of-- of-- of the concierge of my friend's house, down the street. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] And he knew me, and he knew my name, I think. And he knew my friend. And he was on a racing bike. And he said, salut, big Jew. What do you have to suck a cigarette holder for? I mean, it's just to say something. And I said-- pure teenage reflex-- the so-called [NON-ENGLISH], which is kiss my ass. And he chased me, and I cycled off. And I, again, happily knew the area. I turned the corner of where my father used to have a shop when he was still there. There was a taxi stand. And as I turned the corner, I put my bike between two taxis, and he went whizzing past. Again, he was somebody who knew where I lived. So subsequently, [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] my mother was out every Friday night. This is already after the Nazis. And incidentally, I quit going to school. Because the classes were overcrowded. There were-- it was a dangerous atmosphere. A friend of mine and I had walked out of the school.
This is the gymnasium. And a couple of Hitler Youth boys were beating up on a somewhat retarded Jewish boy. And my friend, Harry [NON-ENGLISH], [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] who died recently in New York, was a little, very tough guy, my friend, [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] jumped the Nazis and punched them and said, leave that boy alone. And I said, Harry, they can have you killed for that. And he said, I don't give a damn. I'm not going to stand by and watch this kind of thing. You see, one didn't have a sense of proportion of what one was getting into. And these things became a daily sort of friction. They complained that the Jewish classes were noisy. The Jewish classes were noisy because there were 60 people in a 30-person class. One professor had us shut the doors and said, 'do not quote me, and I will deny ever having said it, but go home and tell your parents to leave the country as soon as possible.' This is a non-Jewish professor. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] Other professors came in Nazi uniform. Some of them who were real bastards, and some of them who were not. Our-- our English professor was a very decent man and turned up with a real high-ranking Nazi badge. I never found out how, what, or you know. In any case, I thought it was wiser to stay home. Except I missed the physical exercise of school, so I figured that the gym professor was not smart enough to recognize that I had quit. And so in the afternoon, I'd come for gym class, and he didn't recognize that I had quit. And I participated and got my exercise and went home. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] The-- so after the Nazis were-- were-- were in-- in full command, and one was frightened of every knock on the door. And I remember being frightened by an unusual knock on the door and looking through the peephole. And there was a black peaked-- you could just see a little bit through that little hole-- a black peaked cap with a eagle and swastika. And I said, my god, the SS. I had to open the door. And it was the postman in a new-- in a new uniform. So, you know-- but the scare of, what next? Well, my mother went to her father's with-- with the adult family every Friday night for Shabbat. And the phone rang. My sister or I answered. And somebody said-- asked for us by name and said, you are going to go on a torch parade this evening. You report to the local authorities. You are going to carry placards. You know, usually it would say something detrimental about the Jews. And we said, where are we supposed to report. Because it's the only question you really had. Not whether, you know. And they said, ask your local police. And this was a bit suspect. But at the same time, you had no choice but to do it. So we called the police, and they said, we don't know anything about it, but if they want you, they can have you. 
INT: When was this? PM: Hm?  INT: When was this? PM: This was after the Anschluss. And we said, well, we don't know where to go. And they said, call the local SS. Well, you know how much you liked to call the SS. So we called the SS, and they said the same thing. If somebody wants Jews to participate in placard carrying, that's fine by us. [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] Go and ask the police. And we said, well, we've done this. An hour later, the phone rang, and it was the original caller. And he said, you haven't gone yet. And we said, we don't know where to go. He said, just go. You'll see where the thing is when you see other people marching. And we said we tried the SS. Don't argue with me and curse words, bad words, four-letter words, and hung up. An hour later, the phone would-- we called my mother at my-- and she said, I'm coming straight home. And this went on all night. And each time, he would say, you haven't gone yet? Well, you are going to be in real trouble. The Gestapo will pick you up in the morning. And every hour on the hour, he would call. And it was undoubtedly some personal enemy. I don't know. Anyway, in the morning, we had decided-- we had made a plan. We were going to go hiking in the Vienna woods and then carefully ask people via telephone whether the coast was clear to come back. We didn't know exactly what we were going to do. But we packed our rucksacks, and we were going to leave early. And in the meantime, our cook, [? Paula, ?] was posted at the window to look down into the street to see whether the Gestapo was really coming. And she-- we were just about to leave when she came running, pale as a sheet, saying a Gestapo car has just pulled up in front of the house. And there-- and-- and everybody stood transfixed. And I, with all my presence of mind, said, chuck the rucksacks into a closet somewhere, into a cupboard. We didn't have closets really. And read a book and sit. And don't look like we were trying to escape, or they'll shoot us for trying to escape. And we all sat and read. And there was no knock on the door. And we sat, [LAUGHS] terrified. And we finally-- and you know, some people would have jumped, at this point, out the window. And we thought, we wait. And then I finally couldn't contain myself and sneaked over to a window and looked down. And there was the Gestapo guy in the back.
I remember vividly. And it was a camouflaged car with GSTPO, short for Gestapo, marked on the side. And in the back, there was a picture of Schuschnigg, a photograph, with the glass smashed, that they had obviously requisitioned somewhere. And nobody came. So either this was an incredible coincidence or somebody knew that this car was coming and wanted to frighten us out of our wits. So these were, you know, little nothings. It-- it-- the-- an Austrian-Jewish poet wrote some poem saying, the truth is one hasn't-- nobody has done anything to me as yet. And this applied. Nobody has done anything except that and that. I went on my bicycle to visit my aunt in the second district, where they lived. And I had to cross a bridge over the Danube Canal, a main downtown bridge. And as I'm crossing, there is suddenly a Nazi uniformed NSKK member, that is Nationalsozialistisches Kraftfahrkorps-- it's a motorcycle unit of the Nazi party-- who pulled me over on my bicycle. And he's-- had a-- a loudspeaker. And he said, you have committed a terrible offense. You realize that? And-- and-- and I-- I-- I said, I-- sir, you know, what? This is before yellow stars, and I'm not-- other than not wearing a badge, which almost branded you as being non-Aryan, because everybody else was wearing some badge, not-- they weren't party members. They wore plain swastikas. I said, like what, you know. And he-- people were gathering around the middle of downtown. It was quite a crowd. And-- and he said, [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] I want you to see. I'm making an example of this boy, who committed a terrible offense. And we are going to have discipline. [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] Nobody had a clue what he was talking about. And he-- he said, [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] you were riding too near the sidewalk. And I said, I'm sorry. He said, what would you have done if a pedestrian had stepped off the sidewalk? I said, I would have braked. He said, if you were able to. You were going pretty fast. You were jeopardizing a citizen's right, and we in the new regime are not going to tolerate this. Well, I just wanted to make that point. Now you can go. But you know, [LAUGHS] I-- I saw myself halfway to a concentration camp. Because what did I know? I'm stopped in the middle of downtown for riding my bicycle. I mean, I didn't do anything. You know. It-- these were very, very-- you began gradually to realize that you were anybody's target, that anybody could do anything. You heard horrible stories and-- and sort of black humor would have it that if somebody said so-and-so has been arrested, in the beginning, people would ask why. People wouldn't ask why anymore after a while. They said because they had scrambled eggs for breakfast. You know, it-- it's-- there were arbitrary arrests. A friend was arrested, a friend's father for-- he had a shop of exotic fruit, like exotic by Viennese standards-- bananas, pineapples. And apparently, some SS guys had said, in the middle of the night, I feel like having a banana. Well, you're not going to find one this time of night. And one of them said, I know there is this Jew who has the food shop. And he is a very industrious man. He is likely to be in his shop, getting ready for morning. Let's walk over there. They walked over, arrested him. He went to Dachau concentration camp and came back half insane from-- from-- from torture a few months later. In those days, people still came back occasionally. Although it was not unusual that people would get an urn with ashes that said shot while trying to escape. It's amazing that these Nazis would take the trouble to do this, which of course they stopped doing when-- once the mass executions started. But in those days, my scout leaders were arrested for being scout leaders-- and-- and some of them tortured. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] It was an extremely trembling kind of atmosphere. My sister had wanted to leave the first day with her friend from high school, and my mother said no, we go together or not at all, which could easily have killed us. 
INT: You mentioned that your sister wanted to go, and your mother didn't, until you went together. Did-- did she come around to leaving? PM: Well, she said, if it gets real bad, we can always leave then. My sister wanted to leave the next day for Italy, because as you know, nobody knew in which direction to go, and her friend was going to Italy and then to France. She hoped my-- so we-- the-- my-- my mother's sister, with whom she was in business, my Aunt Ida, had gone to Paris every year to look at the new models for the millinery business. And-- and my mother said, why don't you go to London one year? And my-- Aunt Ida said there is no-- no fashion in London of interest to us. We are not into the tweedy bit, we are into the French and even more continental look. And my mother said, but wouldn't it be nice to see what they wear in London? After all, we have a lot of tourists coming here. And my aunt said, well, it's a hop across the Channel. I'll go. And she went-- this was in-- in '37-- and met people in the business. And they said [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] when-- how would you like to-- to work for us and run the millinery department in this department store on Oxford Street. And she said, thank you, but no thank you. I have my own business. It's doing well. I don't, you know, intend to give it up. And either because the person who is in-- who offered her the job was keen on my aunt, who was a very comely young woman, or because he was clairvoyant, he said, well, you never know. We'll leave it. We'll keep it open for you for a year. The year would have been up in April of 1938, on the 12th of March. We had the Anschluss. And my aunt's and my mother's business was immediately taken away by the Nazis and without compensation. And my aunt said, I accept, and went to London and was again met by people in the business. She took the job. And the people in the business said, [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] aren't you glad to be here and-- and out of there? And she'd say yes. And are you happy here? And she would start to cry and say, how can I be happy when my family is in jeopardy over there? Well, why don't you bring them out? She said, well, I-- I can't, but you can. And so she prevailed upon people to invite or employ as anything [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] 14 people, and my mother and sister and I are three of those 14. And she would barely eat, and save all her money, so she could put us into a room in a boarding house and-- and feed us in the beginning, until things looked up a little. 
INT: Were the other-- were the other people of the 14 members of your family as well? PM: Mostly. Perhaps all of them. I'd have to really go through them. It seems to me-- well, certainly my-- my aunt and uncle and their two children. Yes. I think they were-- possibly one boy who was from a family she knew well. But she didn't get all the family out. There were many more. And some of them were very-- more difficult, because if you have an older person, how are you going to get them invited or employed by people who don't know them. And of course, many people were told by my aunt-- I think almost all the host people, the inviting or employing people, were told-- you don't have to do anything. I will see to it that they have enough to eat, and that they have a roof over their head, because I've saved up money. And I will see to it that-- that takes place. And-- and she-- she did that.  INT: Did you have any trouble on the Austrian side getting out? PM: You had to line up at any number of offices, in the first place, to get your visa. In the second place to get a document to say that you had no lawsuits pending, and that you had no police [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] action pending against you and so forth. These things were disorganized and frequently abused. I-- I know, for instance, that some medical personnel, some doctors working for various embassies, where you needed a medical clearance, would abuse the women who came through on the premise that they had no choice because they wanted the visa. And people seem to have few scruples when it comes to exploiting the defenseless. And when you had it all together, they would frequently cancel the validity of the one or the other, and you'd have to start again from scratch, and people would line up all night and so on. Finally, I think there were daily rumors which was the best way to go, the safest. Because some were considered extremely hazardous, some of the borders. Well, the word when we were about to leave in August, at the end of August, was that the best way to go was to fly to Zurich. Unheard of-- nobody flew to Zurich, except you were some business tycoon. So we were to fly to Zurich from Vienna. And just as we were about to do so, a rumor came that a plane had been turned back, forced to fly to Germany, and everybody was arrested. 
INT: So what did you do? PM: Well, we changed, and we-- the word was you go all the way across Germany by the night train through Munich, Strasbourg-- Munich, Karlsruhe, Stuttgart, [NON-ENGLISH], Strasbourg, Paris. From the Austrian point of view, it was intimidating to travel across Germany. We didn't know that in Germany, the conditions were far better still than they were in Austria. Even though the Nazi regime had been in for several years, it was so gradual in Germany that people were in business, people were in public places, people went to theaters. In Austria, that was almost out of the question.  INT: And that was in August, you said, of what year? PM: I'm sorry?  INT: August? You said that was in August of 19-- PM: At the end of August in '38, '38.  INT: OK. And we'll continue on the next tape.  INT: November 10, 1996, interview with Peter Masters, tape number three. We were talking about your leaving Vienna in August of 1938. And you mentioned the night train through Germany. PM: Yes.  INT: Is that how you traveled? PM: Yes. And it was-- it-- it-- and it also had some of-- some sidelights. First of all, they took the heavy luggage and sealed it at the Westbahnhof, Vienna station. And a non-Jewish friend, a [? Baron ?] [? Capri, ?] went-- who was a friend of my mother's, went with her to have these suitcases examined and sealed. And there was a big shipping trunk. And he, I am told, in a handkerchief he carried some gold dust provided by my grandfather. And when they had finished looking at it, and were going over their rubber stamps, he sneezed, and then dropped his handkerchief into the suitcase that had already been examined-- the shipping trunk. And that didn't belong to us. It belonged to a whole group of people who lived on the proceeds of that gold dust. He wore a big swastika badge-- not a party member, but he bought the biggest one he could so that he would be less suspect at the station. And apparently that-- that worked. If-- if it's-- if it's-- or true the way I heard it. On the train, my mother and sister shared a sleeping compartment. And I shared one with an unknown man of whom I was terrified, because how do I know what kind of Nazi he is? You see, by this time we were paranoid. And around my neck. I wore a pendant that was a precious piece of jewelry. And sure enough, as I was getting undressed carelessly, displaying my-- my necklace, which had no-- no men or boys wore necklaces in those days, right, he said, isn't it odd for a boy to wear a-- a-- a pendant like that? And I said-- and I said, my grandmother gave it to me as a lucky charm for like whenever I travel. But boy was I scared. So then-- nothing came of that. He was obviously not a Nazi informant. I don't know. And we sat in the compartment approaching the frontier. And, of course, you are very tense. And there was a Frenchman in our compartment, a cartoon Frenchman, with a beret and a mustache, and about the age-- he could-- he could be my father. And the border people came through, Nazi-uniformed people, and [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] thought we were one family-- father, mother, and two children. And then the last one was the one who looked at the passports. The first one looked at the luggage and at the people. And he said, hey, they are not a family. These are a Frenchman and three Jews. Shall we start again from the top? And the leader of the group said, ah, screw it. Let's get on with it. And they walked out. And we got into France, and we opened a bottle of cognac. And the Frenchman, of course, got one. And my mother ceremoniously threw one out the window to celebrate our escape. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] It was very tense. Again, nothing happened. 
INT: Did you stay in France? PM: We stayed in France for a couple of weeks. My uncle had preceded us-- my mother's brother. And I arrived breathlessly in Paris and said, the Gestapo came to your house today after you left, and said, they'll get you no matter where you are. And he laughed and he said, let them try. And but he-- then he got serious, and he said, Paris is not far enough. And he bought himself a visa to Chile and went to Santiago with his wife. And, amazingly visionary at that time, in August of '38. And we went on to London. I arrived in London at Victoria Station, and immediately found my English was in serious trouble, because a little kid came up to me and said, 'Any fag cards, governor?' which you didn't understand either. All right. I said, I beg your pardon. I didn't quite understand what you said. Could you please repeat it slowly? And the boy looked at me, bug eyed, and ran away. What he was saying, after-- I memorized it and asked-- was fags are cigarettes. Fag cards are premium cards that come in cigarette packages of sports figures, aeroplanes, whatever. He collected the premium cards. Now the word 'governor' is anybody who is older than he. That's a-- a title. So 'Any fag cards, governor?' it means, 'any cigarette premium cards, sir?' And I didn't understand what it meant.  INT: Where did you live when you came to London? PM: In a boarding house at 77 Warrington Crescent in Maida Vale, in one room with a kitchen facility, sort of, in one corner, and everything on meters-- the bath water on meter, the electricity on meters. And if you didn't have any coins, it would kick off, and you'd have to go and get some coins, or sit in the dark, or not have a bath. 
INT: Who lived with you in-- in-- in there. PM: My mother, and my sister, and I.  INT: And how did you support yourself? PM: Well, my-- my aunt had saved up money to-- to feed us. My mother started to help out. My aunt, shortly afterwards-- she had been there for several months-- set up in business with a partner-- not with my mother at that time, but my mother worked there. I did volunteer work at the refugee committee at the Woburn House. And I'm not sure they gave me anything to eat, but at least I was sort of out of the way. And my aunt knew a lawyer who went to the cottage in the country on the Thames, and-- from a farmer. And he got me a job as a farmhand. So I worked as a farmhand for a year and a half. And my uncle in Santiago said, maybe I'll buy a ranch, and you are young enough to learn how to run it. But I found that that was unlikely, because the farmer said, you have to be born to be a farmer, and you're a city kid, and you're no good. So I tried, and it did me a lot of good, because I built myself up a bit. I-- I carried heavy sacks and bales, and did all kinds of things, and-- and chased after the cows in the fields and what have you to bring in the first herd in the morning at 4:30. And it was a toughening process. And-- and they fed me. And then towards the end they paid me minimally, like 10 shillings a week. At first I was just board and lodging. 
INT: Where were you when the war broke out in September of '39? PM: My-- my-- my sister and-- and a Boy Scout friend of mine who had arrived in England just a few days before, came to visit me on the farm. And we decided to hitchhike to Henley-on-Thames, which was seven miles-- no, four miles away. Four miles away. And we did that by displaying my sister to do this, and then we'd come out from behind the bushes in familiar fashion. And we went to-- to Henley. And as we arrived in Henley, there was a car radio, a parked car, and the car radio, and a crowd of people around. And we stepped over to see what was going on. And we heard Neville Chamberlain saying-- 'and that therefore a state of war exists between His Majesty's government and Germany.' The ultimatum about Poland having been broken. We knew it was coming, but we didn't realize it was coming there and then. So it was just over the bridge into Henley that we heard war was on. And shortly afterwards I had to leave the farm, because it was closed for non-citizens, a defense area. And I went to London, and I got a half-scholarship at an art school. And after two months the art school closed because the art school said there was an imminent danger of invasion. And I was taking my portfolio home on my bicycle. It was-- the art school was near Victoria. And my mother by that time had an apartment in-- in Hampstead. It was quite a distance. I cycled it every day, and-- right through downtown. And-- and the-- [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] I couldn't carry more but one portfolio on the bicycle. It's hard to ride with a portfolio. So I went back. I was going to go back the next day for the other half. But in the morning there was a knock at the door, and it was a policeman. And he said, you will have to come with me. And I had expected that that might happen, although it was a bit haphazard. These people had a list of how many bodies to bring in. And if somebody wasn't at home, they went to the next house, and sometimes they didn't get back to the first house for a longer time. So you could never tell. Anyhow, they took me to Hampstead police. And then to Lingfield Racecourse, which had been converted to an internment camp because racing was suspended for the duration of the war. And there I met my father. Well, actually I had met my father before, because when we were making hay on the-- at-- at the farm, which had the lovely name of Frogmill Farm, I saw a man walk down the lane during hay making in-- in the evening. And I thought, damn, it looks like my father, but it couldn't be. He is in Belgium-- my father having escaped, as soon as the Nazis took over, to Switzerland, and then to Belgium. And it was my father. And my father immediately, dramatically, took his jacket off and said, I'll help. And the farmer was not too happy, because he already had one of us. Now he had two. And so we were equally clumsy in his estimation. And he had to invite my father to dinner, because my father had come on a Polish steamer stowing away with the collusion of a ship's officer and hitchhiked to the farm without money. So the farmer invited him to dinner. And there was this big farm table with nine children and my father was sitting next to me, eating like he hadn't eaten in a long time. And that was embarrassing. But more-- more embarrassing was the fact that he nudged me and said, I think I'll make speech. And I said, no! And he-- it was too late. And he got up and said, first of all, ladies and gentlemen, let me thank you for your hostility. And I said, that's the wrong word! And he said, why? They're my hosts. Host-- hostility. I said, it doesn't work that way. Well, anyway, he had his meal, and then gave himself up to the police who interned him temporarily. Well, we are going to send him to Canada on the which was sunk. But he had a cold, so he stayed behind and survived and joined the Pioneer Corps before I did. 
INT: You said you were interned in Lingfield, Surrey. PM: I was interned in Lingfield, and my father was there. And my cousin came a-- a little later. And-- and then my classmate, [? Pippo ?] [? Hecht, ?] who we-- we had arranged a bridge game-- my-- my sister, my cousin, and my friend [? Pippo. ?] And three of us turned up in the camp that night-- not my sister. And we tried to stay together, but it didn't work, because they would fall you in the paddock every morning, and say, everybody under 21, over there. Everyone who has family here, over there. Well, I was under 21 and I had family, so I could pick which one I wanted to go to legitimately. And just sort of developed an eye, which was the better group, you see. But then they'd start sending these groups out some-- they were gone. And we tried to go together. And [? Pippo ?] went first. And we tried to go with him, but they wouldn't let us. We said he was my cousin. Didn't help. They sent him to Australia. So we didn't go to Australia. Then my father left. And you never found out where they went. They couldn't write to you, or if they did, it took forever. And then I wanted to go, and managed to get on the next transport. And he had gone to the Isle of Man, but to Central Camp. I went to the Isle of Men to Hutchinson Camp. They didn't care, you know. I mean, it-- it was not organized. So we never knew of each other. But my father was agitating to get us both together. So they transferred him to Huyton, near Liverpool, even farther away from me. He succeeded in getting me sent from Hutchinson Camp to Huyton. And we met again in Huyton and lived in the same house, until my mother underwent optional surgery and got a customer to write to-- to send a telegram to the camp commandant that Peter Arany, a Boy Scout for 10 years and very reliable, is desperately needed on compassionate grounds by his mother, who is having major surgery, which was an overstatement. And this woman was a niece of Viscount Samuel, and the chief Girl Scout of Great Britain. And that evidently carried enough weight to spring me temporarily out of internment. 
INT: Could you just go back a little and explain why you were interned? PM: Why? Because Austrians were enemy aliens. And when we first came, we were horrified at the unpreparedness we saw compared to the armor and aeroplanes we had seen displayed as German air and land power in-- in Austria. Of course, the Germans were showing off in Austria to intimidate. And they have planes probably circling just out of sight, and it looked like there were thousands of planes, when probably they had 30 or whatever. And they flew low enough you could see the insignia good and clear. And tanks were rolling. And characteristically, you know, when you have a parade in a civilized country, they make a gap every now and again, and the police lets people cross to the other side who have business on the other side. They made a point of not doing that, so crowds gathered on top of the crowds that would have gathered anyway out of curiosity or enthusiasm, of people who couldn't get to the other side. And everybody was packed. And-- and-- and the front ones were cheering, you know. And you've you've seen all the films. I'm not apologizing for them. They were-- they thought this was a winning thing. Well, so the-- the-- the-- when we first told the British, as we felt we must, that this was going on, the refugee committee tried to quieten us, because we were spreading alarm and despondency. And they said, we must be courteous to our hosts, and we should not damage their furniture and property, and speak softly-- especially at night. And I have the card still that says that. And the a conservative newspaper, printed, I think, a man by the name of Ward Price printed articles saying these refugees are spreading alarm about alleged atrocities, which will ruin our relations with our good friends the Germans. And the same journalist wrote, when the war started, how do we know they are not all spies? Lets intern all of them, because anybody can say they are a refugee. So we were enemy aliens, because the Austrian government had not gone into exile as the Czech government had, as the French government had. So there was no representation. And in any case, perhaps they didn't go into exile because of the large portion of the population that enthusiastically welcomed Hitler, thinking he was the messiah. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] So we were suspect. And-- and we couldn't really blame them, except it was clumsily done. And some people who were perhaps spies had good cover stories and were not interned, whereas the innocent had no cover stories or alibis, and we were certainly interned-- mostly men from 16 to, I would say, 50 or so. And-- and in some cases it was extremely humane internment. It depended on the local commanding officer. In Lingfield, the commanding officer ran three kitchens-- regular, vegetarian, kosher. No army regulation demanded that. He did that out of the kindness of his heart. And my father immediately advised me to eat in all of them. 
INT: [LAUGHS] When you were interned, were you ever interned with non-Jewish men-- PM: Oh, yes.  INT: --as well? PM: Oh, yes. In-- in the house in-- in-- on the Isle of Man, it was different. There we were not always, because we were in boarding houses, and each house managed for itself. We got rations. And we were lucky. I was in house number one. House number one had the former owner of a hotel in Innsbruck. He was Jewish. But he-- in the hotel business you learn everything from the bottom up. He was very valuable, because he learned you can cook. You know? Then we had what in Austria is called a sugar baker, a pastry cook-- a non-Jewish, who would say, if you are willing to go without porridge, I'll make you delicious cookies, and made us oatmeal cookies. Then we had a couple of doctors. One I was very worried about when he came because he was an older man with a long white beard, from Munich, a Dr. [? Scholney. ?] I don't think he was Jewish. And I said, is-- is-- doctor, is there anything I can do for you, because it was kind of rough, you know, very primitive. And he said, as long as you can find me a chamber pot or its substitute, I will live quietly and happily in my room. So that was fine. There was a German doctor with a big saber scar who-- who was clearly not a Jew. And it was a mixture. 
INT: What were relations like between the Jewish and non-Jewish internees? PM: I am told that in some-- some camps there were some fights.  INT: But what did you see? PM: In our camp there were none that I can recall at all, perhaps because, well, I don't know. The-- people tended to be on their best behavior to each other and in view of the authorities. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] In some camps they had actual Nazi prisoners-- sailors that had been captured, what have you. We didn't have that. We had some extremely talented people, and the British being a sporting nation, and-- and to some extent a gambling nation, horse-traded inmates. For instance, soccer stars were traded for chefs. There was a very popular piano team at that time called Rawicz and Landauer, two guys playing on pianos. Rawicz was in one camp, and Landauer was in the other. And the two commanding officers were out-bidding each other, because both of them wanted both. And the one who finally got both, I think, had to give up his best chef or whatever.  INT: And how long were you interned? PM: I was interned only two month. And-- and-- it-- you see, I had no immediate responsibilities. So it was not bad for me, although at times it was a-- a little rough. But people who had families outside, of course, suffered. If anything, I was less of a burden to my family being in there, and-- than if I had been outside. But there were some exceedingly rough moments. In Lingfield I volunteered to peel potatoes, because I felt I'm young, and why should some of these old guys have to peel potatoes when they asked for a certain number. So I peeled potatoes and peeled potatoes. And after I came off, I found that everybody else had been allowed to get to their little suitcase that they had brought with them, all of which had been locked up in a shed. But they had opened it, so they could take out their shaving kit and their toothbrushes and whatever they needed for the first night. And that was past. So I went to the nearest soldier, and I said, hey, I volunteered to peel potatoes, so I missed getting my stuff out for the night. And he said, tough shit, you know. And I said, no, wait a minute. That doesn't seem fair. I did something altruistic, and now I'm being punished for having volunteered. And he said, yeah. And I said, I-- I-- I think I have the right to my things like everybody else. And he said, 'the right'? And he pulled his Smith and Wesson, and held it against my head. And I said-- and he said, I have the right to shoot you if I want to. You have no rights at all. And I [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] at-- at-- whatever I was, 17 years old, started to cry out of-- a-- a-- a fury. And guys pulled me away and so on. And the guy was showing off. He was a member of the Queen's own Royal West Camp Regiment, in which I later became a sergeant. [LAUGHS] 
INT: And when did you get out of the internment camp? When was that? PM: Just in time for the air raids in London. And it-- it must have been '40, I guess. And, yeah, it was '40. And I expected to be out, until my mother came home from the hospital. My mother was already home from the hospital, and they forgot me out. And I got a job with a friend's-- sort of friend who had connection, worked at the Polish publishing house. And then I was-- a detective came one day during an air raid, and said, how is your mother? And I said, fine. I mean, not very well yet. And I said, here she is. And that's a long story, which my wife doesn't want me to tell you, I'm sure. The fact is that-- that the-- the-- that was a big air raid at that moment, and we all ducked under the table, and he became very much friendlier after that. And he said, I mean, he-- they had been following my mother to see whether she had been to work yet. You would think they'd have better things to do in the middle of a war, but they did that. And when-- when this happened, my mother had a-- a seizure, a fit from the excitement of the bomb, which shook the building. And-- and we were all under the table. And-- and she started to scream. And-- and-- and he said, I can see she's not well. She better-- get her a drink. And I got her a brandy. And having refused a drink when he first came in, because he was on duty, he said, I think I'll have one now too. And then I told him that they had just lowered the age limit for the army, and I had enlisted, and I was being called up anytime soon. And he said, why didn't you tell me? And I said, you didn't ask. And I went to the Pioneer Corps, which was an unarmed labor unit in-- in Bradford, shortly afterwards, to be trained. 
INT: When you say the Pioneer Corps was an unarmed labor unit, did it consist of refugees, or anyone, or what was it? PM: Not only. It was called the AMPC, Auxiliary Military Pioneer Corps. It consisted of superannuated soldiers-- so third-string soldiers. It had some Q-companies. Q, we thought was we were told stood for 'queer,' but it didn't mean queer homosexual. It meant queer mentally, not quite competent. And-- and they weren't. You could tell. And then they had some alien companies. And we were in the alien companies with British non-commissioned officers. Gradually some of us became non-commissioned officers. I never did. I was a private. And towards the end of a couple of years, the first alien officers appeared in the Pioneer Corps. And by this time, of course, everybody was trying-- everybody who wanted to be an activist, as I did more than anything, wanted out, and volunteered for everything, and usually didn't get an interview, because somewhere there was maybe a bureaucrat, who said if you've been interned, you're a suspect. So you didn't get an interview. And finally I came home from work unloading trains, shoveling coal. And there was this little notice on the bulletin board saying, anyone wishing to do special and hazardous duty, come to the office at 2 o'clock. And I, of course, went on principle. And there was a man sitting literally in disguise-- that is to say with a raincoat with no rank insignia, with shades, which in the British army are not worn like in the American army, and a nondescript badge on his cap-- behind an improvised table. And he said, why do you want to do it? And I said, I lived under the Nazis for six months. And that's quite enough reason. And he said, can you shoot? Can you handle a boat? And do you know anything about radio? And I said I know nothing about radio. I can shoot a BB gun. 
INT: We'll continue. Thank you.  INT: November 10th, 1996, interview with Peter Masters, tape number four. We were talking about when you volunteered for hazardous duty. First of all, when was that, approximately? PM: I'm bad with dates. I'd almost have to look it up. I believe it was probably in the early fall of '42, I would think. And-- and he asked whether I knew anything about the radio, about shooting, and about boats. And I said nothing about radio. And I'd been shooting on the farm. We used to put matches in cracks in the floor, and shoot them with a BB gun at 20 feet. That's pretty good shooting, but it's not quite the same thing. And about boats, I said, I had never been on a sailboat, but I had-- that I rowed a lot, and I knew how to handle a kayak or [? fold ?] boat, because my father had one. And I-- I said, I'm a quick learner, and I'm very, very keen. And he said, you will hear from us. And a few others were also sent-- rather few. I knew of one young chap who went in, and when he asked-- he was asked what-- why he wanted to do this, he said, I've always been interested in doing cloak-and-dagger-type work. And the-- the man said, I'm afraid we won't have any use for you, [? because ?] he didn't want people who were of that disposition, I guess. Then, the call came very shortly afterwards-- I think couple of weeks. And some of us were sent to London, to the Grand Central Hotel on Melbourne Road near Baker Street-- an old, big, brick building. And there we were interviewed in the basement by a team of people. A-- a British cavalry-looking officer, with great big mustache. You know, they say the only good mustaches are the ones you can see from behind. And-- at the desk. And then there was a-- a corporal who was sitting at another table, and a slight civilian who was sitting in the background, who would get up once in a while and bring a piece of paper to the man at the-- the officer, the captain at the desk. And it turned out, allegedly, that this one was one of the top three people in MI5 which is British Intelligence. And he was feeding him questions and points. And the questions were pretty basic, but-- but as we learned, subsequently, techniques of questioning, it was interesting to see that they did a rather good job. And it would start off like the questions you asked me in the beginning, and then it would say, well, what did your father do? And I would say, my father was a jeweler.
And then he would say, and what newspapers do you read? And I would say, non-committally the the the the And he would say, and your-- your politics? Well, the newspapers indicate that to a certain extent, but not really. And I would say, as a guest of Great Britain-- remembering the card I had received, it doesn't behoove me to meddle in the politics of my host country. And he said, oh, yes, of course. And what did you say your father did? And I said, I told you my father is a jeweler. Oh, of course. And-- and-- and what newspaper? I said, we've just covered that. He said, you-- yes, and what are your political orientations? And so, this would go around and round, until you felt, well, I have nothing to hide, and maybe I will tell him whatever there is to be told-- otherwise he thinks I'm a fool, or I'm trying to hide something. Which is, of course, where he wanted you to be. One guy came out and said-- one of our guys-- and said-- we were all waiting outside in this corridor. And he said, ooh, they asked me a tough question. And I said, what was that?-- just before I was called in. You see, I wanted to prepare myself. And he said, they asked me which of my qualities I'm most proud of. And I said, oh, my god, what did you say? And he-- we-- he giggled and said, I said, my good looks. And oddly enough, they kept him, and happily, they never asked me-- although I was prepared fully, and I would have said my-- my ability to bounce back in adverse situations. [LAUGHS] So then they sent us back to the Pioneer Corps, briefly. But it wasn't-- the sting had gone out of it, you know. You knew it was going to be for a short time. And then they sent us to North Wales. We didn't really know where. We were on a plane, six of us-- not all from the same unit, some had come from elsewhere. We were gathered in-- in-- in Bradford, in Yorkshire, where we had first joined up. And we arrived in Merionethshire in-- there's a little railroad going through there, and into the mountains. And we came to a place on the seaside, and there is a stop called Dovey Junction. And there, suddenly, a whole slew of people in green berets got on the train, and some of them turned out to be people who had previously disappeared from the Pioneer Corps, and not communicated. And they were all commandos. And there were lots of questions back and forth, what's it-- what's going on in the Pioneer Corps, or what's going on here? Have you guys been in action yet? Have you been on any raids-- because that's what commandos did at the time.
And we were driven up to a-- a house, a mansion-- which was ours skipper's billet-- the skipper being Captain Bryan Hilton-Jones, who was the man with the shades and the disguise who had interviewed us. And we were told we would change our names and be given a fake identity immediately. And we-- we-- we would have to invent a story-- we had been picked for an initiative, and-- and so forth. And so-- they-- their part was to back us 100% in whatever lies we made up-- why we had an accent, where it came from when we were really British and Church of England. And I was going to be Peter [? Arlen ?] to keep my name more or less intact. And we were called in alphabetically, and the first person being called in was Abramovic-- a Viennese boy. And he came out, and said, gentlemen, let me introduce myself. My name is Richard [? Arlen. ?] And I said, you bastard, you stole my name. And he said, yes. I said, you heard me say I was going to pick that name, didn't you? And-- and he-- he-- he said, yes, they called me in first. And I liked the name, so I took it. He say, you want to make something of it? And I knew [? Arlen ?] very well, because he had told me before that he had been a finalist in the European youth welterweight championships in Brussels. And that-- that-- it had helped me a lot, because when I was running to get ready for the commandos-- still in the Pioneer Corps-- I damaged my leg by overdoing it. And he massaged it, because I had to play soccer for the company. And so in between soccer and cross-country running, he always repaired my leg. And after each event, of course, country running or soccer matches, I couldn't walk. It would return. But he knew how to massage people. And so he and I became thick friends, and I picked another name. Couldn't think of another 'A' in a hurry. And [? Arlen ?] said he didn't fight anymore, because he didn't want to start to look like a pugilist. And he-- of course, he already did. So he hadn't noticed that it was too late. He said, I'm really a poet. And he would read me dreadful poems. But he was enormously brave, to the point of sometimes one would have to question-- I mean, we were encouraged, in a certain cowboy attitude. But I mean he would do things like-- we learned how to wreck trains, or how to run trains in case we captured trains. And so we were in a railroad yard, and there was an electric rail, and we had rubber-soled boots. And he said, I wonder whether they would insulate you if you stepped on them. And they did-- and they didn't. The-- it-- the metal screws in the rubber sole, apparently, were some conduit. How he survived, I don't know-- he jumped, I saw him, he jumped very high into the air, and looked very green and shaken. And he said, I guess that didn't work. But it's the sort of thing he would do. 
INT: What did you do in the commandos? PM: Hmm?  INT: What did you do in the commandos? PM: Well, we ran our guts out. We were-- we-- everything was running and shooting and explosives. And-- and then special information on the German army, which we learned diligently, most of us. And it was wonderful, from our point of view. The big thing was to-- not to be kicked out. Being kicked out was called RTU-- Return To Unit, because we were all volunteers. And you were RTUed for a number of reasons. Not being able to keep up would be a prime one. Not being able to subordinate yourself to the system-- if you complained about the non-com officer, or officer, or whatever, who punished you unreasonably. These were not punishments. These were part of the toughening process. So if you went to the skipper and said, Sergeant so-and-so is making me do this, he would say, you don't have to do it-- but on the other hand, if you can't fit in, then you'd better go back to your unit. And so such complaints didn't exist. You just-- you didn't want to be kicked out. You wanted to stay in. So you ran until-- well, you-- no, you see, after a while, you were on your second breath-- well, we ran on our seventh breath, and there was no falling out. Falling out was permitted only if you fainted. People did. That annoyed the skipper. The skipper would say, if this was a real thing, and somebody fainted, would you leave him behind? No, you wouldn't. So from here on out, if anybody collapses, you bring him along. Well, when you're on a seven-mile run, with weapons, and equipment, and ammunition, you see somebody faltering, you take his weapon, for a start-- if you are fit enough to do so. And then, if that doesn't help him for more than a quarter mile, you take him in the middle of two guys and put his arm over your shoulders, and tell him to please not drag his feet, but pedal his feet so there isn't so much friction. And we would do that. And after you do that for half a mile, we would need two people to drag the draggers-- to drag him. And when we finally stopped-- well, before we stopped, it was customary that the officer in the lead would sprint to show that you still had it in you to sprint. Not everybody would do that, but we had some good athletes. We had a guy who said he was going to break the four-minute mile, and he would have if he hadn't been killed before he had a chance. So it would challenge the skipper in the last sprint, and he would get beaten [? out ?] at times, although he was a great athlete. But so were some other guys. So after the last sprint, everybody would have fallen in, tidy up, and he would give us instructions and then dismiss. And then as soon as he was gone, the column would collapse. 
INT: What was the composition of this commando unit? Was it refugees only? Or were others in it? PM: Well, the management, at first-- I mean, there was the skipper, who was a Welshman and a Cambridge language major. Accent-free German and French. And then there was a second in command, Jimmy [? Monahan, ?] who was an Irish poet. These people became so much part of us, that we would consider them as being us. There was an-- another officer, a-- a [? Emmett, ?] who wore tan-colored badge on his beret-- you wear your own badge on the beret in the British commandos-- and Royal Air Force wings. So he must have had a very colorful history, I never learned what it was. He didn't speak much. Gradually, all-- all the non-coms and so on were-- from the beginning-- were refugees, were us. The Sergeant Major-- troop Sergeant Major, Oscar O'Neill, formerly [? Henshaw, ?] was a commando, troop sergeant major. I was a private. And people who came with rank generally had to relinquish it-- because commando is a new ballgame. And before D-Day, I was promoted to lance corporal, which was a big deal. I was second in command of my detachment of six people. The-- the composition were people who were German, Austrian, or Hungarian refugees, generally. And to be refugees, they were mostly Jewish-- although some of them were political refugees. And then there were a few people where nobody knew exactly what they were. And I subsequently found out that one of them was a Danish merchant seaman who spoke reasonable German-- not very good German, not as well as the rest of us. Then there were a few guys who were Jews from Sudeten German-- from Czechoslovakia. They could have joined the Czech army if they were Czech citizens, but perhaps they weren't, or perhaps they didn't want to-- being Jewish Sudeten people. Then there were-- but mostly Germans, Austrians, and Hungarians. The-- [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] as-- as I say, some political, and some who knows what. We didn't genuinely speak about it too much, although security was never 100%, because people went on leave and they-- in uniform, and their families, you know, were there, and friends. Although, I'm told that my friend, Ken Bartlett, went on leave. He was from Munich, he was half-Jewish, a musician. And somebody met him who had been in the Pioneer Corps with him and said, [? Karl ?] [? Billmann! ?] And Bartlett supposedly, said, you must be mistaken. I-- I-- you don't-- I don't know you, and walked on, you know. But you couldn't do that across the board. But there were also stories that just before D-Day somebody doubted who we were, and that somebody outside the barbed wire enclosure where we were encamped before D-Day supposedly said, I know who all you chaps are-- refugees-- Jewish refugees. And supposedly was arrested and not released until a few weeks after D-Day. That could be an apocryphal story. I don't know. But that's what I heard, among other things. 
INT: You mentioned D-Day. Did you participate in that invasion? PM: I participated in D-Day. It was my first action. But, of course, other people had been-- the very-- in the very beginning, five people went to Dieppe on the raid, and two of them came back, and the other three-- I never knew. It's before my time. And-- and I-- stories differ, that they were captured and executed. That they were-- they certainly didn't come back. Two of them did come back, and I've talked to them about Dieppe, and so on. Then, there were other raids on which people participated. Some of them--  INT: I want to talk about the raids that you participated in. PM: That I-- my first action was D-Day. There were some others planned, and often they did not materialize. The weather was bad, the RAF called it off, the Navy called it off. These were combined operations. So we trained vigorously for D-Day in teams that were predetermined. And on D-- D-Day, two commando brigades went in, Number 1 and Number 4. And each one had four subunits of commandos, and each of the subunits and headquarters had some of our people-- usually teams of five or six. And I was in a team of six that went to-- with Number 6 Commando-- on Sword Beach, subunit of Sword Beach. This was alphabetical-- Queen Red was the right portion of the Queen Beach-- Red and Queen. So I landed on Queen Red, Sword Beach, which is the left-most of the whole invasion facing the land. Was the bicycle troop of Number 6 Commando-- Number 1, troop 6 Commando. Captain Robinson commanded it. I was the only foreigner in that unit-- and, of course, not known to be a foreigner. And we landed on a LCI. We were trained parachutists, but we-- and had qualified by jumping at the school-- but only, I think, one person somewhere jumped [? liaison. ?] The rest of us came by landing craft. The landing crafts were-- were not the kind with a ramp that comes down like this, but a single ramp with a handrail, and a very steep kind of plank is what you went out on. We embarked on the day before in the-- in the mid-afternoon, and sailed all night to assemble, and then landed at dawn. And the Navy commander of the craft would not let us come up on deck when we want-- we wanted to watch. And he let us up only when we were absolutely running in. He was extremely competent and conscientious. Not everybody was that good. He ran the boat practically aground. And this was very important, because we were loaded down with stuff.
Everybody carried an extra payload, and carried everything, and lots of ammunition. My extra payload was a 200-foot mountaineering hemp rope, in case the bridges, which were our first objective, our main objective, were destroyed by the enemy. I would have had to swim across with one end of the rope, and tie it up on the other side. And other people carried inflatable rubber dinghies, and they were going to ferry 2,000 people across the river, and then across the parallel canal, to get to the high ground on the other side. When the bridges were taken intact by the guiders of the 6th Airborne Division, with whom we-- to whom we were attached, I could dump my rope, and travel relatively light-- or lighter-- for the rest of the way, which was to a place called Varaville-- V-A-R-A-V-I-L-L-E. It's mentioned in the Bayeux tapestry. It's an ancient village. And we were to hold it until further notice. It was taken by a Canadian para-unit that came in by parachute, and moved out with prisoners as soon as we arrived. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] We had no time to dig defenses, so we took the German position over-- which one doesn't like to do, because, of course, they know exactly where it is. We also had to blow up a few small culverts, because we didn't want tanks to come over those culverts, coming the other way. But some of the guys with the explosive hadn't made it, so it was a question of how to do it-- go for broke with what we had, or do it in installments? The captain decided to go for broke, and then go in with pickaxes-- we carried full-size pickaxes and spades, because we didn't trust the army entrenching tool, because we knew we'd have to dig fast. And did we ever have to dig fast. I dug, chest-deep, a foxhole-- a chest-deep foxhole four times in one night. I mean, four foxholes, because each time we had to change position. On-- on D-Day, we had no choice of changing position. We were out of radio contact, we were posted missing, and our orders were to stay until further orders. Now, here comes one of the training things that really worked. The Germans had failed to destroy a small anti-tank cannon, electrically operated, that was in a turret in the ground. Commandos, army commandos, are volunteers from different army units. It so happened that by sheer chance, one of the volunteers in 1 troop 6 Commando, the bicycle troop, was a bombardier of the Royal Artillery-- so he knew about shooting cannons. We all had learned it, but he really had done it.
So the Germans being-- the Nazis being Germans, had methodically written instructions for use on the gun. And I had learned about the gun, but I wouldn't have known it in such detail. I'd never seen one. So here was this lovely gun, and I translated the inscriptions to the guy. And they had left a map, a [? code key ?] with sketches-- 750 meters to the bushy top tree over there. So far to the spire over there. So far to the fringe of the forest. You didn't have to [? range-- ?] you-- you-- you could just read what it said. And he said, ah, I-- I see how this thing works. And we went to Captain Robinson, who said, you two guys-- not I, he and his buddy-- are excused digging and exploding culverts. You just drive on with the gun. And the bombardier said, can we-- can we fire it, sir, to practice? And he said, you're out of your damn mind. You'll bring down the whole German artillery on us. Dry run until I say go. Well, out of radio contact, posted missing, during the night the counter-attack started. In battalion strength, we were 30. Some of the guys started to shoot back a little too soon, and were immediately killed-- four people-- instead of holding their fire longer. But they [? arranged ?] and missed us. Then they zeroed in, because they knew where the position was, and mortared. And one mortar bomb, and the-- the captain gave the order to fire, and the guy fired away like crazy. Oh, we only had armor-piercing shells, but it didn't make any difference-- at oncoming Germans. And he fired away. And then a mortar bomb fell on the turret. And we thought, this certainly is our end. And all was quiet. And after a couple of minutes he resumed firing. He had heard the mortar coming. It-- it sort of hisses. And he and his buddy threw themselves down inside the turret. The thing exploded on the fringe, and spattered sideways, and not down. And he was unhurt, and without a doubt saved our survival. I mean, at 6:00 in the morning, we got our emergency procedure. We got a message that they couldn't hear us. But they said, if you receive this, get out of there immediately. Come back to [NON-ENGLISH], meaning headquarters. Avoid the village of Bréville on the way back-- it was right behind us. It has been retaken by the enemy. So we circumvented it. They saw us and started shelling us, and injured four more people, three more people on the way back. And we made it back just in time for the big counter-attack on the main position. And so it went. 
INT: Other than translating the instructions on the cannon, did the British army take advantage of your knowledge of German? PM: Yes, of course we were primarily-- instant-interrogating prisoners. Normally, you have to wait four days until the intelligence people report back. We could do it on the spot. If you say, this is an advance unit of an armored unit that usually comes four hours behind its advance, that doesn't do you any good four days later. Whereas our information was instant and-- and valuable. And we understood how they were organized, what it meant, what their insignia meant, what the documents meant. That worked very well. Also, there was deception. My friend Harry [? Nunberg, ?] Harry [? Drew ?] in the army, was challenged on a patrol, because we became specialists in reconnaissance. It had nothing to do with speaking German. It had to do with our willingness to do it; our eagerness to do it. We volunteered for all such ventures. And Harry was challenged by a German sentry. And said, in Prussian, haven't the fucking signalists told you that we are coming? And they said, no. And he said, well, isn't that like them? And the sentry said, well, come in and be recognized. And Harry said, how do I know who you are? You come out and be recognized. And took him prisoner, and brought him back across the River Maas-- this being in Holland.  INT: November 10, 1996. Interview with Peter Masters, tape number five. We were talking about your experiences in the Commandos and-- and D-Day. And once you were on the continent, did you liberate any Jewish people? PM: No. Not to-- to-- no. I didn't-- never had the opportunity. We liberated slave workers who were Poles, Frenchmen, Ukrainians, and so forth. The-- reaching back a moment though, the thing-- the point I-- I-- I am extremely keen on making is that people, I feel, should know that this myth about everybody going like lambs to the slaughter is just that, a myth. Firstly, there was resistance in some of the camps, as you know. Secondly, there was the Warsaw ghetto uprising. There were partisans in the forest and so on. But I consider what we did resistance, because we could have been victims and laid back and said enough already. We got out, and that's it. But enough of us or some of us had enough activist spirit left that we wanted to do this badly. And it was hard to-- to be allowed to do it. And again, when we talk about the lambs to slaughter bit, how-- how can you fault people in concentration camps for not being more active in-- in an uprising or something? Anyone who has ever fasted on Yom Kippur knows that towards evening, you feel headachy and-- and a little bit weak.
And people used to have smelling salts in the-- in the synagogue and so on. Now, if you've been through a week, a month, or several months of Yom Kippurs, of being completely undernourished, you have neither the spirit nor the physical capability of making a plan, leave alone of carrying it out. I've-- I've always been astonished at this German mixture of competence and incompetence. Because for instance, in Sobibor, I understand they imprisoned Russian officers together with Jewish inmates. The Russian officers said that even though they were underfed as much as the Jews, had the advantage that they were highly trained people. So they could lead a-- a-- an uprising much more easily than somebody spontaneously. Well, we tried to contribute whatever we could. And as far as personal things, every now and again, the training really paid off, as it did in some of the examples I've cited. And then later, when we went back from Normandy, where we were for three months, having been told we'd only do the initial assault for two weeks, but you don't let an elite force go if you have them. So then we went home, trained reinforcements. The reinforcements weren't ready. The Germans were threatening to break through. They shipped us out to Holland, 16 of us. In the meantime, somewhere in Italy or somewhere in Yugoslavia, and in-- in Albania of our troop. Now, we were-- we shipped out again and went on the [? Maas ?] and then got ready for the-- we mopped up in the [? Maas ?] area and liberated a few villages. Then we-- we were preparing for the assault across the line. We did a night river crossing in Buffalos-- that's amphibious tracked vehicles-- and speedboats. And at the town of Wesel, which we captured. It's a big town. We had over 1,000 prisoners in that town. Put them all in a bomb crate. There was two guys with Tommy guns on top, watching the whole bunch and keeping them below the lid. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] As we took the town, I was to be with my colonel. That was Colonel Gray of 45 Royal Marine Commando, to whom I was then attached. And we were hit by a Panzer fist. That's a German anti-tank weapon with a beehive hollow charge. And the two guys were in the rubble of the bombed buildings and were shooting it against us. Not against tanks. There were no tanks. So it blew us over. And Colonel Gray, who was that far in front of me, had his arm very badly injured and-- and [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] needed medical attention swiftly and so forth. In the meantime, our front unit of 45 Marine Commando had captured a very unusual German patrol of an officer and two senior sergeants or engineers.
When you capture engineers, you're always a bit nervous, because you think they're going to blow up something under you and so on. So you-- I interrogated them, together with my friend, Ian Harris. And we had a set up like a table with a blanket on it. And I had them marched in to shake them up. Because they had just been captured. And here was the setup, like they don't expect to be immediately interrogated in fluent German. You see? And being higher ranks, they were, of course, briefed to say name, rank, and serial number. And two of them-- and my first question was always what's your regiment, because they are not supposed to answer that. But if you have them fresh enough and shaking enough, it works sometimes. So I said, what's your regiment? I'll give you my name, rank, and serial numbers. And take them out. The next one, same thing. The third one was being arrogant. And he said, I didn't belong to a regiment. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] You know, teasing me. And I said, OK. A division. He said, I didn't belong to a division. You know, like, figure that one out. And I suddenly remembered in training that on a certain page in the German pay book it says-- it sometimes has a stamp that says ZBV, which means [NON-ENGLISH], for special usage. And these are army-level, non-divisional, non-regimental troops. So I casually looked through his pay book, like I was toying with it. And sure enough, there it was, ZBV stamp, because the Germans, big with stamps, you know. And I said, OK. Let's start with [NON-ENGLISH]. And he jumped. And he said, I'm not saying another word. I said, that's fine. Take him out. Bring back the first guy. The first guy came back in. And of course, you separate them. First guy came back in. And I said, [NON-ENGLISH]. [GASPS] How do you know that? I said, your buddy just told us the whole thing. You know, we're corroborating. Because if he is lying to mislead us, he's in bad trouble. So I said, we have a lot of people here who were bombed in London with your V weapons, and they are very, very loose on-- on their conduct. We try to restrain them, of course. But-- So when he stopped talking, I got the third one in with the same spiel. And it-- it worked. And-- and then I started to play a game. I had-- I knew they had been captured coming on a railway embankment in our direction. And I wanted to know why. Why? What were they going to do? So I said, you-- you were walking along the railway embankment, past [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] the factory.
And he-- by this time, he thought I knew everything, right? So I said, before the factory, you came past the-- that church on the right. He said, that's right. You know, we're-- we're now playing a game that I know everything, and he is confirming that. Isn't it amazing? So we went backwards. And all I'd done is memorize the map in the direction in which he had come along the railway embankment. And I finally-- there was a village at the far end. And I said, you came through the village of such and such. Now, at this time, I'm not looking at the map doing any of this. You know. And he said, not through the village, from the village. [LAUGHS] Which is, of course, what I wanted to know. So mixing them up, bringing one in, taking one out, and handing over to my friend, Ian Harris, who is [NON-ENGLISH] of Vienna. Whenever I ran shorter for questioning, he'd throw one in from the side. And there were two guys speaking fluent German, you know. We found out that they had come to check whether the bridges were properly blown, and that's why there were engineers. And we didn't need that damn bridge. We had our own, waiting up in an arm of the Rhine. But I knew where they had come from. And being army-level troops, there was a reasonable chance they were near the headquarters of the counter-attack force. So I hurried to the injured Colonel Gray, who was in the next cellar. We were in a cellar. And as I walked past our cellars, other compartment, there were our signalers with aerials sticking out through a kind of skylight at pavement level. And they were talking. And I said, who are you talking to? And they said, the artillery on the other side of the line. And I said, what are they shooting at? And he said, routine tasks. We don't have anything. And I said, I've got one for you. [LAUGHS] And I gave him a six-figure map reference, which is about as precise as you get. And I said, if you don't have anything to shoot at, have them should at that. And how big a target can you command. This is army language, and it means-- and he said, uncle and victory. That means the artillery of the whole bloody army. [LAUGHS] And I said. Let it rip. And they passed it on. And I thought I'd better rush to legitimize what I'm doing. I-- I was a sergeant then. I had no authority to shoot the artillery of the whole army. So I-- Colonel Gray had left instructions that if he passed out, he had to have-- he wanted a bucket of water thrown over him to bring him around. He didn't want to relinquish command in the middle of a-- a-- an attack like this, a battle like this. And so I said, may I have a word with you, sir? And he said, sure, Masters. And I said, I have enemy information, not 100%, where enemy counter-attack headquarters might be. He said, great. Get the artillery on it. And I said, I've already done that, sir. And at that moment, there was a distant miles across the river, a rumble. And then there was [WHISTLES], and then the ground shook, even though this was miles away. And I never knew what I hit, but no massive counter-attack materialized. Now, I can't take responsibility for that. I-- I would like to. But I really don't know what or whether. But it seemed the reasonable thing to do. And it was entirely based on that entry in the pay book, which we learned page by page, the German pay book, you see? So that was very, very satisfying. 
INT: Where were you on VE Day? PM: On VE Day, after the Rhine crossing, [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] the-- the skipper, Bryan Hilton Jones, was no longer in charge because we did a patrol in Normandy, six of us and he and three French underground civilians, a rather risky thing, because these would be considered spies, and we would be considered aiding and abetting spies. Well, the skipper was hit and-- in the stomach, almost killed, and taken prisoner. The rest of us had dispersed and made it back as per training. And the leader of the French underground got so excited that-- of the local underground-- that when they challenged him on coming back, he couldn't remember the password and was shot by the French commandos. Shame-- a terrible thing to happen. But he thought he is with the British, and they will know the password, but we had to spread out when we were fired at. And so he was alone, and he couldn't think of the password, which was an English word. You know. So they shot him. So the skipper was taken prisoner and made friends with a German doctor, who operated and-- and gave him a special diet and actually said that he was not moveable when-- when-- when we advanced. And we captured [NON-ENGLISH], where he was in the hospital, and the German doctor had arranged it. He could be left behind. And so he was liberated, which was marvelous. But he was an invalid out of the army. And so at this time, one of our own guys was in charge, James [? Griffith, ?] alias [? Kurt ?] [? Garza, ?] whose father was a doctor in the Spanish war on-- on the anti-Franco side. We had some people who were on the pro-Franco side. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] The-- [? Kurt ?] [? Garza ?] was James [? Griffith, ?] and he and I did a number of patrols together-- a couple, just he and I. And he thought highly of me. And after the Rhine crossing, he said, I'm going to send you for a commission. And I said, James, now? You know, it's-- it's spring of '45. And he said, [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] you know how British society is? It would be good to have been a British officer. And I said, I'm not arguing that. But right now, I-- I don't want to go away. And I'm a sergeant, and it's the best of all worlds. I-- I live well, and-- and-- and I don't have to worry about being pushed around as a junior officer. You know? I'm-- I'm a senior sergeant. And he said, I think you should go.
And I resisted, but he persuaded me with the help of the Brigade major, Sir [NON-ENGLISH], who has since been knighted and died in Scotland. And I went to cadet school. And I became an officer. By this time, the Commandos were disbanding. I was sent to West Africa, first to the unit in which I was commissioned, the Oxfordshire Buckinghamshire Light Infantry and then the Royal West African Frontier Force, the 6th Battalion of the Gold Coast regiment, training native troops. I had a ball. Kurt Vonnegut says, 'unexpected travel is a dancing lesson from God,' and I've always believed in that. And while I was at cadet school, there was VE Day. And other than some people getting some musical instruments from the band, stealing them out of storage and blowing tubas, I don't remember much excitement except everybody went out to have a drink. The-- that was VE Day. VJ Day came when I was in-- in Africa, I think. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] So the-- in the cadet school, the thing I dreaded most was what we call in the Army square bashing, parade ground stuff and-- and bullshit pamphlet knowledge. You know, which, we, as the regular forces, it's not my thing. And I found-- I was doing extremely well just by doing-- whenever anything came up, a question that I had not read in the pamphlet, that I was supposed to have studied, I would think of how they had done it in the Commandos. And having been with a good unit, it was inevitably the right answer. Sometimes a bit too much so, because the pamphlets-- I mean, for instance, I thought I'd be a maverick, because the instructor would say, what use is the Bren Gun Carrier. That's a British tracked vehicle, open top. And people's hands went up, of the cadets. And one would say, it's great for flanking movements and fire support. And another one would say, it's great for this, that, or the other. And I would put my hand up, and I would say, none whatever-- no use. And he'd say, why not. And I would say, because it sounds like a tank, so it draws fire. And I've seen more burnt out Bren carriers than ones that were not burned out. And somebody who had given the early answer would say, oh, I protest. It is good for flanking attacks. And the instructors, by that time, were all people who had been captains in Italy or in-- in Burma or in-- in in-- in Germany and-- and France. And the instructor would say, Masters is right. And I would say, well, I'd make one exception. If you want the enemy to think that you have armor when you don't, then Bren Gun Carrier would make them think that. And it's good for bringing up the-- the kits and-- and-- and the-- the packs and the ammunition. But you see-- so you couldn't be a maverick because they would say you're right. And that, incidentally, stopped when I got to the regular outfit after being commissioned, where people who had been at that base throughout the war would contradict the practical advice that I had, because they were sticking to the pamphlet, which made me very happy to leave for Africa also, apart from seeing a part of the world I'd never see otherwise. 
INT: After the war, did you ever think of leaving Britain to go back to Austria? PM: Visit. And that didn't come about, because I was a student. I couldn't afford it. I did go to France once, but not to Normandy, but to the Pyrenees, with a girlfriend. [LAUGHS] And I-- it-- it-- it wasn't that-- you know, I've always felt fond of my memories of the Austrian landscape, but proportionately-- similarly unfond of the [INAUDIBLE] population. And I don't want to tar them all with one brush, but you never knew who was who. If you saw someone of the appropriate age group, you had this feeling of were they involved with killing my grandfather. You know. So that was not easy. I-- the-- the war in Britain, of course, lasted six years. So that takes a bite of-- out of your life. I was extremely eager to make a living and settle down when it was over. And I went to art school and-- and-- and-- because I found I had to-- to learn something. And got the first Fulbright to America and met Alice again, she having preceded me, working for the Monetary Fund. And we dated for a few months and were married in April. And [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] well, it was a-- a-- a great life.  INT: Do you think about the war years often? PM: Yes, of course. First of all because it-- I relish the-- the notion that I was fortunate enough to get the karma out of my system by being able to do something to hit back. And you develop, as I say, a certain cowboy attitude, where you say, I can take these guys on any time. [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] We were better trained or-- or-- or whatever. And-- and also by questioning the myth of their super race nonsense. Because it's still-- they did some things very well. And they did some-- had some very fine equipment and some very good people. But they also did some enormously stupid things. And they couldn't afford some of the fine equipment they were building. It was impractical for their economic situation to focus on making fancy stuff that they-- that was a tremendous loss if any of it got-- got damaged or lost. What they should have done is to mass produce. What they should have done is to alienate the occupied countries less, if that were possible. I mean, obviously, they did that reasonably well on the-- in the east, where they had the Baltic nations itching to get out from under Stalin. You know. But I think they made a-- a-- an awful mess of it in Holland. Sure, they had some supporters, but-- and in France. I think people have fought the French for being too supportive. I don't, because I saw both sides. And-- and it's difficult to stand up in hopeless fights against an occupying power. You need a little bit of outside-- outside support, which is why I think the idea of getting out and fighting then is much better if you have a choice, which was many people did not have. Then to take through the forests and try and defeat Hitler from a-- a wooded site in Poland. I mean, I-- I-- they had no choice. They did marvelously. But the sensible thing to do is go out, learn how to do it, get equipped, and-- and-- and go get 'em. 
INT: Not everyone could do that. [LAUGHS] PM: Sure.  INT: OK. [PAUSES FOR 5 SECONDS] Now that it's 50 years later, is there any message that you would like to leave for your children. grandchildren, the world? PM: Well, the obvious one, never again. And while I'm saying it, I think it's extremely difficult. Because when-- when the Nazis first reared their ugly heads in-- in Austria, the common saying among reasonable people was ignore them. Or the Viennese had a saying in-- in-- in the Viennese jargon, don't even mingle with them. So [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] don't make martyrs of them. Because what can they accomplish in our cultured, civilized society? And obviously, [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] wisdom after the-- the event says that that was wrong. What we should have done, apparently, is to kill them. Well, at which point do you start killing people? The average decent person isn't going to kill a Senator McCarthy when he starts to mess with the Democratic system. [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] At which point do you decide that this is intolerable, and you must do something? Well, the answer has to be you have to be terribly alert, and you have to blend being reasonable and not doing what they would be doing, and that is to kill them upfront. You know. But at the same time, not to permit yourself to be railroaded into intolerable situations. And I have to say that, for instance, the present attitude in this country about arms, that you're only allowed to buy two assault weapons a month or whatever it is in some states, is crazy. The answer is you don't need any assault weapons. You do not need assault weapons. I know how to handle weapons, I don't own one. I would feel safe having one, and I've been tempted at times. But I-- I feel I don't want to miss and get into a situation where there are guns lying around everybody, and everybody who feels angry at somebody else takes-- takes a-- a machine gun burst at them. This is crazy. At the same time, I think you have to distinguish between, if you will, politically, between Watergate and-- and the present-- 
INT: Whitewater? PM: Whitewater machinations. Watergate messes with the-- with the process of freedom. It enables people to do things that are not [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] white-collar crimes of-- of-- of [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] absconding with invested money. That's not the same thing as introducing people who are committing crimes of-- of substance, of-- of breaking in, of messing with the democratic process, of messing with the-- the-- the political, reasonable status quo. I think when you do that, you should be immediately checked. When you do the other, by all means, investigate and so on. But don't call it the same thing. It's not the same thing. And I don't expect everyone to understand that, but I think if you've been through the sort of thing that we have been through in our life, you recognize the differences. And, of course, you have to cherish living in a country where the-- there is a constitution that is full of reasonable things, even if they are at times misinterpreted, like the right to bear arms, which was meant for a different-- for a legitimate militia against a colonizing power.  INT: Thank you.  INT: November 10, 1996, interview with Peter Masters, tape number six. You had a lot of experiences as a Jewish refugee member of the British armed forces and the Commandos. Are there any lessons that you learned from that experience that you'd like to impart? PM: Well, certainly. Firstly, the lesson that I consider myself fortunate to have had the opportunity, because it could so easily happen that I wouldn't have gotten an interview, and no amount of volunteering would have gotten me anywhere. And I'm sure it happened to some people. I also think there were some people who preferred it that way, you know, who is-- who-- who said, I-- I would have really liked to get into this, but I never had the chance. And-- and I-- I don't know how hard they tried. But more to the point is perhaps the thing that having had the opportunity, I feel liberated from the trauma. And I feel that, as such, I am very fortunate. Now, I also learned that in times of crisis and trauma and-- and emergency, I learned that I-- I had-- I had the feeling that somebody has to do something. And then I-- the follow-up is that I learned if I don't, perhaps nobody will. So I must do something, and I must do something now to try and remedy the situation. And this is merely a question. It's really reaction beyond reflex. If your reflex reacts for-- to a first thing, that's fine. The reflex-- even there you can learn certain things.
I mean, to give you a simplistic view of it is that when you are a soldier, we are no longer in the Middle Ages where it depends on your skill as a swordsman whether you survive or not. Most of it is luck. Good training helps. Now you can be hit by any number of things. Most of them are things that go bang, either a shot or an explosion of a shell or a mortar or a grenade. The common denominator is it goes bang, it explodes, and it's likely to hurt or kill you. The first step to take, therefore, is generally to take cover. Now you get so that you see where the cover is without looking. At first, you consciously-- and I used to teach recruits that-- you consciously look for the nearest cover. Now you may say that doesn't apply in civilian life. It does to some extent. If something suddenly happens, the thing to do is to be alert and look what-- where you must go and what you must do. After a while in training this can become an instinct. An instinct is supposed to be something that's there from the beginning. But I believe it's a conditioned reflex, if you will. But you can get yourself to the point where you know that if-- if this house were suddenly struck by lightning, which direction would I head in, or what would be my action. Or-- I'm using a bad example, but no matter what, you can program yourself to some extent to some direction. I believe that could help older people from not falling and breaking their limbs. Because I think, first of all, if you keep reasonably fit and actually practice rolling on a gym mat, you can learn how to fall as we did in parachuting. I am programmed not to be afraid of falling. And if people say, be careful, I say, I never fall. Or if I do fall, so what? I know how to fall. So you see, these are all connected in conditioned reflexes, being prepared for this and that. People are afraid to walk in the dark. First of all, in winter, when it's cold, nobody is going to sit in some dark alley and wait for the off chance that you might come through that dark alley. You are in much greater danger if you're walking in the street some-- somewhere where there are lots of people, and somebody is trying to snatch your purse or something. So walk in the middle of the street, or walk alert that somebody might come and snatch your purse. And don't carry it with two fingers, and so on, and so on, and so on. Some of it is perfectly reasonable programming. And especially the one about being prepared to take the next obvious action, and knowing that it may be up to you. It's parallel to, in-- in tennis, when you play doubles. The coach will tell you, when your partner is-- is hitting the ball, say to yourself with every shot, the next shot may come to me. Because so often there is an exchange. They are keeping on playing to your partner. Suddenly the ball comes to you. Bye, you don't know what to do. You see, this is very much like life, in-- in-- in-- in a stretch parallel. The next shot may come to you. The next thing that happens may come to you. You have options. Use your options. Think about your options. But don't fall into the trap of saying, what if, and then painting a scenario of such disaster that you're in constant terror. That's-- that's useless. Be reasonable. Options open in normal situations, not what if a meteor falls on me. That's not a practical worry, you see. Now I-- I trained my African soldiers in commando training, and they didn't know what hit them, the poor guys, because that's the training I knew. And I think they profited by it. And then I started to teach my children a bit, and I-- the first two were girls. And they must have had quite a rough time when they were little, because they were in-- in-- in the park, in-- in-- in the forest balancing on wooden, on fallen trees at a young age, and learning that if they fell off it wasn't the end of the world. They had to keep their feet and knees together and land nicely. But I don't think I made too much of an impact on them, except perhaps in overall attitude. And-- and in a certain amount of-- what shall I say-- a liking of sports and things. But that's probably where that one rests. Although I-- I am delighted that my children are all more or less reasonable people. And my grandchildren, of course, are-- are brilliant. 
INT: Thank you, very much. PM: Thank you.  INT: Mr. Masters, could you please introduce your wife? PM: This is my-- my-- my wife Alice, née Eberstarkova. And we have been very fortunate. I have been very fortunate to have her as a wife-- ALICE MASTERS: Thank you. PM: --for my long life. ALICE MASTERS: Thank you. PM: Because she is the best anyone could have.  INT: Thank you both. ALICE MASTERS: Thank you. CREW: OK. Right.  INT: You can go ahead. Go ahead. CREW: What's in this picture? What is in this picture? Mm-hmm. PM: OK. This picture is of my mother's parents. [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] The man is Arnold Metzger-- M-E-T-Z-G-E-R. His full Jewish name was Abraham [? Pinchas ?] Metzger. And his wife, [? Hermine, ?] née Holzapfel-- H-O-L-Z-A-P-F-E-L. It was taken at the turn of the century in Vienna, where my grandfather had come from Cracow to learn gold and silver smithing. And my grandmother, as a young girl, had been sent to meet him at the station. They fell in love, and it was a love match all their lives. She died when I was seven years old of stomach cancer. And this is a picture of my father, Rudolf Arany, who was a first lieutenant in the Austro-Hungarian army, and is shown here during World War I on the staff of Field Marshal Mackensen, the [NON-ENGLISH] field marshal, who is the man sitting in the center of the picture in the front row. And my father is the one to his left, the second from the left, standing, as a first lieutenant. The first lieutenant in the light uniform on the extreme left was my father's best friend. His name was Eugene Winkler. He changed it to Holt, and became a producer in Hollywood. This picture was taken in Velden in Austria, in the south of Austria, in the summer of 1935. It shows my mother Klara Arany, seated. And behind her is my best friend, Fritz [? Baumgarten, ?] considerably older than I. He had just graduated from medical school. He was half or a quarter Jewish, and Fritz emigrated to China, where he worked for the American Board Mission in a place called [NON-ENGLISH] in [NON-ENGLISH] province. And he died in China after his disappointment of the mission being closed down twice, first by the Japanese and then by the communists. This picture is also in Velden, facing the Woerthersee in the south of Austria in Carinthia. We were on vacation. And my sister is sitting next to me. I was 13, and she was 15. We had been there as small children. This was sort of a revisit to an old vacation place. 
INT: And your sister's full name? PM: My sister's full name is Eva Maria de Becker, which is a translation of the Austrian von Becker. And her maiden name, of course, was Eva Maria Arany. This picture shows me in an Austrian Boy Scout uniform in summer camp in Rab in-- on the Adriatic Sea, an island in the Adriatic in what was then Yugoslavia. It would now be Croatia. And we had a scout camp there in 1936. And the picture was taken by my friend Fritz [? Baumgarten, ?] who was not really a scout, but he came along because we needed a doctor in the scout camp. This picture shows me as a 16-year-old on the farm where I was a farm hand, Frogmill Farm in Hurley-on-Thames, between Henley and Maidenhead in Berkshire. I am dressed for my job of cleaning the pigsties, which you can see in the background. That is, you can see two of them. There were many more. We had 500 pigs there, and we cleaned them out every morning. And the dress is to protect us from the splash. And we wore rubber boots to wade in the muck, and an old sack around the waist. The hat a friend of the family's actually sent me from Vienna, because he thought it might come in useful in my farm work. This is a picture of 3 Troop, 10 Commando, sometimes referred to as X Troop, or the British troop, or the miscellaneous troop, the refugee Commando troop. The skipper, Bryan Hilton Jones, is the one reclining to the left of the mascot, of the white bulldog. 
INT: And when and where was this? PM: The picture was taken in [NON-ENGLISH], in North Wales, [NON-ENGLISH], in 1942 or '3. This shows my army dog tags. That's in case you are killed, and they want to find out who you are. And mine says, 6387025 FP Masters, which is a mistake. It should be PF-- and COE, which is Church of England. The crucifix was given to me as a good-luck charm by my Austrian nanny. It shows the Madonna, the Austrian Madonna, at the bottom of the cross with the baby Jesus, and Jesus on the cross. She said I should carry it as good luck. She didn't know then that there was going to be a war. That is my army pay book, which says 6387025, Masters, Peter Ferdinand; born 5/2/22; student, art; C of E, Church of England; enlisted at London 28/10/40 for the duration. And it's signed by me. This is a picture of the detachment of 3 Troop 10 Commando that went with Number 6 Commando. In the center standing is [? Gerald ?] [? Nell ?] [? Nickers-- ?] [? Gerald ?] [? Nickers, ?] whose name had been [? Nell, ?] a German refugee. I am on the right, as a lance corporal, second in command of the group. On the left is Gary Mason, alias Weinberg. In front, left to right is [? McGregor, ?] whose name was [? Coory, ?] and Harry [? Nuremberg, ?] my friend who served under the name of [? Drew, ?] and then took his name [? Nuremberg ?] back, and lives in New York. Ha-ha. Fell over. ALICE MASTERS: Image that! PM: This is our-- our wedding picture in 1950 on the 10th of May. It-- ALICE MASTERS: 6th of April. PM: Oh, I'm sorry. I gave my wife's birthday by mistake. It was the 6th of April, 1950. My wife Alice and I being married formally at International Student House in Washington, DC on R Street. The students of the house gave us the wedding because we didn't have any money. This was one of my last visits to my Aunt Ida in London, who had saved us all by bringing us out from Vienna. She had a lovely flat, as we call an apartment in London, on Streatham Place, a block from Hyde Park. And she kept a little garden on the little balcony she had. She could do no wrong as far as I was concerned, because she had saved my life. And no matter how difficult she was, I promised whenever she needed me I'd come immediately. And I always did, until she died. 
INT: And when approximately was this taken? PM: This picture was taken in, I would guess, the-- '94. And she died at age 93 the following year. This picture is sort of an annual tradition. We go to Capon Springs, West Virginia on vacation. And the whole family meets there. On this picture is my, from left to right, my son Tim. On his lap there is my grandson David Quinn, who belongs to my oldest daughter, Anne. We come to her later. Then there is Lori McFarling, my son's wife, as of one-- one year ago, my daughter Kim Masters, a journalist. In front of her is Hannah Quinn, our youngest grandchild. Next to my journalist daughter Kim is Gary Simpson, who is a television producer in Hollywood now, then myself, dressed for tennis, and my oldest daughter Anne, who is a graphic designer, as I was myself. And she goes under the name of Anne Masters. Next to her is her husband, Michael Quinn, who is-- who is an architect. And on his lap is Samuel Quinn, the middle grandchild. The picture was taken by my wife, who is unfortunately therefore not visible on this picture. And it was, I would say, 1994 or '5. UNIDENTIFIED SPEAKER: No. No.