INT: Survivors of the Shoah Visual History Foundation. Date is November 10, 1996. Survivor is Alice Masters, born Eberstark. Interviewer is Dina Cohen. City is Bethesda, Maryland, USA. The interview will be in English. My name is Dina Cohen. Today is November 10, 1996. I am conducting an interview with Alice Masters, born Eberstark, in Bethesda, Maryland, USA. The interview will be in English. Could you please state your name and spell it? AM: My--  INT: Your-- AM: --name is--  INT: --name now, mm-hmm. AM: --now is Alice Masters-- A-L-I-C-E M-A-S-T-E-R-S.  INT: And your name at birth? AM: It was Alice Eberstark-- Eberstarkova in Czechoslovakia.  INT: Could you spell that? AM: E-- E-B-E-R-S-T-A-R-K-O-V-A.  INT: Were you known by any other names? AM: No. I was known as Alice.  INT: And your birth date? AM: It was May 10, 1925.  INT: And how old are you now? AM: 71.  INT: And the city and country of your birth? AM: I was born in Trstená-- T-R-S-T-E-N-A, county of Orava-- O-R-A-V-A, in Czechoslovakia-- C-Z-E-C-H-O-S-L-O-V-A-K-I-A.  INT: And what kind of a town was Trstená? AM: It was a little village in the mountains of-- it was in northern Slovakia, in the mountains-- the Tatra Mountains. It was a very tiny village, actually, and very beautiful, surrounded by mountains.  INT: And what was your home like? Where did you live there? AM: We lived at the beginning, when my mother first got married, we lived behind-- at an addition of my grandfather's house. And later, in 1938, we-- my father built a house, and we were lived in that house by ourselves. 
INT: Could you describe your family? AM: Well, my father was-- you want to know about my father?  INT: Of course. AM: My father came from Poland to Slovakia as an apprentice in, in the-- it's a-- building industry. And my mother was a, a homemaker. She was born in, in Trstená. And was a dress-- I think she learned how to be a dressmaker. It was a very, very lovely home life, very secure and very surrounded by a very loving family. My grandfather lived very close to us. And we had-- my mother had an older brother-- a younger brother and a younger sister. And we, we were a very close family. And we had a beautiful childhood, because we were just used to a lot of skiing and skating and sports. And we loved nature. We loved to go into the woods and pick wild strawberries and wildflowers, and had a beautiful childhood. We went to local schools, and we had a very close community. And there was a synagogue in the village. And our life was sort of centered around the synagogue and the Jewish community.  INT: Were there many Jews in Trstená? AM: There were quite a few Jews, quite a few families. I can't remember exactly how many, but I would imagine about 20 families, Jewish families, just as a guess.  INT: And did you have siblings? AM: Yes, I had an older sister. I was a middle child. We were three girls. I had an older sister and a younger sister. I had-- my older sister was Josephine-- [? Josie ?] we called her. And my younger sister was [? Ellie. ?] We called her [? Ellika. ?] 
INT: And did you have any pets? AM: Yes, we had-- [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] a cow. And we had chickens. And I don't think-- oh, we had geese, of course. And I don't think we-- we didn't have a dog and we didn't have cats, no. We had a lot of friends who were Jewish and non-Jewish, and we had a very lovely childhood.  INT: You said you had a lot of family nearby. Could you describe, like, family celebrations in your home? AM: Well, we had a family-- not too many-- well, my grandfather and my grandmother lived in the village. My uncle and my aunt were living away from the-- from the village. They lived in [NON-ENGLISH], because they-- my uncle was director of a spa in [NON-ENGLISH], which was-- and my aunt worked there also. And-- but they came to visit, and we, of course, adored having them. And the-- my father had a big family in Zakopane, which was not very far from us in Poland. We didn't go very often, but my father traveled because his mother lived in Zakopane. And she would come and visit. And we had a, a family in a nearby village, [? Slanica, ?] and other parts surrounding Trstená. And we had a very, very close relationship with our family.  INT: Was your family religious? AM: My father was very religious, actually, considering my mother-- I think, didn't-- was not as religious my father. My father went to the synagogue every Friday and Saturday. And of course, naturally, all the High Holidays. And we were very kosher. But I think it was only because my, my mother may not have maintained such a religious home. She only did it because of my father. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] We were-- yes, we observed all the holidays. And my-- we went to the synagogue every Friday night with my father. My mother would stay at home and get the house ready for the service-- for the dinner, and for Saturday. And all the food was prepared before the Saturday. And no lights were turned on during the Sabbath. And we observed. Yes, my father was religious, and every morning he did his prayers with all the attachments to his arms and everything. So-- and my grandfather was also reasonably religious, but not Orthodox. 
INT: Did you have a religious education? AM: Yes, I went to Sunday school. We went to Sunday school. But of course, we didn't understand a word that was said, because it was all in Hebrew, and nobody bothered ever to translate it to us. So it was not the-- you know, it, it should have been-- it would have been wonderful if they would have taught us what it meant. But we did not have any understanding of what we were saying. But we were religious. And of course, Saturday there was-- nothing was done, except going to a synagogue, and walking, and visiting our neighbors.  INT: And did you go to elementary school in Trstená? AM: Yes, I went to my-- all my-- both my sisters and I went to the elementary school. And my older sister went to a high school in the village. And I went to a gymnasium in a-- the nearest gymnasium was in a place called Dolny Kubín, which was two hours by train. And I traveled every morning. And I started out early in the morning, and went to school by train, which took two hours, and came home in the afternoon around 5 o'clock. My sister-- the younger sister, of course, was too little. She did not get to-- she would have gone to gymnasium had she-- had we stayed in the village. My older sister just always wanted to be, as, like my mother, she wanted to be a mother and a dressmaker. And so she was going to a local school. 
INT: What did you want to be? AM: Well, I had no idea yet. But my parents thought that I should go to gymnasium and go to college.  INT: Did you have both Jewish and Christian classmates-- AM: Yes, I did.  INT: --in school? AM: Yes, we did. And I had-- my best-- one of my best friends was a Christian girl, Maria Baritowa. And then we also had-- I think they were-- we were in the great minority. There were about three Jewish girls in my class-- at the most three Jewish children. But we did have both friends-- Jewish and non-Jewish. Mm-hmm.  INT: Were you aware of Hitler's rise to power in Germany in the '30s? AM: Not until-- yes, around '38 I started getting aware, because my parents and friends of my parents who came to the house talked about it a great deal. And we were very concerned. We were very worried about it. They didn't discuss these things with the children. And I just listened and heard what was going on. So I knew that something was happening. But of course nobody in their wildest dreams could imagine what it all meant. I mean, how could we have ever thought about it? If-- we were-- the first time that I really knew seriously about it was when I couldn't go to school any longer, because my parents decided it was too dangerous for me. Well, after Czechoslovakia was occupied, actually, in March 1938, since I had to get up very early to go to, to the gymnasium. And I woke up and it was daylight. My mother was standing by the radio listening to the news. And I was very upset. I said, why am I not up? Why am I not going to school? And she said, you're not going anymore, because Czechoslovakia was occupied. And so they decided it was too dangerous for me to travel. And that's-- I realized that this was a very-- well, you know, this is the first time I really seriously knew that something terrible happened. But maybe even before that, because I think we talked about the fact that there's a possibility that Czechoslovakia might be occupied. And my friends at that point in time, my non-Jewish friends, were terribly patriotic. So were we all. But we were all worried that there may be occupation. Of course, this changed after the occupation, because many of them then became very sort of-- some of them became followers of the Nazi party, like the Hlinka movement. Hlinka was the priest who was the leader of the Nazi party in Slovakia. So I-- that-- this is when I really became aware, the first day of the occupation, more than any time before. 
INT: But even before the occupation, did you ever experience any antisemitism in Slovakia? AM: Oh, yes, yes, I did. But it wasn't-- yes, I did. I was always aware of the fact that we were-- that there was antisemitism. But one did-- one just, you know, dealt with it. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] I didn't like it, and I didn't like to be in the minority in the school. And I didn't like when the prayers were being said in the school, because I stood there, and everybody else was crossing themselves and saying prayers. And I had to stand silently. So I was very different from the others. I did mind being different. I minded it very much. And it, it was particularly evident during the school prayer. And yes, I was called names. And other people were called names. And I, I hated, it but what could I do? But Czechoslovakia was very different, because it was very democratic. And Czechoslovakia was very advanced. So you felt very secure, you know, because we had our president, Tomás Garrigue Masaryk, who was very democratic, and very-- life was-- we felt very safe in, in many ways before the war. Right.  INT: Did your family ever consider emigrating? AM: My father wanted to leave. I-- with, again, nothing was discussed with the children. But from overhearing things, my father always wanted to go to Palestine. But my mother was born in Trstená. Her family was there. And I think she was-- she wasn't that Zionist. My father was. But it never came about, unfortunately. It would have been a good idea if we had left. 
INT: Were you a Zionist? AM: Well, I-- no, I wasn't at that time. I didn't, really. I was very, very happy in Czechoslovakia. I was very patriotic. I was very proud of being Czechoslovak. I must stress, Czechoslovak-- not particularly Slovak, as it is now. And I was-- I thought Czechoslovakia was super. For years and years after the war, I still felt terribly close to Czechoslovakia. To me it was home, very important. And I never thought of leaving. It would never have occurred to me. No. And no, I wasn't, but I would belong to Jewish organizations. I belonged to Maccabi Hatzair, and I belonged to a Czech organization called [? Slovak, ?] which was a gymnastics sports organization. And I was-- and I loved the Hebrew songs and the Jewish songs. But I felt very Czech, as Czechoslovakian.  INT: In, [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] in 1938, when Czechoslovakia was occupied-- AM: Mm-hmm. No. '39.  INT: Oh. AM: March '39. Mm-hmm. It was--  INT: Right. AM: It was-- yes.  INT: Slovakia became independent. AM: Yes. Slovakia became Nazi state.  INT: How did your life change then, other than not going to school anymore? AM: Well, I did-- I didn't go to Dolny Kubín, but my mother and my parents put me into a local school in Trstená, where I just observed, because I was not enrolled in that class. So I just sat up on the second floor of that building, and I was very, very worried, because things became rather difficult in the village. Now, no German set foot in our village. But the locals became Nazis. And the head of the Nazi party was a-- the two priests. One was [? Klinker, ?] and the other one was Tiso-- T-I-S-O. And some of the Jews in the village, one day, when I was in class, I saw buses in the center of the village, because the school was right in the square. And I saw buses. And I looked out of the window, and I saw some people boarding the buses. So I was very worried, and I wondered what was going on. And it seemed that some people were being picked up and put into the buses, and put-- and sent-- I didn't know where at that time; I found later-- they were sent to the Hungarian border. They were just being sent out of the village. And they came with bundles and suitcases. And I, I was just shocked to see it. And it turned out that those people were just dropped on the Hungarian border and left there. And they-- subsequently they came back, because-- just for a little while, obviously. My parents were not among them, which was-- I always thought that my parents would be safe, because my father was very popular in the village. When the cross from the church fell down, my father was the one who climbed up to put the cross on on the steeple, and the whole village was watching. And they still remembered it. And later, when I went back one day to Czechoslovakia, they remembered that my father was the one who put the cross back. And also when the-- there was a fire in the village, my father was the one, because the mayor was drunk, my father had-- was the one who had to go and get the fire engine and put out the fire. So I thought he was a very popular person in the village, and I thought people would look after him, and he would survive. But it wasn't so. But-- what was the question? [LAUGHTER] 
INT: Just how your life changed-- AM: Yes.  INT: --when the-- AM: Oh, that's right. Now--  INT: --Tiso government came into power. AM: --also, during that period, people were being picked up. Young men and men were being picked up and made to dig ditches in the village, and work on manual labor or something-- I mean, just to make them do undignified and difficult things. And also they were made to-- they got some cart horses. And they made the, the men, who never had any experience of riding horses besides these [? big ?] cart horses. And they made them ride those horses to the nearest town. And of course, you know, they were tormenting them, actually. And other things happened. And I, I-- maybe I was protected, and I don't-- I wasn't aware of all the things that went on. But things like that went on. They were very frightening. Now in the meantime, my uncle, who was director of the [NON-ENGLISH], was-- had lived in Berlin in 19-- in the '30s, because he was a representative of the spa in Berlin. So he knew exactly what was going on. He was a very well-educated. He went to the Charles University in Prague. He was well educated. And he-- as was my aunt. So was everybody else. People were well educated in the village. I mean, they were intellectual, Jewish-- some of the Jewish people, OK. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] He lived in Berlin. And he, at-- in the-- I think in 1937 or '38 he was transferred to London. And he wrote to my parents and said, things are-- it will be very bad. And it would be safer if you send the children out. My mother, who respected her brother enormously-- because, after all, my mother had never left the village, and she was a very bright and intelligent woman, but she'd never had the opportunity like her brother, who was sent to university-- she respected his opinion. And the letters kept on coming from London, where my uncles wrote saying, send the children away. I think that I can arrange for them to come to England. And of course, it didn't-- I mean it just was such a remote end possibility that we would ever be sent. But one other thing I have to mention. When my uncle was in [NON-ENGLISH]-- he was a wonderful uncle. I mean he was really-- we adored him. When he was in [NON-ENGLISH] together with my aunt-- my mother's sister-- they had us come over for summer holidays, my older sister and my-- me. So that we always-- they were wonderful to us. We were the only children in the family at that point. And he would have us for the summer holidays in [NON-ENGLISH], which was a big town. And I think my mother has never made such a trip, but we did. And my parents would send us to [NON-ENGLISH]. This is the uncle who did so much for us. I mean, he-- when he came to the village, we were so excited, because he was a skier, and he would take us, buy us skis, and we went skiing with him. And he did extraordinary things for us. He's the one who wrote to our parents. So they began to sort of slowly develop that there might be a possibility. But, I mean, I never even considered that such a thing would happen, because it was such a remote idea that you would be sent. The village was reasonably secure. Nobody thought anything would happen. Who would have thought such a thing would ever happen in the village? And that we should be going to England. I mean it was just a wild notion. However, when things happened in the village, my parents began to really think about it, and my father went and obtained passports for us. My mother started sewing and preparing for us. She-- and all the clothes, by the way, were made at home, because I longed to have a store-made dress, but it never happened. My mother made everything, but it was exquisitely made, because it had to be first-class. And it was beautifully embroidered. All our underwear and all our nightgowns, all our [INAUDIBLE], everything was beautifully embroidered. Everything was handmade. My mother started sewing and preparing for the-- such a possibility that we may go. So we-- the passports cost an awful lot of money. I think my father must have spent-- because I think at that point things began to be very difficult. And in order to get the passports, I think my father had to spend an awful lot of money to get them. But he got the passports. And they started seriously considering it. Now people came to our house and said, how can you even think about it? How could you send the children away? But they-- I, I, I-- as long as I live, I will never understand how they did that, because it was such an enormously difficult thing. If it had been in the big city I would have understood it. But in a village in the mountains, where nothing-- you know it was just a very unlikely thing. But my uncle is the one who persisted in it. So it happened. 
INT: Was there a particular incident that prompted your leaving, or was it just your uncle's-- AM: My uncle's letters. I wish I had known what he had written, because I don't know what was in the letters. And I don't even know what-- how the discussion went about us leaving. I mean, it's just the most unbelievable thing that it happened. And nobody else did it except my parents in the whole village. And of course, nobody survived, as far as I know. So [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] there may have been one family that was very well-to-do that survived. But I-- yes-- the other man, [INAUDIBLE], he was a lawyer in the village. He was-- well, he was a very wealthy man. And he had one daughter who was my girlfriend. But I have never been in touch with her. I have been in touch with her father. But as far as I know, hardly anybody survived-- none of my girlfriends, in any case.  INT: When were you and your sisters told that you were being sent away? AM: We-- I, I don't know exactly. But I-- [INAUDIBLE] and we were occupied in March '39. I stopped going to school, to my college then. Then probably-- and we left in June. So it must have been in between March and June of 1939. So probably, let's say, [? in ?] March, April, probably May. I would think in May, because it wasn't immediately in March, April. My uncle might have started writing sometime in April, and probably May-- even before that, probably. So almost immediately after occupation they must have been talking about it. 
INT: Could you describe the, the events of your last day at home, what it was like? AM: Well, it was-- well, the preparation for the leaving, there was a lot of activity, obviously; a lot of sewing, a lot of getting suitcases, a lot of going to visit all the people in the village and saying goodbye. I think we may have traveled to Zakopane to say goodbye to our grandmother, but I'm not sure. I can't remember that part at all. I only remember that we went walking around in the village to everybody, and everybody was saying to my parents, how can you do this? That's all I remember. And [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] my grandparents, who-- my grandfather lived very close to us. This is going to be difficult. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] My-- let's see now. [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] We went to [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] say goodbye. My girlfriends [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] with-- I can't remember the days, actually. I only remember the last day, to [INAUDIBLE] the very last day where, in the morning, when we got up to go, my parents were taking us to Bratislava to take the train, because a train went from Bratislava to Prague, and to pick up the rest of the children. So we got up in the morning. We got dressed. We-- our suitcases were ready. And we were ready to leave when we heard some horrific crying from one of the rooms. So we looked at each other. It was our father weeping loud. And we just were shocked. That was the biggest-- the memory of that is the worst, because we have never-- my father was a very strong person. And we never saw him cry ever. But he was actually crying loud. And it was very hard. And we couldn't believe that this was happening. It was-- that was the hardest part of it. Then we traveled to-- took a train to Bratislava. I don't remember exactly how long we spent there. 
INT: Let's continue this on the next tape. AM: OK. [LAUGHS] Great. [DRINKS]  INT: --interview with Alice Masters, tape number two. You were talking about leaving the village. AM: Yes. Well, my father-- I was saying that my father was weeping--  INT: Mm-hmm. AM: --loud. And it was very upsetting to us to hear that. Then we traveled to Bratislava. I'm not-- I can't remember the details of the trip at all, except that we-- all I-- I don't know whether we spent the night there. I don't think so. I think we went straight to-- it may have taken about two or three hours to travel from the village to Bratislava-- maybe four. I can't remember that at all. Then we went to a store. And my father, at the last moment, bought us a few things. He brought-- bought-- decided to buy us a blanket-- each a blanket, in case, because they weren't sure what was happening, how it would be. And he bought us little presents. He bought me a ring. And he bought little things for-- I don't have the ring anymore-- unfortunately. I only have-- the stone fell out. But I loved that ring for a long time, of course. And I have the ring itself, but I don't have the stone. And he-- I have a blanket. And he bought us little things to take along. Then we went to a station where there were quite a few children. And nothing is very clear. I don't know exactly how many. I always thought there were 500 children in a transport, but no, there were 500 children altogether that left Czechoslovakia in these transports. The transports were arranged by Mr. Winton. What was his first name now? 
INT: Nicholas? AM: Pardon me?  INT: Was it Nicholas? AM: Nicholas Winton. That's right. Mr. Nicholas Winton, who was a English stockbroker who happened to be in Czechoslovakia, and decided that nothing was being done about the Czech children. So he decided to organize the transports. And there were altogether to be six transports. I was in the one-- we were in the one which was one before the last, and the last never made it. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] And I don't know. I always thought there were 500 children in a transport, but there were 500 children altogether out of Czechoslovakia. So there were not that many. But it seemed that the whole train was full of children. They were accompanied by young-- young people, who had to come back to Czechoslovakia. And we boarded the train in Bratislava. My mother, of course, naturally it was a very, very difficult time. Again, it was so painful. That-- that memory is sort of very hazy. I can't remember it all. All I remember is that my mother could not make a decision whether to let my sister-- little sister go with us, because she was only 10. My older sister was 15, I was just 14, and my little sister was 10. And my little sister was very frail, according-- my mother thought she was very frail. But she was a little girl who was the youngest, and she was rather-- she wasn't-- she always was a little bit sensitive, and not as strong as we were. So my mother took her off the train. And maybe-- and we said, keep-- why don't you keep her? We wanted her to stay at home, my older sister and I, because we thought she was too little to go. But my mother then put her back on a train. And then she took her off again. And at the last moment she-- she put her back on, which I thought was extremely brave and courageous. But she really wanted to keep her. And had she kept her, she wouldn't have lived, of course. At the last moment, we talked through the window-- open window. There were other-- of course, lots of children in the compartment. We talked to our parents, and they said, maybe you should leave your little gold necklaces with us, or your bracelets. So we took them off and gave them to our parents, which is really unbelievable. They said it will be safer if we keep it for you here. And so we gave it to them. And then my father told my older sister where things would be in case something happened to them. And he-- he took her up to the attic of our house and showed her the place where he would hide it, because when she went back after the war, it wasn't there. And the train pulled off. We waved goodbye. And, of course, [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] our parents were on the platform crying. The children were scared. And they were afraid. But we were being brave. And of course we were going to see our uncle in London, whom we adored, so we thought-- consoled ourselves. We said, well, we are going to see our Uncle [? Heine. ?] We were very excited. And so we didn't-- well, we sort of covered it up. I mean like we have for the rest of their lives-- always tried to sort of deal with it the best we knew how. And as soon as the train pulled up we were asked to carry some jewelry for other children, because some children had lots of bracelets and necklaces. So my little sister was given several bracelets on her arm that belonged to other people, and covered with her sleeve of her cardigan. And all our things stayed behind, which we never got again. But it doesn't matter. That didn't matter. That was the least of it all. Then we were supposed-- since we were traveling, I think it was on a Thursday or Friday, since we were religion-- my father was religious-- it was told-- he was told that we would stay during the Friday night and Saturday in Holland, because then you wouldn't have to travel, because my father would never have liked us to travel on Shabbos, OK? So we-- but when we arrived in Holland-- oh, first we went to Prague, of course, and picked up the rest of the children. Then we traveled through Germany. We were terrified, terrified, terrified when the German soldiers came on the-- it was German, or whoever there were, inspectors, and came to examine our luggage. And we were absolutely petrified of Germany. Then we got to-- when we got to Holland, when [INAUDIBLE]. What came first? What came first-- Germany or Holland? 
INT: Probably-- well, Germany was closer to Czechoslovakia. AM: Yeah, Germany. So then Holland. And we were not-- when we came to Holland, we were supposed to get off, as I told you. And-- but when-- the Dutch people decided not to allow us to disembark. So-- because I think they decided to seal the train and not allow anyone to come off. And that was the biggest disappointment for me, because I thought they-- they don't want us to get off the train. That seemed unbelievable. I mean, we were kids, little children. You must remember that we were much younger than our years, because we were brought up in a village which was very protected. And we were so young. We were not exposed to radio. I mean, we had a radio, but we never-- I don't remember ever listening to any radio programs. The only thing we listened to was music. And we didn't have televisions. And we were just going to school and playing. We were playing in the woods most of the time, or skating, or skiing, or swimming in the river. We had-- and we knew nothing about-- very little about the outside world. And suddenly we get to Holland, and they don't allowed us-- they didn't allow us to get off the train. But people came to the station with hot chocolate-- I mean, people of the Jewish community probably in Holland-- and brought us hot chocolate and candy bars and cookies. And that was very warming. And that made us feel better. Then we had to travel. Then we traveled on. We arrived in England in the middle of the night somewhere. I don't remember which port. And we got on the boat to cross the Channel. And one thing I remember, they were-- they served us English tea, which was absolutely horrid, with milk in it. It was dreadful. I hated it. But and that was very hard, to be on the boat. And we kept on saying, well, we're going to see Uncle [? Heine. ?] That made us feel reasonably good. Then we arrived in London. I wish I had kept the number that I had around my neck. I don't have that anymore. And my uncle was there. Our uncle was waiting for-- there were hundreds of children, and there were loudspeakers, and children with their tags on. And they were calling the names of the children. And we couldn't find uncle for the longest time. But finally we managed to meet him. And he came to meet us with my guardian, Fanny Bandit, whom he, in order to get us out, he had to get guardians for us.
And my guardian-- it was just a formality. All he needed to do is to get signatures. And he got-- that's what it was supposed to be-- signatures for our-- So he-- he happened to have a friend called Fanny Bandit who was a violinist. And she signed for me. And she had a car. My uncle, by this time, had lost his job, because obviously the war-- I mean, Czechoslovakia was occupied, and he no longer was able to be a representative. And he didn't have a car. He didn't have anything. He didn't have a job. So Fanny Bandit did have a car, so she came to the station with him. And now again, my memory's totally off. I can't remember whether we went to his home in London, where he was married and had a baby, young son, or whether we-- he was-- took us directly to the children's home in Burgess Hill, Sussex, where we were to live. That was a great shock to us-- especially to my older sister, who thought that my uncle should take at least my younger sister. But my uncle, who would have normally probably taken us, was married. And although his wife, apparently, was extremely helpful in getting us out, I think she just wasn't able to have us. And so we were absolutely shocked to be-- that we are going to a children's home. We never thought of that. I mean, that never came up. And I'm not even sure whether my parents knew that we were going to a children's home. And I don't know that they would have allowed us to go had they known that we were going to a children's home. But maybe my uncle communicated that to them. Now my older sister and my younger sister had a different guardian. Their guardian was Dame [? Mira ?] [? Hess. ?] She apparently signed for a lot of children, but she also was, since my uncle had the friends who were in the musical world, she was one of those guardians that signed for them. But this was just, again, a formality. And only later, when war broke out, it became more than a formality. They had to sort of take care of the children in some way-- financially if not otherwise. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] So we ended up in Burgess Hill, Sussex, in a children's home. There were 50 children. And none of them, except the three of us, and a friend of my-- they had a little girl who was 10 years old who traveled with us. She was the daughter of my uncle's friend. She traveled also with us from Czechoslovakia. And one other girl were from Czechoslovakia. Everybody else was from Germany and from Austria-- all the other children. And that was another-- an enormous blow to us, because they all spoke German. And we wanted to be with people from Czechoslovakia. Of course, after a while, at the beginning it was an adjustment, because we didn't speak German, and we didn't speak English-- not a word. And they looked down on us, because we came-- we were sort of from a village. They were [NON-ENGLISH], city girls. And they were, of course, more sophisticated than we were. But after a while-- it took a few months before we became very good friends. And we lived in Burgess Hill in Sussex. The name of the home was called Wyberley-- W-Y-B-E-R-L-E-Y-- Wyberley. 
INT: Before we talk about the home, can we go back a little to when you left Trstená? AM: Yes.  INT: What did you take with you when you left? AM: Just clothes. We didn't take much with us at all. Just clothes, nothing-- I don't think there was anything else. Clothes and maybe-- I don't even remember that we had photographs. But it must have had a few little photographs. That's about all. And no-- nothing else. No money. [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] Nothing. My parents, however, sent us packages for a long, long time. And they communicated with us. My mother-- of course, my father, his brothers-- two brothers and a sister-- came to the United States. My mother's-- no, my grandmother-- my father's mother-- was married. What-- it was the second marriage of my father's father, OK? From the-- the first marriage-- they had three children, and they all came to the States before the World War I, before World War I. And so my father was not in touch. He was from the second batch of children. There were five children in the second batch. And they were not in touch with the American family. There were two-- one brother lived in St. Louis, one brother lived-- one sister lived in Vermont, and one in New York. And nobody was in touch. My father was not in touch with them. But when war broke out, when my mother started finding the addresses, and they-- she approached them and asked whether they would take us. And they tried. The uncle in St. Louis tried to get us. And he communicated with England, and tried to get us over. But it was too late already. But he-- they would have taken us. And-- [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] so we didn't-- you ask me whether-- what we took with us. 
INT: Mm-hmm. AM: I don't know why I came to this, but never mind. Now, let's see.  INT: Did you have food packages when you left? AM: [INAUDIBLE] That's what I was going say. My parents sent packages to us, because they found a way of corresponding through these American families, and also through Switzerland they have somebody there that they knew. They sent letters to us through Switzerland, and also through Hungary, for the longest time. And so therefore we had letters from them until 19-- March-- the last letter from my parents was in-- the-- March 1942. And they sent us packages. My mother would write us in letter after letter. They would-- she would make-- first of all, we were all taught how to do things, how to-- particularly my older sister was made to understand that she would have to be in charge of the two of us, and she would be sort of as a surrogate mother. And she took it very seriously. She was 15 years old, and she was very accomplished already. She knew how to sew, and she knew how to cook-- sort of. She learned from her mother. She was the only one who learned anything. And my mother, by the way, coming back to this, was an excellent, excellent cook, and an excellent homemaker. I mean just first class in every direction. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] So my sister had-- my mother would sort of write to us, and send clothes, or whatever we needed, and she would send packages, with what little they had. If anything at all, she would send packages to England through various means. And they would send us things like stamp certificates to-- so we would be able to write, because we only had six pence pocket money a week-- six pennies. And from that we had to pay for our stamps to write home. We had a lot of correspondence with our parents. It took weeks and weeks for letters to come, but we did correspond. And the last letter was, as I say, March 1942, and they were deported in the summer of '42 to Auschwitz. So three months later, after the last letter, they were deported [INAUDIBLE]. [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] And-- but we didn't take anything, actually, anything at all. And, of course, this [INAUDIBLE] there was nothing left at home. 
INT: Could you describe your life at Burgess Hill? AM: It was a very lovely home, actually. It was quite luxurious. And we thought it was very luxurious. I don't know how luxurious it would be today, but in those-- it was a very beautiful-- it was a convalescent home which was converted to this children's home. It had-- it was like a mansion with a lot of grounds. And it had a tennis court, which I thought was very impressive. And they built an addition to the back of this building for us to live in, an addition was sort of-- were-- we were 16 girls in one room. I have a very good drawing of that room. And my two sisters and I and my-- a friend from Czechoslovakia. And there were 16 of us sleeping in the thing. We thought-- we were very impressed by the home. Of course we were country girls, you know. And so everything was impressive. I was very impressed with England. I mean, everything. I mean, one thing I minded, I missed about home, were the mud roads. I didn't like the paved roads, you know, I loved the country things. And the home, well, there were-- there was a matron, and there were nurses, and there were all kinds of people who were running the place. And there was a huge dining room, which was very elegant. And the breakfast table was set with a banana next to our plate every morning. And I thought that was super. And the-- everything was very luxurious, I thought. And it was very nice, except we couldn't stay there very long, because when war broke out we had to leave, because it was right near the coast, and it was being taken, you know, by the army. And it was also a restricted area. And also the money must have run out, because suddenly we had to leave. And people had to leave. And the big girls had to leave at first, and then the little girls, and then the little girls. And then we all had to be dispersed all over the place. And at-- nobody knew what was going to happen to any of us, because I am not exactly sure what happened. The-- the money for the home must have been provided by an organization that no longer could pay for it. And also because we couldn't stay there because of the area, since it was restricted, [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] we had to leave. But while we lived there-- OK, you wanted to know. We went to school. We learned to speak English. It was-- we went to school every day. We walked to the local school. And it was sort of an elementary. I mean, obviously, we were just learning to speak English. We didn't learn very much, except the basic things-- basic English. And since we were there only one year, well, when war broke out I think we stopped going to school. And all-- all the girls helped in the kitchen. I don't remember that I had-- oh, all the girls had little girls. Each big girl had a little girl to look after. That meant they had to take care of combing the hair, and looking after the everything, how they were dressed, and so on. It was very nice. It was a very nice home. And the thing [INAUDIBLE] was very painful about the place is that for me, when I went to the village, and I saw people walking with parents-- children walking with parents-- it was very difficult. And-- but we managed to be brave. [INAUDIBLE] shall I, what should I say? Very brave. And many times parents of some of the children did manage to come to England from Germany, or from Austria. And they picked up the children, and they went. That was also very difficult. I could see no way that my parents would ever leave, be able to come. There was no way that they would come, whereas other children were expecting their parents to come. For instance, the little girl who was with us from Czechoslovakia, her parents came and picked her up, and they went to Latin America. And now they're still alive. These-- these people are still alive in New York. I'm in touch with her. We are in touch with many of the people from the children's home. And those were very difficult times, when other people came. Now my uncle would come and visit us, and we would visit him. For instance, for Christmas holidays, we would go and visit-- stay with him for a week in London. And we loved that. I mean, he was wonderful. I-- he could-- I mean, he couldn't do anything, you know. He couldn't have us. But he was wonderful. As much as he could do for us, he did. And we stayed with him. And we would-- he would give us parties for us, and he would take us to theaters, and be very nice. 
INT: And when you had to leave Burgess Hill, where did you go? AM: Well, first of all, my older sister left. And she went to London. And she was, by this time, 16 years old. And she went to work. And she lived in a-- in a hostel which was run by a German woman. It was in Belsize Park. And she-- this German woman had a hostel where she had, I think, about maybe 10, 15 young girls living there. And there were three people to a room. And she provided-- she had-- also had meals for them. And my sister worked as an apprentice in a dressmaker shop. Or-- then later on she became sort of a cutter, or a dressmaker. In dressmaking it was mostly. And where we lived-- she lived in that home. When my little sister was-- we were all separated. When my younger sister was taken away, she went to live somewhere near Burgess Hill. She was taken in by some Quakers. And she [INAUDIBLE] had a very hard time, because she was only 10. And she hated being separated from us. She was very lonely, and hated it. But there was no-- nothing to do. Now this is where my older sister was so upset with my uncle's wife, because she thought at that point, definitely, she should have taken my little sister, which he should have done-- definitely, now that I think about it. Because she was 10 years old. She should have had a-- But my-- she was sent to-- in that area, around [INAUDIBLE]. And she went-- she was sort of moved from one family to another. She did have a hard time. She had one or two families which were very nice-- Quaker families. And unfortunately my sister died two years ago. And I wish I had asked her about the-- I never really knew exactly about the families. I know that she told me that Friday afternoon sometimes the teacher would say, who is going to take Ella this week, or something like that. And I think she had one or two families who were very-- very hard, very difficult for her. She had a very, very lonely time with them. And-- but she-- but she didn't. She went to school. She had the entire full education. She had English education. She matriculated and went to college. So she was well-educated. She was quite a-- a very well read, very-- a curious, intellectual person. But she was lonely, and she missed her mother and her parents very much. And she missed not being with us. So that was very hard on her. Now I came to London. When I came to London, my uncle took me.
And he went to my guardian and said, you've got to look after her. And I said-- I was in the room next to them. And my guardian said, you promised that I only have to sign-- although they were friends. She was a very nice woman. But she kept a-- and she was a spinster, a very well-to-do spinster who lived in a beautiful, beautiful place with a housekeeper. A very spoiled woman. She was a violinist. She had absolutely magnificent place, beautiful things. She was a great influence on my life. So was my uncle, by the way. She-- but she didn't want to have the responsibility for me. She said, you promised I wouldn't have to do anything. My uncle said, well, I didn't know there was going to be a war, and-- and something's got to be done. So she said, what-- well, finally, after a long argument, back and forth, and I'm feeling absolutely dreadful. Even though I didn't speak much English, I could understand that this was an argument about who is going to look after me. Finally, she came and asked me what I wanted to do. And I thought, I have do something that I can earn my own living immediately. I don't want to be a burden on her. So I said, I'll be a hairdresser, because I thought, I can wash-- not hair-- I can wash people's hair without having to be educated. So for the rest of her life she told the story to everybody, she wanted to be a hairdresser, but I didn't like that, so I made her do something else. Well, she-- my uncle persuaded her to give me-- if she-- if he managed to arrange to send me to college, to school, would she pay for it? Well, she finally said, OK, she will pay if he can get me into school, because I didn't speak English. She will pay for the school for a year or whatever. And I-- I could live with him, because his wife was, by this time, evacuated out of London because of the bombings. So she-- so he said, I could stay with him, and she would pay him a little maintenance. And she said, OK, she would do that. So she's-- he arranged for me to go to [INAUDIBLE] college-- [INAUDIBLE] college. But for that, he had to persuade the principal of the school to take me, because he said, how can she learn the shorthand when she doesn't speak English? But he said, please, give her a chance. It's her only chance, because she will pay for it. So she paid. She paid for it. And she paid for my maintenance of my uncle. And she gave me a $5 pocket-- five shillings pocket money a week. 
INT: OK, let's stop now. We'll continue on the next one. AM: How many more do I have to--  INT: November 10th, 1996, interview with Alice Masters, tape number three. You were talking about going to Gregg Secretarial College. AM: Yes.  INT: And [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] how long were you there at school? AM: Well, it's normally, I think, a two-year program. But my uncle implored the principal to let me come in, because he said, please give her a chance, because she doesn't-- because it's the only chance. So he said, OK, he would give me a chance to do it. So I worked extremely hard, of course. Didn't understand a word, but-- not much in any case-- but he took me. And then he complained to my uncle that I was working too hard, and I didn't associate with the other people in the school. And I was out of there in 10 months. It's a two-year program, but I was out of there. Because I was-- felt very obligated to my guardian to get out of there as fast as possible. I-- probably, it was a mistake. I shouldn't have paid much attention. She could very well afford to pay for me. She could have paid for much more. But I felt bad about having to do this, and she was so upset about it. So I really worked very hard. And I was out of there 10 months, which was probably a mistake. I would have been much better equipped had I stayed the full two years. But I-- whenever some example had to be given, the teacher would always call on me and show the class what the outline is. And, and I'm the-- and I didn't know what the outline meant, but I knew, by the sound of it, how to write it. In any case, as soon as I finished there, I left my uncle's place and went to live where my sister was, in a-- in the hostel, Belsize Park. And I went to work for a bookshop called Hatchards in London, and 1 pound, 5 shillings a week. And of that, I paid 1 pound to my-- so my-- for my upkeep. And from there-- I worked that thing a year, and, from there, I went to work at an engineering place. And after that, I was offered a job-- well, I was offered a job with a Czech government-in-exile, as a bilingual secretary. Which took a long time, because I could not be released from the job at the engineering firm, since it was war effort. And finally, when I was released, I worked for the Czech government-in-exile, [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] until I came to America in 1948. But I lived in London through the war, through the Blitz. If I think about it now, it frightens me, because I never-- I hardly ever went to a shelter. I was a fire watcher. And I just lived in England, in London, and watched the bombs drop all around me. And we had a-- we associated mostly with only-- almost exclusively with the refugee children, who were in that hostel. And we belonged to something called Young Czechoslovakia, and we went to all these groups-- all that-- all the refugee things. And we were-- had a reasonably exciting life. We didn't know exactly what was going on at home. We were very, very worried about it, but we didn't know-- have the news really. We didn't know. And we first-- we lived in that home, in a hostel. After that, we, my older sister and I, moved to the YWCA, where we had a matron, also. And we had to sign-- we couldn't stay out in the evenings. We had to sign in and out when we left the house. And we were, were given food there, breakfast and dinner. And we had a room, where we had three of us live together, my sister and I and a friend, [? Anna, ?] [? Anna ?] [? Fischer, ?] who was also a refugee from Vienna. And we lived there five years, until, finally, we had to leave. Because the matron said that it was maximum five years we can stay at the Y. 
INT: Excuse me. And-- [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] your job with the Czech government-in-exile? AM: Yes? I was very fortunate to get that job, by the way. It was a very, very, very unusual to be able to get a job like this. But I was very, very fortunate. I got it through someone who was also a member or at least came to the Young Czechoslovakia. And he-- I didn't realize who he was. He was a young soldier. And he would come. He was a very quiet young man. And one day, when I went there, on an errand for someone, for my uncle, he-- I met him. And I-- he said, are you working here? I said, no, no. And I said, I don't know any ministers. You know, you had to know somebody really high up to get a job there, because it was paid five times as well as anything else-- as anything else I ever had. It was impossible to get in there. And I said to him, I don't know any young-- any ministers, that's why I'm not working here. So he said, well, come and see me after, after lunch. I met him as he was walking out of the building. And I said to my-- to this person that I went to see in the government, on-- my uncle sent me there on an errand. And who is this man? I, I don't know his name, I just see him sometimes in the Young Czechoslovakia. He was very young, very handsome young man. And he said, well, you'll find out when you go and see him. And I said, well, what is his name? He said, his name is Meyer. So I went to-- to his office. And when I came to that office, it said Minister Meyer, Minister of Commerce. And I was absolutely shocked, he frightened me so. In any case, I got the job. But it took a long time before I could be released from my other job. I worked for them until 1948, when I came, through that job, to the United States. 
INT: Did you ever come into contact with any [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] officials of the government other than Meyer? AM: Oh, yes. Well, I worked in the building, in London, where all the officials were, all the Czech government officials. Yes, and we had the Czech Army in London, in England. And of course, I was so-- I can't tell you how patriotic I was. And, of course, there was always-- I mean, I never intended to stay in England or come here. I wanted to go home. And for years and years, I thought I would definitely go home. I could never envision getting married to anyone but a Czech person, because I love Czech poetry, and I love Czech songs. Czechoslovak and Czech songs, I should say. And of course, it didn't work that way. [LAUGHS] Uh-huh.  INT: And through the war years in London, and in England, actually, how were you treated by the British, as, as a Czech refugee? AM: Well, first of all, I must give all the credit to the British for having allowed us to come. They took 10,000 children, which was much more than anyone else did. And therefore, I was always very grateful to the British, number one. I was very impressed with them, because they were extremely brave and very wonderful, I thought. I mean, through the bombings, things stayed open, and everybody had a-- kept their chins up. And had a-- [LAUGHS] you know, very, very brave people. And I thought they were-- But they-- we didn't associate much with English people. They were not very warm. They were very reserved. And we had nothing very much to do-- except in-- at the YMCA, I had some English friends. But it was very rare there. I was-- I must say that the-- my guardian and her family paid very little attention to any of us. There was a huge-- my guardian had a huge family, with many nieces and nephews, who were married and had-- who had children, but they never had any-- English Jews, I'm afraid to say, did not take-- did not look after many of the refugees. Most of the children, who were in the homes, were in the non-Jewish homes. Now, that is the fact in England. No, I felt we were not part of the English scene, really. We were mostly with the refugees. 
INT: And were you aware of what was happening in Europe? AM: Not really, not really. And besides, we were so afraid of what was happening, that we may not have been-- we may have pushed it away from-- I mean, we didn't want to deal with it. I'm not sure exactly. We just managed to survive as best we could. Let's put it that way. We had so much to do with our own survival or trying to deal with our situation. Because having come from a very, very protective home and, you know, we were not-- we were so looked after at home and suddenly being left by ourselves, like that, and having to earn a living and had no one behind us. That-- But we were very worried about it. We talked about it a great deal. But we had no idea. But we said, all the time, that if anything was happening, that our parents would be safe. We felt very strongly that they would be safe because of my father's popularity. And also, we thought the village people would look after them. But they didn't. In fact, I think that when nobody else entered the village, but our own people did this. Because they were, you know, sent away, in, [SIGHS] in the summer of 1942. And I-- and I don't really know the full extent of what went on, because my mother wrote us long and detailed letters about-- but not about really things that were happening. And one of these days, when I feel that I can, can deal with it, I shall read those letters. Because I hadn't read them since the day I received them, because I can't get myself to read them. But I feel that I must, sooner or later, start reading them, and to get some kind of understanding, if I can, if she had written anything at all that would be what went on. But I know that my grandfather-- she did write something about my grandfather, that he was taken. That he had lost his house, and that he lived in a room without windows. She said, my-- your poor grandfather lives in a room without windows. I never knew exactly what that meant. But I wish she would have written more about what went on. But, of course, she also wanted to protect us. So I don't know exactly what went on. But we felt very-- we, we were sort of-- a hope against hope, we were hoping that they would be looked after. Or that we thought my father would be able to do something, hide somewhere. But his mother came to stay with them from Poland. And so once the old lady arrived at my-- at my parents' house, they just were completely unable to leave. Because they-- my father was very attached to his mother, and he would not have left her. So I think that was the problem. 
INT: You said you were separated from your little sister. AM: Yes.  INT: Were you able to communicate with her? AM: Oh, yes.  INT: Did you visit at all? AM: Only, we never visited her. First of all, we had no money at all. And also, we just-- we were busy. I don't know, we never visited her. But she came to visit us, and we were, of course, very close, and very much in touch. And my-- we relied a great deal on our older sister. She did our sewing, our mending. She did everything for us. And we really took advantage of her, to a great extent, because she was only a year and a half older than I was. But she-- I used to-- when I ran out of my own clothes, I would go into her drawers and borrow things from her. And she was very, very good. But after-- and she was like a mother to us. She-- we thought of her as a mother. And we were in touch with our little-- my little sister. And of course, we were very close when she-- as she grow-- when she came to London-- I, I don't remember exactly when she came. Oh, she-- after the Y, we lived in a room-- [LAUGHS] or maybe before the Y, I can't remember it now. We lived in a home of a-- also a refugee lady, who rent-- she rented a room to us. And we had a room there. And we had a hot plate. And that's where we cooked our meals. And I don't think she came to stay with us then. But at the very end of my stay in London, we also-- we lived in an apartment, or maybe a room-- a room, probably. And my little sister, I think, came to live with us then, after she graduated from-- I don't. But I-- I have to sort of-- I don't remember. But we were in touch, and she was with us during the holidays. Yes, of-- we were very close. And we were close after she married, and she came to stay in London. We were together a lot. 
INT: What do you remember about VE-Day? The end of the war? AM: Very little-- very little. I don't even remember where I was. I think it was a very anxious time, because we weren't sure-- my-- we were deciding who would go home, and how we would go home. And we were terrified of going home, to find out what went on. Because by this time, we probably knew a little more. And it was decided that my older sister would go home, almost immediately after the war, to-- oh, we had cables immediately after the war. We had cables. We had cabled to the village to ask about our parents. And we had cables back from a teacher who lived in our house. And he said that my parents were sent to Auschwitz in the summer of 1942. And that nobody's heard from them. And then we had cable from the village authorities or whatever. And we had cables from various people. And they all said the same thing, that they were sent. OK, during the war, by the way, we did go looking. We-- towards the end of the war, went-- looked at, at the lists of Red Cross, lists of people who were deported to the camps. And we saw our parents' name on the list. But we thought they would come back. I mean, we had no idea of the extent. When you saw a parent-- a name on the list, you thought they were just in a camp. You didn't know that this was a death camp. So we thought they would come back. So it was decided that my older sister would go back. I was, actually, tell you the truth, probably terrified of going back myself. But my older sister went by herself. She went to the village. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] Nobody was there. She went to-- our mother had written us letters saying where she-- who had what. And she said, this family is keeping this for you, this family is keeping that. My sister went from one family to another. Nobody gave us back anything. And they didn't admit of having anything either. She didn't get a thing back. She went to look in a place where my father was-- supposedly had hidden something. Nothing was there. The front yard was completely dug up. And afterwards, later, when I went back in 1969, I was told that the front yard contained all the belongings of the Jewish community, of the synagogue, and so on-- probably the Torah and other silver things from the synagogue. That was completely dug up. Everything was taken away. Only-- [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] also in the '60s, sometimes, or in the '50s, they dug up the back, where the barn stood. Behind our house, there was a barn. They were going to demolish the barn and build a building. And they found the boxes of-- that my father-- they found other things that were buried there. At that point, they turned it over to the authorities, because it was under communists, and they were afraid of each other that they would report. So they didn't keep anything. But, of course, I have a list of the contents that were hidden there, but I don't have-- I didn't get anything back, because it was given to the-- I don't know, it just, just disappeared. And so my sister went from family to family asking for things. Nothing was given back. She didn't get an iota, nothing. The house was-- [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] different people lived in my grandfather's house. And all the shops, they were now occupied by the peasants from the village. And nobody knew anything. [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] So, I-- we didn't-- we-- my sister came back to London. We decided there was no point in going back home. What's the point of going home? Where to? Oh, there was one family, I think. That was one-- three, three daughters of one family were back. And my sister found-- I think the-- my mother's sewing machine. And I think she gave it to them. She found it in somebody's home, and she insisted on having the sewing machine. And she gave it to these three girls. And that's about it. We decided to stay in London. We didn't know what we were going to do. Our uncle was in London. We were sort of in London. And we said, well, what should we do? We decided we would stay where we are. And my sister stayed in England. And I came to the States with my job. 
INT: How did your job take you to the States? AM: Well, I worked for-- through my office-- well, it's a longer story. But I-- through-- the-- when the International Monetary Fund had its second annual meeting in London, I was assigned to work for them, for a delegation of 15 delegates that were coming from the States and from Czechoslovakia. And I was assigned to work at that annual meeting, which I didn't want to do, because I was absolutely petrified. I mean, it was a very high-level delegation, and-- for the governor of the Bank of Czechoslovakia, plus the executive director of the International Monetary Fund. And I was just a very young girl, 22, and I was bilingual. And I wasn't that absolutely secure in my skills. But the person, who was also a refugee during the war but had gone back-- As soon as the Czechoslovakia was liberated, many of the people who-- with whom we were, went back to Czechoslovakia. And they were all high government officials. Some of them were refugees, like me. But they went back. One of those men, who went back, who was a high official in the Czech government, in, in Prague, and he's the one who insisted that I be assigned to the annual meeting. I think he had a real reason for it. I think he wanted-- he knew the writing on the wall, that I would be recalled back to Prague. Because all of us were being recalled after the communists took over. So he insisted. And I kept on saying, no, no, I don't want to do this job. And he said, you must do this job. She must do it. He didn't talk to me directly, he talked to my superior. She must be assigned to the annual meeting. And so I, reluctantly, went to work for the annual-- I was made to go to work for the annual meeting. And then, the people with whom I worked said, don't you want to come to, to Washington? I said, you know, who would have thought? And I said, OK, I'll take-- they said, will I take a test? I took a test. And in 1940-- March 1948, Czechoslovakia fell to the communists, the communists took over. At the same day, I was recalled back to Prague. All of us were recalled back to Prague. And the same-- and when I came to office, I had my recall notice to Prague. And then I said to my boss, excuse me, I have to go out and find a new job. And so I went looking for a new job. When I came back from having found a new job in London, my sister called to say that there is a letter from Washington, and that was a letter of appointment from the International Monetary Fund. So I came back saying, appointment accepted. And I came also-- not-- I didn't really want to leave my sisters, and I didn't want to leave England. But I thought, if I don't come to the States when this opportunity was being given to me, I'll regret it all my life. So I did come in 19-- I accepted the appointment. I came in March '48. And I have stayed with them for 35 years. And that's how I'm here. That's how-- that's how I ended up in America. 
INT: And where did you live when you first arrived in America? AM: I lived at-- the first-- you mean in Washington?  INT: Did you know anyone here? AM: No, I didn't know anybody here. No. I was hired as a bilingual secretary for-- to work for the International Monetary Fund. I stayed 35 years, and, of course, I became administrative officer. And I didn't know anybody here, not even the person I was going to work for. Because only the-- the group that I worked with in London. But they weren't-- you know? But I, I thought I'd stay a year and then go back to England. But I knew as soon as I arrived, and I started my job, that I would stay here.  INT: Why is that? AM: Because it was a wonderful job, and wonderful-- I loved it here. And I must add one other thing, I felt much more at home here than I did in England. Because many things here were more familiar to me, were more like my home, than ever in England. Oh, and now I feel very much-- in a way, the people were-- it was-- you know, I was more accepted here. It was quite different. Now-- but I feel very close to England now, because I feel very at home, and I have many English friends now. And I-- when I go to England, it's like my second home, because I've lived there for many years. And also, I see it's different, it's changed. England has changed, because, through the war, through the refugees, it became different. 
INT: And did you have a social life when you came here? AM: Here? Yes. Yes, I had-- well, I-- the first day that I came here, I-- because there was-- I came here during the cherry blossom festival, my office could not get a hotel room for me. So they said-- they said, would you mind going to the International Student House? And, of course, as soon as I-- it was a godsend. Because I loved it. I said, that a-- nothing better should have happened to me. I went to the International Student House the first night that I was in Washington. And I met-- made friends with, with people that I'm still very close to-- are the people I met the first night at the International Student House. And two of them were working at the Fund. One was a lawyer, and one was an economist. And we became-- we are still friends. They both live here in Washington. So I-- the-- it was immediate social life, yeah, yes.  INT: And how did you meet your husband? AM: Oh, we met in London in 1947. We met. I was-- [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] his very close friend, who was in the commandos with him, was a friend of mine. And we double-dated in London. Then we met again, here, in America, when he came on a Fulbright scholarship. And I was here. And I was-- we got together. We met again and got married.  INT: And what was your wedding like? AM: Oh, we were married-- well, since we had no family at all, neither he nor I, no one at all, we were going to be married at the International Student House. The students gave us a wedding. And the wedding was at 8 o'clock in the evening, on a Thursday evening, because Peter was working-- was a student in New York. He was a graduate student at the Parsons School of Design. And we met. I said, we were going to get married at the International Student House. Where else? And the wedding cost me $25 for the dress. The rest of it was done by the students. I invited almost everybody I knew at the International Monetary Fund, including the director of administration. They all came to my wedding. And the wedding was the simplest wedding you can imagine. They, they did-- it was a beautiful building, the International Student House, on 1825 R Street. It is a beautiful building. It is a beautiful hall where we had sort of dancing. And they, they served-- the cook there made a beautiful wedding cake, and they had a punch. And that was the wedding. And [LAUGHS] it was the simplest wedding, but it was beautiful, just the same. And Peter and-- it was Thursday evening, because Peter could take the weekend off. And then Monday, he went back to school, to New York, and I went back to work. 
INT: And when was that when you got married? AM: 19-- it was in 1950, on April 6, 1950.  INT: And-- [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] let's stop now and go to the next tape. AM: Yeah, the whole story. [LAUGHTER]  INT: November 10th, 1996, interview with Alice Masters, tape number four. We talked about your marriage. AM: Mm-hmm.  INT: Did you have children? AM: Yes, we have three children. My oldest daughter was Anne, my middle daughter is [? Kim, ?] and our son is [? Tim. ?] They both-- well, two of them-- they all lived in Washington, recently, but Kim moved to California and lives in Los Angeles.  INT: And did you talk to your children about your childhood and tell them about your experiences? AM: Not really. Later, I did, a little bit here and there. They know. They are very well aware of it. But we don't do it. We haven't talked about it. We did, and we didn't. Not at the early-- not when they were very young. Slowly, it came out, after years. But I don't know exactly when we started talking about it.  INT: And do-- AM: My daughter, [? Kim, ?] was very much-- wrote some poetry about it, because she really was very affected by it. My daughter, Anne, didn't talk about it too much, and our son. And they're all very aware of it. Yes.  INT: And did you keep in touch with other children-- AM: Oh, yes. 
INT: --who were on that transport with you? AM: No, not the transport.  INT: Mm-hmm. AM: Only one--  INT: Mm-hmm. AM: --the little girl what came with us, my uncle's-- the daughter of my uncle's friend. I'm still in touch with her. She lives in New York-- in New Jersey, actually. The other, from the transport, there was-- no. I've lost touch with everybody from the transport. I mean, we didn't know each other.  INT: Oh, OK. What about Burgess Hill, then? AM: The Hill-- oh, yes, we keep in touch. In fact, we had a reunion, 50th reunion of the Kindertransport in London a few years ago. And we-- they have regular-- I get a newsletter from them. I'm a member of that association. And I'm keeping in touch with them, yes. Quite a few of us, such girls from Wyberley, we are in touch, which is very nice. And, of course, I'm always looking for more of them.  INT: And did you ever meet Nicholas Winton? AM: Oh, yes, Nicholas Winton, I met at the reunion. For the first, first of all, I never knew about Nicholas Winton until the 50th anniversary of the Kindertransport. And I met him in London then. He came to the reunion. And he was wonderful. I was really thrilled to meet him. And he's a wonderful man. And about a year ago, he was in Washington, and he came here. He had lunch with us. We spent actually three or four days together. He-- and then we arranged for him to be interviewed at the Holocaust Museum. And we are in touch with him. We sent-- you know, we are supposed to go and see him when we go to London. And he is in touch with many of the children from his transport. He's very involved with it. The reason nobody knew about him is because he did-- never did anything about it. He didn't tell anyone. Well, it came out just before the reunion of the 50th anniversary, when he took all the documents to the archives. And that's how he was discovered. He was getting old, and he decided that he'd better turn the documents over to the archives. And that's how we found out that he existed. Nobody knew that he did this. 
INT: Do you know-- AM: Hence-- so now he's being celebrated all over.  INT: Do you know which archives he took them to? AM: In London.  INT: In London? AM: Yes. So, we are very, you know, fond of Nicholas Winton. And, of course, we owe him a lot, especially all the Czech children, because nobody was doing anything about the Czech children.  INT: Now that it's 50 years after the war-- AM: Mm-hmm.  INT: --a lot of time has passed. And you certainly went through a lot. Is there any message that you would like to leave to-- for the world, your children, your grandchildren? AM: Well, naturally, I want people never to forget what happened. And I would like people to believe that this happened, because there are some people who are trying to deny the Holocaust. It certainly happened. It happened to my family. It happened to all my friends. It happened to my-- all of my relatives, masses of them, my grandparents, my grandmother from Poland, my father's brothers, sisters, my nieces-- his nieces and nephews. I can't even begin to count how many people died in the Holocaust. The only person who survived of the entire family is one of my cousins, because he managed to get into the-- pretend to be Polish, and pretend to be Christian. He changed his name, and he joined the Polish Army, and subsequently ended up in the Russian Army. He is the only survivor. He went back to Zakopane looking. No one came back of maybe 60 people. Nobody turned up. Everybody died in the Holocaust. My-- his-- one of little children, who were five years old, were shot in front of the parents in the camps. What I would like? I want people to remember that this happened. And, of course, it-- it's-- it is just very-- the older I get, the more difficult it is to grasp or to deal with this kind of thing, because how could this-- how could people have done this? What-- what upsets me and bothers me more, that the numbers from the camps are, are not really-- do not really reflect the numbers of, of the real victims, because many people died in their homes or on the streets. They were murdered without being accounted for, because they just-- they could-- people were free to kill without having to be held responsible for it. And what is there to say? I mean the-- just hard-- just hard to deal with. And I just feel I-- every time I, I think about it daily-- not only daily, but all the time. And it's very difficult to-- not to think about it, especially when I-- when I am in the kitchen, and I'm peeling potatoes, or throwing away the peelings of, of things, like fruits and vegetables. And I put it down the disposal. I think to myself how people would have died for this crumb if they wouldn't have been able to get hold of some food. And I just feel everything I do reminds me of this. And I always feel that we are living in this-- I mean, I'm throwing away things that people could have survived on. And so naturally, everything I do, every, every, every movement, everything I do reminds me. I think about the Holocaust all the time. And it's, it's just very difficult to forget it. How can one? 
INT: Is there anything we haven't talked about that you'd like to add? AM: Well, I think we have covered mostly everything. Well, I must say, I do want to add one thing. When my-- when I had children, when I-- oh, I-- there's something very important that I have to add, yes. When I had children, I always felt terribly sorry for my children, because I thought they'll have to-- we don't know what awaits them, or what is past. Even that, even for my grandchildren, I feel sorry. Because when-- how can you tell those children what has happened to their families and to people like them? And it's a terrifying thing to tell the children, because the question would arise, can that happen to me, and can that happen again? And when I had babies, I used to think-- stand over the crib. And I'd said to my-- and I felt terribly sorry for them, because I thought, if they weren't Jewish, they wouldn't have to go through this. And, of course, that was a very-- Oh, that is another aspect I have to add. As a result of this Holocaust, I have not-- I have-- my father would be very disappointed in me, because I don't observe, and I'm not religious, because it's hard for me to justify religion. My father was so religious and prayed so much. And even probably during the-- during the terrible times, he was still praying. And I just can't see that. I don't see how you can be so religious, and this happens, and that you continue to be religious. So I felt I couldn't go to a synagogue after the-- after the war, I could never go to the synagogue. Because it would be so upsetting for me to sit in a service, like I used to go with my father. We used to sit upstairs-- women upstairs, men downstairs. And we went together to the synagogue. And it was so wonderful to go to the synagogue with him. After that, I could never do this anymore, because it was too upsetting. And so that would be one thing, that my-- I lost my religion as a result. I mean, some people continue to be religious, and maybe one day I will be able to do that. But not, not for a long time. And maybe there are other things that I have overlooked, but that's it. 
INT: Thank you very, very much. AM: OK.  INT: OK. Yep, What's in this picture? AM: Oh, this is the village, Trstená. This photograph probably was taken around the time when I left, around-- in the '30s-- '38, '39. This is my village, Trstená, from which I came, and where I hoped my parents would survive. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] It was a very small village surrounded by mountains-- very beautiful. CREW: That's OK. AM: --demolished that house--  INT: Mm. AM: --unfortunately. CREW: OK. AM: This is my grandfather's house. My grandfather lived in the front of it, the big part of it. And when my mother was married, they added the back of it. That's where we lived until 1938, when my father built a new house. Right in front of the house, you can see that there is a roofing advertisement. That was my father's business. And also, over the right window, at the top, again, my father's advertisement for his business, which was metal works. And also, my grandfather had a-- the Red Cross was in the-- my grandfather's house. It's-- and in the front of it we-- was a big garden. A big garden? [LAUGHS] It seemed very big to me, but was a small garden. And we grew our vegetables there. And it was a lovely house, but it's no longer there. It was destroyed. Of course, it says [NON-ENGLISH] under the metal works sign, where my father-- that was the roofing material that my-- my father represented. There was a bench up there, I see. Well, it was a very-- there's lovely memories for me, this house. 
INT: OK. AM: This is a picture of us just before we left, I suppose, maybe a year before, or six month before. On the-- coming from left to right, my sister, Josephine, my older sister. At the back of her is my uncle, who was the one who was responsible for our survival, who was in London. And-- CREW: Next to him? AM: --his name was Heinrich [? Heino ?] Dorner, D-O-R-N-E-R. His wife, next to him, Lotte Dorner, L-O-T-T-E D-O-R-N-E-R. Next to her, my grandfather, my mother's father, [? Adolf ?] Dorner. In the middle, my little sister, [? Ella, ?] Now dear [? Ella, ?] her married name was Appleton, [? Ella ?] Eberstark. And it is I, Alice, with the braids. And this was taken probably in 1938.  INT: OK. AM: This is the photograph of the house that my father built, and which was completed in 1938. We moved into it in 1938. And this photograph was taken after we had already left. Our parents took it so that we would see them in the photograph-- my mother on the left, a lady who lived in her house. She was not Jewish. She was the mother of the teacher, our teacher. She lived in our house, because it was big enough for three families. And my father. And this is the front yard in which the Jewish communities' belongings were buried, which was dug up during the war. And all the things were taken away, stolen. It was a very modern house. It had electricity, and it had bath-- inside bathrooms. Before that, we did not have those. And it was a-- we lived in it a very short time, maybe not even a year, before we had to leave. 
INT: OK. AM: I have a few things left that my mother made for us. This is an example of the kind of underwear. This is a nightgown that my mother made. And every stitch of it is by hand, including the button holes and the embroidery and beautiful cotton material. Beautiful way it's done. And this were the kind of things my mother did for all of us. The three of us had the same things. She made, then, all our clothes. And she embroidered every stitch of this. And I think it's-- it was beautiful. And all our underwear was embroidered in a similar fashion. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] With all the work, everything that had to be-- everything that we wore was made by her. This is-- these are the girls from the children's home in Wyberley, Burgess Hill, Sussex. In the middle is the matron, and to the left of her are probably the functionaries. I don't know who they are. But the-- And the-- my little sister is the sixth on the left-- on the right, from the right. My older sister is one, two, three, four, five, six, seventh from the left. And I am the ninth from the left.  INT: In which row? AM: On the last row, with-- I'm the one with the braids, but not the one on-- not the one in the-- there is another one with the braids, but it's not me. I'm in the last row. There it comes. You see it? These are mostly girls from Germany and Austria. There are just four from Czechoslovakia. 
INT: Go ahead. CREW: Go ahead. AM: OK, this is the portfolio of all the letters that my parents wrote to us-- my parents and my grandparents. And my mother wrote a, a lot of letters, and she tried to get them through to us, to England, through various means, through America and through Hungary, until Hungary entered the war. This letter was written in '42, I think, and it was censored. It says so at the top. And there are masses of letters. This whole book is full of them. And my mother wrote in several languages, because she could speak-- she could write in Czech-- or in Slovak, I mean, and in Hungarian and in German. The very last-- this one was written on January 12th, 1942, long-- just before, I mean, we have one more letter after that, I think. And the other letter, the last letter, came in March, and it was written in German I thought maybe she thought maybe it would be easier to get through if it were in German. And that was written in March, 11th of March, 1942. After-- that was the last letter that we've heard from them. After that, they were deported, in the summer, to Auschwitz. CREW: Go. AM: OK, and now this is when I went back to Czechoslovakia, to my village in 1969, for the first time, having been persuaded by my husband to finally make the trip. This is what I got back from the villagers. Some of them got together to meet us. And they gave me this torn book, which belonged to my mother, because they looked in the inside pages to see-- inside covers whether there was anything hidden in there. And they gave me-- were these photographs. And this is a-- the third-- I'm third on the left, with the long hair, with the braids, when I-- in the happier days, when I participated in the activities of the village. We used to go to a square and have all kinds of festivities. We would promenade there in the evenings with a band playing in the middle, and then we had all kinds of festivities. And we are all dressed in Czech costumes. And I'm-- anyway, from the left, I'm one, two, three, fourth from the left, with-- carrying flowers. And I loved those things. They were beautiful occasions. I don't know what this particular occasion was. And further, this is the book. And in this book, which was totally destroyed, there were a few photographs. And it included my father's driver's license, which was canceled here. It says Zrusenei, Zrusenei, which means 'canceled,' on November 16th, 1940. That was his driver's license. And I got that also in 1969 when I returned to my village, at-- I arrived at 6 o'clock in the evening, and I left at 10 o'clock the next morning, because it's all I could deal with. And this is what was given to me, including two or three other photographs. CREW: Now. AM: OK, this is-- a quilt is being made by the Kindertransport kinder of-- and this is my square for the quilt, which is now being done. I've just submitted it. And this quilt, my square consists of a photograph of my-- on the left, of-- which was sent to us in England after we had left. It was probably taken in 1940, just before my father's license was revoked, because the car is behind them. It was a convertible. And on the left is my mother, Sidonia Eberstark Dorner-- Sidonia Dorner Eberstark. And my aunt, her sister, her younger sister, [? Margitte, ?] who died somewhere. We don't know where. And my step-grandmother. I don't know her name, unfortunately. I used to call her omama. And my grandfather, [? Adolph ?] Dorner, and my father. 
INT: And your father's name? My-- Salamon Eberstark. AM: On the right is my father's mother, who came to stay with my parents after we left from Zakopane, Poland. And that is one of the reasons why my parents could not leave, because my father was very, very attached to her, and he wouldn't have left her behind. So because she came-- all her family had already probably dispersed. And so she came to stay with my parents. And they just stayed behind because-- with her. And this-- she was transported with them, in 1942, to Auschwitz.  INT: And her name? AM: Her name was [? Hannah ?] Eberstark. My granddaughter is named after her. These are three of us-- Josephine, Alice, and Ella Eberstark, Czechoslovakian transport, June 1939. And in the middle it says, they died. Their courage let us live. OK. These are my parents' grandchildren. Absolutely super children, and my parents, of course, would have adored to know them. But, unfortunately, they were not-- they never knew them. My daughter, Kim, who didn't participate in this, she is on the left. That's Kim Masters. She's a journalist. My daughter, Anne, who is a graphic designer. And my son is in the middle, getting married, Tim Masters. My oldest sister's children, [? Vera, ?] [? Vera ?] [? Esklar. ?] CREW: In the gray dress? AM: In the gray dress, next to my son. And Michael Knight. They are the children of my older sister, Josephine. And the two girls here on the right, are my youngest sister's children. It's [? Kathy ?] Appleton and Helen Appleton. Helen is a doctor, and [? Kathy ?] is a graphic designer. [? Kathy ?] lives in Western Samoa at the moment, and Helen lives in London. 
INT: And when and where was this taken? AM: This was taken last October, and at my son's wedding, October 1995, here in Washington.  INT: Go ahead. AM: This is a picture of my grandchildren with her-- their parents-- my daughter, Anne and her husband, Michael Quinn. And my-- in the back, in the middle, is David Quinn, my oldest grandchild, and Sam Quinn, and Hannah. Hannah is four years old. This was taken at the wedding of my son, in 9-- October 1995.  INT: Could you please introduce your husband? AM: I'll be happy to. This is Peter, my husband, who I met in London in 1947, and again in New York-- or Washington in 1949. And we've been married 46 years, the happiest years of my life. PETER MASTERS: It's certainly the happiest years of my life, because I have a rare treasure with a similar background. And we have a lot in common. We enjoy each other's company. We are never bored.  INT: Thank you both very much.