INT: My name is Isabel Alcoff. I will be conducting an interview with Dora Zuer Iwler in Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania. The date is December 15, 1996. And the language is English. CREW: Any time.  INT: Good morning. Could you tell me your full name, please? DI: My name is Dora Zuer Iwler, and I was born in Poland, in the city Chodorow.  INT: OK. And your date of birth? DI: I was born in 1923, July the 1st.  INT: And can you spell your maiden name and your last name, please? DI: My maiden name is Zuer, Z-U-E-R. And my-- my married name is Iwler, I-W-L-E-R.  INT: And spell Chodorow, please. DI: Chodorow, C-H-O-D-O-R-O-W.  INT: Did you spend your whole life in Chodorow? DI: Yes. I did spend my whole life in Chodorow.  INT: All right. Tell me a little bit about your town. DI: Well, my town is a very small town. We had approximately about 2,000 Jews. And unfortunately, after the war, only 20 survived. And it was a lovely town. We lived very happily together, the Christians and the Jews. And I had a lot of friends.  INT: OK. Did you attend school in Chodorow? DI: Yes. I went to a Catholic school. And it-- it was nice. It really was nice, till-- till I became a little bit older, and I sensed a little of the antisemitism, which I tried to persuade people to take me as Dora Zuer, not as a Jew. With some it worked, and some didn't. There were-- Chodorow also had problems because there were Ukrainians and Poles, which they hated each other. And of course both of them did not like the Jew. 
INT: OK. Did you have a choice whether or not to go to a Catholic school? DI: No. I didn't have a choice not to go to a Catholic school, because that was the school by the-- by the government. And I didn't mind. We were all together. And it was nice. Of course, there were prayers in the school. And I was conducting my own prayer. And it was lovely. I will tell you the truth. I never paid too much attention to it. Because I loved people, and I felt very happy in school.  INT: OK. Now, did you get any Hebrew education? DI: No. I went to-- for a short time to Beit Yaakov, and I didn't like, somehow, the system. I don't know why, but I stepped out. I didn't-- I had a little bit because my brother learned, so I learned with him. But not too much.  INT: OK. So at home, can you describe how your Jewish education was done at home? DI: Well, I come from a very Orthodox home. My father was a Mizrahi. And every day, my father prayed, went to the synagogue and prayed. And the house was strictly kosher. Shabbat was a very, very important thing. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] And--  INT: Describe your home for us. DI: Like what?  INT: Was it a big house? Did you have many bedrooms or-- DI: No. Well, first we lived in a home which was large. And then when I-- we became older, we moved to a three-- not three-bedroom, three-room apartment, which was close in the city. And that was OK. In the winter it was a problem, because we all congregated in one room because of the heat. 
INT: OK. Tell me about your family members. DI: There was my mother, my father, two brothers, and a sister. My mother's name was Sima. My father's name was Juda. My older brother was Moshe [NON-ENGLISH]. My sister was Miriam. And my little brother was Yitchak.  INT: OK. Now they-- they all lived with you, all-- all right. Did you have any other family members living with you? DI: No. I lived at home.  INT: OK. Now, did you-- you went to school until what age? DI: I-- I was-- till 16. It was right before the war. I finished [NON-ENGLISH]. It's a business school--  INT: OK. DI: --that we went to in the evening. Because the gymnasium was 35 zlotys, and my father couldn't afford to pay that. And I went to night school. And in 1939, the war started.  INT: OK. Now, what did your father do for a living? DI: A lot of things. We had a restaurant with somebody, in partnership. And then he was collecting, buying scrap iron. And then at the very end, at the very end, he had a food store that we, my brother and I, helped out.  INT: OK. And did your mother have an occupation outside the home? DI: No, honey. She had four children to occupy her. And she also helped out occasionally.  INT: OK. Describe what your mother's typical day would have been like. DI: Oh, honey, there wasn't enough hours in the day. She had a lot-- she-- she washed-- they were washing clothes. It's not like here in the United States. You had to warm the water and bring in wash from four children. And then she boiled the clothes and did everything. It's so-- it's-- it was a hard life. Life was very rough, very hard. 
INT: Was she a good cook? DI: Yes, my poor mom.  INT: Tell us some of the things you used to have at home. DI: Everything. Whatever she cooked was delicious.  INT: Yeah? What was a typical Shabbat meal? DI: The typical Shabbat were chopped liver or gefilte fish. And there was chicken soup. And there were meat and all kinds of kugels. It was a real feast. It was lovely.  INT: And how about holidays? What did you do on holidays? DI: Oh, they were terrific. Also the same way. Holidays were very big. I mean, were very-- celebrated very lovely in our home. It was a sense of security.  INT: Did you go to the synagogue on holidays? DI: Yes, I did. I went on Shabbat, and I went mainly on the holidays also.  INT: And your brothers? DI: My brothers and sister, everyone.  INT: OK. Did your father go more often than that, or did-- DI: Yes. My father went in the morning, to the morning services. In the evening, sometimes he did at home.  INT: OK. Did you ever do any traveling as a family, any vacations? DI: Yes, we did. We did. But we went to relatives. Isabel, there wasn't enough money to spend on everything. He had four children. He had to clothe them, feed them.  INT: OK. DI: And it was hard.  INT: Were these relatives out of town? DI: Yes.  INT: OK. Do you know some of their names, or can you remember some of them? DI: Well, there were-- my mother was one of 11 children. And we went to the city, [NON-ENGLISH], where she was born. And we spent with family. During the summer, we mainly spent vacation there. And my father had a brother who lived in-- [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] oh, I forgot. 
INT: OK. DI: But who also we went to spend there. My grandmother lived with him, so we spent time there.  INT: So you knew your grandmother. DI: I knew my grandmother, yes.  INT: OK. Now, you said your mother was one of 11 children. DI: Right.  INT: And she came from a different town than your father. Do you know how they met? DI: No, I don't.  INT: No. OK. Was your father ever in military service? DI: I don't know.  INT: OK. OK. And how about your brother? Did he ever get involved in military service, your big brother? DI: Honey, my brother was young. He was 17 and 1/2.  INT: OK. So he never was enlisted in the military. DI: No.  INT: OK. DI: When the war started.  INT: Now, you mentioned that you were working in the business with your father sometimes-- DI: Yes.  INT: --you and your brother. Can you tell us what you did there? DI: Nothing. We were selling oranges, apples, and so forth, and helping out. And also my mother used to make a-- a potato. Not latkes, but like kugels. And we used to sell them in the store too, which was lovely.  INT: OK. All right. And you did this after you finished your business school? DI: After, yeah. No. I did it during-- during.  INT: During business school? OK. DI: Yes. After I finished business school, we were-- the war started in 1939. And being that I speak Polish and Ukrainian, I had to learn Russian. 
INT: OK. Now, did you learn languages in school or at home? How did-- DI: No, in school.  INT: In school. DI: In school. Well, in school, I had-- we had-- it was Polish. And then we had to have an hour-- an hour-- an hour, one hour in a week, Ukrainian. And then we had to take a foreign language, which I took German.  INT: OK. Did everyone in town at this-- or in school know that you were Jewish? DI: Yes.  INT: OK. DI: It's a small town.  INT: Were you treated differently at school in any way? DI: Sometimes, sometimes. But I didn't pay attention, which I was used to it.  INT: OK. And how about in the business? Did you have Jewish customers or other customers? All kinds of customers? DI: All kinds of customers, mainly Jewish customers.  INT: OK. And did you live in a part of town that was mostly Jewish, or-- DI: Yes. We lived in the middle of the town, not far away from the business.  INT: And how far was the synagogue from your house? DI: Also on the corner, right on the corner.  INT: OK. And were there other Jewish businesses also in that area? DI: Oh, yes, sure.  INT: What type of businesses were-- DI: All kind of business, all kinds. There were goods, and there was groceries, and there were butchers. There were-- it was like a shopping center, small. I'm referring to a shopping center. A small place that you do business. 
INT: Tell me, your father was a businessman, and did he trade goods with the other businessmen, or did he pay cash for everything? DI: No, no, no. He didn't trade goods. He did it on his own. To tell you the truth, I wasn't very much involved. So I really don't know too much about it. Don't forget, I was 16 years old when the war started, and I was very busy in my own circle, so I did not pay too much attention.  INT: What did you do outside of school and work? Did you have any hobbies or friends? DI: I had friends. We talked, and we read. We walked. We--  INT: OK. Did you have a best friend when you were a teenager? DI: Yes, I had a lot of friends, not only one best friend.  INT: Do you remember any of them? DI: To tell you the truth, I remember the faces, but not-- no names. One was [? Winter. ?] Her name was [? Winter. ?] Was a sweetheart.  INT: OK. DI: And she--  INT: Did you have a rabbi in your town? DI: A rabbi? There was a lot of rabbis.  INT: OK. DI: We had about three synagogues.  INT: All right. So you had three synagogues. Did you attend all the synagogues or one? Just-- DI: No, no. Just one. The one that the ceiling from that synagogue is in Beit Hatfutsot, which is in Diaspora, in Tel Aviv. The ceiling from that synagogue that we went-- 
INT: The Diaspora Museum. DI: Yes.  INT: OK. All right. Tell me, did you know anything of what was going on in Germany between 1933 and 1939? DI: No, nothing at all. Nothing at all.  INT: Did you ever read newspapers? DI: Yes, we did. But I never-- never paid attention to it.  INT: OK. And did you ever hear anything on the radio about any anti-Jewish laws or anything that was going on in Germany between '33 and '39? DI: No. There was-- lately you saw there was, on certain Christian homes, the very sophisticated homes, there was written, for dogs and Jews is forbidden. Those were the marks that when you saw some students were fighting with Jews. Those were little things that they were starting in our hometown.  INT: This was in what year? DI: In 1939.  INT: OK. All right. And did you have any contact with people who were escaping, refugees from Germany, at all? DI: No.  INT: No. DI: That was in 1939. Nobody escaped then.  INT: OK. Now, did you have any way of knowing any problems were coming? DI: No, nothing.  INT: All right. And that summer, before the war broke out, did anyone in your family discuss the possibility of leaving Poland? DI: No, dear.  INT: OK. Did any members of your extended family leave Poland before the war? DI: Nobody. Nobody left.  INT: OK. All right. Now, in September 1, 1939, where were you? DI: In September, I was in the-- in the city, in the home. And the Russians came in. I was two years under the Russian regime. I told you that I started learning Russian. In two months, I learned, and I worked for the Russians. The Russians confiscated our store. Not only our, every store. And my brother and I worked for the Russians and also my father, because it was like a [? cohort. ?] You had to work for-- for the government. And it was OK. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] Everybody was living equally. What they did in our hometown, first they took the rich ones, the very rich. They took them out, probably to Russia, probably to Siberia. And the people who did-- did not have money, who were poorer, remained in the city and worked for the government. 
INT: OK. What other changes took place under the Russian occupation? DI: Not too much. Nothing. There was very strict under the Russian. I recall, one time, I was five minutes late. So the second time was already a note on the door. Not on the door, on the wall. That in Russia, if a person is late, it means [NON-ENGLISH], which means it's against-- like a sabotage. And if this will repeat, they will send me to Donbass. Donbass was a coal mine. They will send me for a year to Donbass, just to be five minutes late. It was very strict.  INT: What type of job did you have? DI: I was working like a [NON-ENGLISH]. A [NON-ENGLISH] is a [NON-ENGLISH]. How do I spell this in English? There was-- every peasant gave grain, gave wheat. And we checked the wheat, if-- how much dampness it had and how much other little things. To a certain-- to a certain point, you had-- you can accept it. Because the peasants, what they did, in order that it should weigh heavier, they put some sand in it. They put some water in-- in it. I recall, it was only 17% of dampness you were allowed to take.  INT: Was it like an inspector or-- DI: Inspector. It was-- there was a laboratory. It was about 17 girls. And we had fun. It was nice.  INT: OK. And who supervised this? Was it somebody from-- DI: That's right. A-- from the Russians supervised us. 
INT: OK. Was it all Jewish women? Or was it-- DI: No, no, no, no. There was Christians and Jews.  INT: OK. So everyone was treated equally. DI: Equally, very nicely, yes.  INT: All right. And how long did you have this job? DI: Two years.  INT: OK. DI: Till the Germans came in.  INT: OK. And then what happened? DI: Oh, [SIGHS] everything. Horrible. See, I don't know how they worked in other cities. But in our hometown, the first thing, the killing started.  INT: And when-- what was the date of the Germans? DI: I think it was in June. In 1941, the Germans came into the city Chodorow. The first thing what they did, they start killing, on the street.  INT: Can we go back? Exactly how did the Germans take over from the Russians? Was there a battle, or was there just a political-- or-- DI: Nothing.  INT: They just-- DI: There was no battle. They walked in. The Russians left, and the Germans came in, very easily. There was no fighting.  INT: OK. And were there any political decisions that went with this that you know-- DI: No political decisions. Nothing. Nothing that I know of.  INT: OK. DI: But the-- yes.  INT: So the Germans came in in 1941. And how-- how did this directly affect you? DI: How did it affect me? The whole-- everybody was affected by it. They start selecting people. The-- first-- first the elderly. They start killing all the elderly people, the Jehovah's Witnesses, the Gypsies, and the homosexuals. 
INT: How were they killed? DI: Killed. They were killed. They were taken away, and we never saw them. And there were people also killed on the street. They were cutting the beards from the elderly people, from the religious people. Isabel, it was horrible. [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] And-- [SIGHS] and then they-- they took people my age. At that time, I was 18 years old. They took us to work. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] Again, I explained, I don't know if they were the same way in every city, but in my city, in my town, this is the way how they did. They collected the young people, and they sent us to work.  INT: OK. Were you still in your home? DI: We were still in our home, yes. All of us. And my father, may he rest in peace, he built a bunker under the cupboard in case when the Nazis will made an aktion, they will come and-- and-- and grab people, they will be able to go in and hide.  INT: Now, how did he know that there might be an aktion? DI: Apparently, he knew that. I don't know how my father knew about it. He probably-- people started talking, and this is what he did.  INT: OK. Now, you said when the Germans came in, they made everybody work. Can you tell me what everyone in your family was doing? DI: Oh, well, they first-- my mother was home with the children, with the smaller one. My brother went to work, I went to work, and my father was taken to work. And then I was assigned by the Germans to work in one Ukrainian family, which she was out of town. They had a-- he was in charge of the forest, her husband. And they had two little children. I work in-- in the-- in their garden. And she liked me very much, and I liked them. They were very nice people. And I worked into their house. 
INT: OK. DI: Almost like [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] for a few months, quite a few months.  INT: OK. Did you come home every day from that job? DI: No, I didn't. I stayed there. And then one day, when they made an aktion in our city, the lady told me, Dora, you will have to go to the city. And I said, what's going on? Why do I have to go? She says, something is going on that the-- all Jews have to concentrate. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] And when I went, and they took me to the station, I went to the station, and there was people. My mother was taken there. And she was in the cattle car. I didn't know about it. But while I was waiting on the station, one of the Nazis who knew the Ukrainian family, who saw me there, pulled me out from the crowd.  INT: OK. Now, when you were-- when the Germans occupied Chodorow, were there any regulations that were passed? DI: There was a curfew. We weren't allowed to go out in the evening. We had to wear our band, the-- the Star of David. It was a white band with a blue Star of David.  INT: OK. And were any things taken from you? Any possessions taken from you? DI: I-- we had no possessions to be taken. First of all, what's happened, there were about-- in our place, there were six of us. There were a lot of people from different villages, when they were coming into the city. A lot of people were put in in our home. There was almost, like, 17 or 18 people living in our house. But this wasn't done by the Germans. This was done by the Judenrat, which the Jews who were appointed by the Nazis. And they did this, which they had no choice. 
INT: OK. DI: It was like concentrating all the Jews, like in a ghetto.  INT: All right. Now, your father's business had been handed over to the Russians. And-- DI: Not handed over. They took it.  INT: Taken from-- OK. Now, what happened to his business after the Russians left? DI: Who knows?  INT: OK. So what-- he didn't have a job anymore? DI: By the Germans?  INT: Yeah. DI: Nothing.  INT: OK. And so did your family have any source of income? DI: To tell you the truth, I don't know. It was very hard. They probably had money and bought some food. I remember, one time, I went to my friend, my Christian friend. And she gave me some potatoes and some flour. Because there was hunger. People were swelling from hunger. There was hunger. There was nowhere to buy, and there was nothing to buy with.  INT: OK. At the point-- you said you had some Gentile friends. DI: Yes.  INT: Were they helping you or not helping you when the Germans came? DI: I-- I went to two of my friends, and they were very nice. They were helping.  INT: OK. All right. Now, you came back to Chodorow on-- and you said that the-- one of the men, one of the Germans, recognized you. DI: Yeah, one of the Nazis pulled me out of-- from the crowd, yes.  INT: And where did he take you? DI: Nothing. They put us in-- there was a few of us. They put us in a barn. And the following morning, I went back to the same lady, to work. 
INT: OK. And what happened with the rest of your family? DI: Well, when this first aktion, my mother was taken to the cattle car, and my sister was killed. My father and my brothers and I, we buried our sister. The second aktion, my little brother was taken away. He was only 12. We don't know when, and we don't know where. So there was only my father and my older brother and I, we remained. And they made the city free of Jews. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] My father went to a city [INAUDIBLE]. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] That's what he told me he's going to do. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] And my brother was going to go to the partisans or to somewhere. I don't know. I wanted to go with him. He wouldn't want to-- he didn't want to take me. And I was going to go to Lwow. The same Ukrainian lady had a sister who lived in Lwow. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] And I was going to go to her. Because they already thought that they will-- I will be able to be there. Unfortunately, her chauffeur recognized me, and I couldn't be there. And this is how I was caught.  INT: OK. The chauffeur recognized you, and what happened then? DI: Nothing. And so the lady-- her sister could not take me in, because the chauffeur knew I was a Jew.  INT: OK. DI: Because I was in her sister's place, there, so he knew who I was. 
INT: OK. DI: So I would like to go back, the parting with my father and my brother. That was horrible. We never saw each other again. And we didn't know what-- what's going to happen. [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] And [SIGHS] this is--  INT: Do you know the approximate date that you-- DI: When we parted?  INT: Yes. DI: No. This was in-- this was in the beginning of 1942. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] I remember, it was cold. I think it was-- because I went to Lwow. And I was staying on the street, and they were-- I don't know how to explain what they make-- what they did, the Nazis, they were catching people on the streets, with the help of the Ukrainian Militsiya, and also Poles. Some Poles did participate too in it. And while we were all caught, we were taken to Janowska Camp.  INT: OK. And tell us what happened there. DI: In Janowska Camp? Well, in camp-- the life in camp was horrible. In the morning was a roll call. And you had a piece of bread and a little bit of coffee. And then you went to work. In the evening, you had a little bit of soup [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] with a piece of bread, and that was it. But it wasn't-- it wasn't the food. It was the life, what life. Every day, every-- not only they doing-- every hour, somebody else was shot. Somebody else was killed. In our camp, there was no crematoriums. People were killed on the premises. People were digging ditches, and they were-- while they were digging, they were killed. 
INT: OK. All right. And did you ever hear from your father again? DI: Never. I don't know what happened to my father. I don't know what happened to my brother.  INT: OK.  INT: OK. All right. You were telling me that you were in the Janowska camp. Can you tell us about the Janowska camp? DI: The Janowska camp was on Janowska Street. I think it was 135 Janowska. I don't remember. It was like a hell camp. It was terrible. I was so angry at everybody-- that people are killed every moment. And nobody cares. Nobody's here to help us. I was angry starting-- I'm sorry-- at God. [CRYING] I was angry at Canada, United States, at the Vatican, the churches, the Christian world. Nobody cared. People are killed for nothing. And my-- I wanted-- as much as I loved people, I could not be attached to anybody. Because I wanted to escape from that inferno.  INT: Right. Explain to me-- you said it was on a street. DI: Yes. It-- this Janowska Street, yes.  INT: OK. Was it enclosed in any way? DI: It was enclosed with wires, electrical. You couldn't go near the wires. And we-- it was like-- it was a prison.  INT: OK. Now, what were the living conditions like? What did you-- where did you live? DI: We lived in the barracks. There were barracks. And we slept on the bunks. Sometimes we had straw. Sometimes we didn't. 
INT: OK. And what did you do day to day? DI: Oh, [SIGHS] first time I was working in the barracks. And then I was helping out in the kitchen. And then I was very fortunate. They send me to work in the fields. Then I was free.  INT: Mm-hmm. DI: And I was looking how to escape.  INT: OK, now, who was supervising the Janowska camp? DI: Who was supervising? There were Nazis. And there was mostly Ukrainians in our camp.  INT: OK. Now, the Ukrainians-- were they local people? Or were they-- DI: I don't know them.  INT: You didn't know any of them? DI: I didn't know them. I didn't know any of them.  INT: Right. DI: And I didn't want to know them. They were horrible. They were just like the Nazis. They were killers.  INT: How far away from your home were you? DI: I think Chodorów-- Lwów is about 60 or 70 kilometer. I really don't know, honey-- maybe more.  INT: OK. DI: I really don't know the geography too well.  INT: So how did you go from Chodorów to Janowska camp? DI: I told you. I went to Lwów.  INT: How did you go? DI: I went by train.  INT: OK. DI: Yeah.  INT: All right. And now, at the Janowska camp, you didn't know anyone. Were there any family members? Any-- DI: Nobody. Nobody was there. Everybody was-- we became a family later, but everybody was strange. 
INT: OK. DI: So let's go back to the field, where I-- we were working. And the weeds were extremely very high. And I said, what am I going to lose? They are going to kill me anyway. Everybody is killed. I will not be able to survive. Let me take a chance. I went into the weeds. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] How they didn't-- they usually make a roll call. That was luck was with me. And I stayed through the night. The following morning, I walked in the city. I took off the-- mine Star of David band, and left it in the field. And I walked in the city and portrayed as a Christian-- no papers, nothing to show. I knew about that they were-- the Nazis were also taking Christian boys and girls to Germany, to work in a munition factory. So that was my lie. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] And I found a job, with-- I looked in the paper, and I found a job with a couple janitors. Both of them were elderly people. They lived in Lwów. And it was on the street Kopernika. They took me in. And I told them-- I lied to them. I didn't tell them the truth. And they felt sorry for me, and they took me in.  INT: Do you remember their names? DI: No.  INT: Oh. DI: I don't remember. But they were elderly. He was mine age. He was 73. He had asthma. He lived-- he laid mainly in bed. And she were-- they were such sweet people. And she was such a sweet old lady. They didn't have children. And you know what a janitor does-- takes care of the tenants, brooms out the sidewalks, the care of-- does the shopping for the tenants-- whatever. This is what I did. This was going on for more than a year, like, almost a year, three months, four months. The dates I cannot recall too well. Till one day, the-- I was brooming the outside, [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] and schoolmates from my school saw me. Because the university was very-- not far from-- actually, it was on this-- not far from Kopernika Street. And three of them saw me. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] Some of them-- I don't know-- one or two or all of them-- I don't know-- told the government, told the Nazis. A few days later I was picked up. They came to the-- to the main door. The bell rang. And I went out. And they said there was a plainclothes man with a Nazi, and he said, I would like to call-- talk to Miss Sophie. I said, I am Sophie. And she-- they said, we would like to see your papers. What papers? I had no papers. I told them right away that I am Jewish. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] We walked in in the house, and the two elderly people asked me. Sophie, Sophie, what's going on? And I told them I'm Jewish. And the old man was laying in bed. He said, Jesus Christ-- what I have lived to see at my old age. At that moment, I turn to those two Nazis. I says, if you have got in heart, if you believe in God, please do not hurt them. Because I lied to them. They didn't know that I'm Jewish. At that time on the wall was hanging a whip. I must have touched the nerve of the Nazi-- not the Nazi, but the plainclothes man who was Polish. Because I talked to him. He must have been a Volksdeutsche. Half of-- one of the parents was German, and the other parent was Polish. And he took off the whip and started whipping me. I says, please don't hurt them. But fortunately enough, later on, I found out they were not hurt. They were not killed. Because when the Nazis found a Jew in a Christian home, they killed the Christians too. 
INT: OK. OK. The German, the Nazi, and the plainclothes man-- where did you go? DI: Well, they took me on the-- to Lonsky. I didn't know. But they took me on the side-- they-- they were walking on the sidewalk. I wasn't allowed to walk. I wasn't-- I wasn't-- I was walking near them. So he said, tell me where there are some more Jews. And I will let you free. Even if I would have known, I would have never told him. I says, I don't know. He says, you filthy Jew. I'm going to kill you with my own hand. I-- at that moment, I didn't care if he would kill me, because I had it. It was enough. So I said do you know what? I'm so glad that you will have me on your conscience. Instead I should have you on mine. At that moment, with his right hand, he slapped me. For three days I couldn't hear. Then he took me to-- they-- the two of them took me to Lonsky toward [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] jail. I have to think a little moment. It's Lonsky Jail. And they are also are concentrated-- I don't know if I pronounce it right. It's 'Lonsky' or 'Lensky--' something like that. And I was there for a week. I want you to know this was already in 1944. The Russians were already approaching. [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] And if I would have been another couple months in-- in more than-- in Lwów, I would have been liberated by the Russians. So they took me. I was a week there. And then they took everybody back to Janowska camp. 
INT: Everybody that was in the jail with you? DI: Everybody who was concentrated there, they took them back.  INT: Mm-hmm. DI: This is what I know. And we were [? out ?] a few months, about, I believe two months or six weeks, or eight weeks, or nine-- nine weeks. I don't remember. At that time, I was assigned to work in the kitchen.  INT: OK. You were back at the Janowska camp. DI: In Janowska camp, and I worked in the kitchen. After a short time being, as-- as I said, two months or-- I don't remember, but it was-- but in the meantime, the Russians were approaching. And Janowska camp was already-- there were shrapnels. There were bombs falling around. And matter of fact, I says, good Lord, if I get killed, I didn't care. But as long as I take all the murderers along with me, the Nazis. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] And one day, they decided to evacuate, to leave the camp. So they [? put ?] us four in the row. And we were walking. There was, again-- it was about two. They caught me, I believe, in May. And it was like in July, or June. I don't remember, because I remember it was a short time. Janowska camp was liberated by the Russians. And we walked. There was maybe about 400 to 500 inmates. I don't know how many. And we walked about 80 or 90 kilometer till we came to a big meadow. And that was not far from [NON-ENGLISH]. And near that meadow already-- being that I was free, I looked around. Maybe I will be able to escape again. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] So there was a railroad track near the meadow. And I said to my girlfriend, let's go up and take a look. Maybe we'll be able to escape. She says, they will kill us. I says, what's the difference? We're going to be killed. Or they will kill us in our-- in our back, or on the front. They will kill us. So we walked up. We were approached by a Polish conductor, who was Christian. He was dressed in a navy blue uniform. He said, what is it here? I said, we are from the Janowska camp. He said, where are you going? I said, I don't know. He says, who are you? I says we are Christians. He says, are they all Christians? I said no. They are Jews and Christians. Maybe he would help me if I would tell him I'm Jewish. But I was afraid, because there was a lot of collaboration among Christian people. They collaborated with the Nazis. And I was really afraid to confide in them. There was a proof already. Mine roommates from my school, they told on me. So that left fear. That left fear in me. I was afraid to confine me. 
INT: Mm-hmm. DI: He said, would you-- would you like to escape? I said, yes. He said, follow me. If there was any miracle in my life, it was then. The two of us followed him. We went to a Polish home. We slept through the night. The following morning, everybody was running away from the Russians. And we were going, like, towards the Russians. But we didn't walk in the main road. We went through the fields-- the two of us. We walked a whole day. We were extremely tired and hungry. We saw a little light. We walked in a village. We walked in. Again-- the same lies-- that we are Christians. We escaped from Germany. And here they gave us something to eat-- again, a miracle. They were hungry, the people also. That night they killed a goose. And there was potato with a goose. Believe me. Today filet mignon doesn't taste as good as that soup tasted then. We ate. We went to-- on the loft. We slept through the night. The following morning, we went from village to village to look for a job, again, with the same lies-- that we are Christian. We escaped from Germany. We found a job and a farmer. And he took us both in. I had a little problem with my girlfriend, because she looked Semitic. So she stayed in the house. She took care of the cows, of the horses, of the manure, and did everything. And I worked in the field. We were there another half a year, till January. What am I talking? Yeah, six months. Right. Till January 1945. In January 1945, we were liberated by the Russians. And when I saw the first Russian, I hugged him and kissed him and started crying. And he's-- and I do speak Russian. So he said, are you Jewish? I said, no. I was afraid of my own shadow. 
INT: All right. Can we go back a little bit? When you went back to the Janowska camp for the second time, did you see any changes? Anything different from the first time you were there? DI: No, dear.  INT: All right. Were there any people there that you knew or recognized? DI: No. No. Everybody was strangers-- was strangers.  INT: All right. And the conditions were exactly the same-- DI: The same thing.  INT: --as when-- DI: The same thing, yeah.  INT: OK. Now, when you left the Janowska camp to-- when they liberated the camp, they evacuated the camp, were you given any food? DI: Nothing. We had a piece when we sat on the meadow.  INT: All right, then. DI: Each of us received a piece of bread.  INT: OK. And how far did you walk when you left the Janowska camp? Do you know? DI: I told you before-- 80 or 90 kilometers.  INT: OK. Now-- and when you were-- were with a girlfriend, you said? DI: Yeah, Albina.  INT: Albina. Would you remember her last name? DI: No.  INT: No. DI: I didn't know her last name.  INT: OK. And the farmer who gave you and Albina the job, do you remember his name? DI: There was in a village that was called-- not far from [NON-ENGLISH]. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] And his name was [? Brady. ?] I think so.  INT: OK. DI: We call him Uncle and Aunt, just-- 
INT: Mm-hmm. DI: --again, not to be suspicious.  INT: Did they ever find out you were Jewish? DI: No.  INT: OK. Now-- and were you still in this area when you were liberated? DI: When we were liberated, we were another few weeks. And we were going to go home. We found a ride with a-- with a farmer, peasant-- took us to the city Sanok. That was Friday. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] We-- the Jews were in Sanok were liberated a half a year before we did. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] And there was a young gentleman who fell in love with my girlfriend Friday-- met her Friday. Sunday they got married. At her wedding, I met my husband. [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] Of course, our courtship was longer a little bit-- lasted three weeks. Because when I-- when he met me, I had two teeth were broken by-- a Nazi beat me. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] I had a dress made from a military blanket, had no shoes. So he took me to the dentist. He took me to the shoemaker. They bought me a dress. And after, in February-- we were liberated in-- in January. And February 28, we were married. This February is going to be 52 years that we are married.  INT: And what's your husband's name? DI: My husband's name is Israel. And God blessed us with two beautiful children, and three gorgeous grandchildren.  INT: OK. Now, did you ever find out where your family went, your immediate family? Did you ever hear from any of them again? DI: No. Nobody survived. Because every city had a statistic who survived. And we had the records of every city. So I found out that nobody survived in our-- from my family. 
INT: OK. And your mother who had 11 brothers and sisters, did you ever hear from any of them? DI: Nobody. Just one daughter.  INT: One daughter? DI: One daughter and two-- from another sister-- one daughter from one sister, and two sons-- one son from one-- they were in Russia. And one lived in Palestine, then, now Israel.  INT: Mm-hmm. OK. And how did you find them again? DI: When I went to Israel, I met them there.  INT: OK. All right. And your husband-- was he also a survivor? DI: Yes. My husband had a hard life. He-- there were 10 children. [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] And he lost-- he survived two brothers and one sister. My husband was in a cave for almost over two years, with two brothers.  INT: OK. All right. Now, you were in 'Saknow,' you said? DI: In Sanok.  INT: Sanok. DI: Sanok.  INT: I'm sorry. Sanok. DI: Yeah.  INT: And how long did you stay in Sanok? DI: Well, in Sanok, I stayed, when we got married, three months.  INT: Mm-hmm. DI: I wanted to go to Palestine very much. I didn't want to be in Poland. I didn't want to be in Germany. So one day, there were two groups of Poles in Sanok-- actually, in Poland. There was the-- what's called the Armia Krajowa, which was the police of the land. There was some-- they were Poles against the Polish regime who was under the Russians. And the one day, the mayor of the city was killed. And there was-- their-- their office was not far from our home. It happened Friday night. I said to my husband, if God will help me, that I will survive on Sabbath, Sunday morning, I'm leaving Poland. Because we have heard when a-- when a Jew went back to his village, he was killed. He never came back. The Poles were killing here, were killing there. I says, I did not survive to be killed by Poles. I want to go back. I want-- I want to go to Palestine. Sunday came. We left Sanok. And my husband had a sister who lived in Hungary. We went to her. And from there we went to-- to-- via Italy, we stopped in Germany just for a day or two. And we went to Italy. Unfortunately, we couldn't go to-- legally, we couldn't go to Palestine. My husband's brother went to Palestine, and he winded up in Cyprus. So then I was expecting our first child, Jeanne. And he wrote to us, do not come now, because the conditions in Cyprus are very bad. Wait. And my husband really didn't want to go. We have relatives in Pittsburgh. Their name is [? Krieger. ?] And my aunt and uncle send us an affidavit. And we waited in Italy four years to come on our Polish quota. 
INT: OK. Tell me about your life in Italy. DI: Oh, beautiful. Just we didn't have anything. But the people in Italy are so beautiful. They are just wonderful. They have so much love and so much compassion. I just love them. So it's funny. I was born and raised in Poland. And it's also a Christian Catholic country. And here is Italy, who is a Catholic country, a Christian. I don't have that feeling towards the Poles as I have towards the Italians. Because they were so kind, so good. We didn't have any-- I mean, nothing. I remember when Jeanne was born, we had a sheet. We tore the sheet in six pieces to have diapers. But we were so happy. And then when-- a lady-- I don't know who she was. She was Italian. And she was near me. I didn't even have a doctor to have the child. There was a woman, a midwife.  INT: Uh-huh. DI: And she was staying me and pressing on my neck. And she brought me so much clothes-- children clothes. I don't know who the lady was. I couldn't even tell her grazie. I didn't know-- I didn't know that word, that you couldn't speak Italian.  INT: OK. DI: I have very pleasant memories from Italy.  INT: All right. The four years you were in Italy, was your husband working there? DI: No. We were getting help from Joint.  INT: Mm-hmm. DI: And also from UNRRA. Joint is a Jewish organization. UNRRA is under national organization. And we also received packages from our relatives from Pittsburgh. 
INT: Mm-hmm. DI: And here and then, maybe he sold some few pieces when we got packages from-- and certain things we didn't need. So he went to Piazza Vittoria, and he sold him there. But we didn't have too much, and we didn't need too much.  INT: OK. Did you have contact with [? Iz's ?] family after that, in Palestine? Did-- over the four years, did they ever tell you that you should change your mind and go to Palestine? DI: Oh, my-- the brother--  INT: [? Iz's ?] brother? DI: --his brother, who was in Cyprus--  INT: Mm-hmm. DI: --the younger brother, told us not to come-- wrote that.  INT: But after that. DI: After the--  INT: After independence, did-- DI: --oh, yes. Of course, after that, honey, I-- we wrote to each other. I was six times in Israel.  INT: Mm-hmm. DI: Israel is very much a part of my life. And I love Israel very much.  INT: OK. What-- when did you come to the United States? DI: I came to the United States in November-- the 22nd of November 1949.  INT: And how old was Jeanne at the time? DI: Three and a half.  INT: OK. OK. All right. And you came directly to Pittsburgh? DI: I came directly to Pittsburgh, yes.  INT: Tell us about your trip. DI: Oh, [LAUGHS] we went-- we came from Italy. We embarked from Napoli-- Naples. And we came with It was a military ship. I was sick all the time on the ship. I was-- I says, let's go back to Italy. I didn't want to go. So we came. It would-- I was sick. And then poor Jeanne had the measles on the boat. And when we came to New York, I wanted-- so she was so sick, the poor thing. And we-- we couldn't help her. They didn't want us to be in New York. So we came. We took the train and came to Pittsburgh. The following day, my aunt-- may she rest in peace-- came. And she called a doctor. We were in-- still city hotel, in the north side. What a memory that. It was horrible there. [LAUGHS] 
INT: OK. And how long was it before your husband got a job? DI: Well, we-- I think we were a month or six week-- weeks. That Federation helped us. My husband found the first job on Carson Street with the Gerson Brothers. My husband is a tailor. And he worked there for one year. He liked-- the people were wonderful, but he wanted to be independent. So we found a cleaning store in Hazelwood for $300. But we didn't have the money. So we went to the free loan association. They loaned us the $300. And this is how we started. We'll never forget the first customer. She came in. She asked, well, the price. She brought something in. My husband was supposed to repair. And she says, how will the job look? How will the job look? The price is right. He says, lady, me no talk. Hands talk. And this is how we started. UNIDENTIFIED SPEAKER: [LAUGHS]  INT: OK.  INT: Reel number three of my interview with Dora Iwler. Dora, before we go on and talk about your life in America more, I'd like to go back and ask you what happened to your friend that you had worked with on the farm. Did you ever hear from her again? DI: Yeah, unfortunately, Albina died when my son was bar mitzvah. She died of cancer. She had two children, and she became sick, and she died. She lived in Canada. We kept very much-- very close in touch with her. 
INT: OK. DI: But--  INT: And did you ever hear from anyone else in your hometown after the war? DI: From my hometown, yes. I-- I met-- I didn't meet-- I talked with her. She lives in Delaware. Her name is Dorothy [? Fingeret. ?] She's also from my hometown. We exchanged some views from our peoples who survived. Otherwise, I didn't. Yes, that's true. And I met another friend of mine whom I met in Italy, who was my brother's friend. And he had a picture. And my brother was on his picture. So I took a picture of it. This is--  INT: Mm-hmm. OK. DI: Not too many survived.  INT: All right. Now, tell me more about your life in Pittsburgh. DI: Well, in Pittsburgh, I was very fortunate. I have family here. I have cousins who were very nice to us, who accepted us right away like a family. And as I told you before, we opened a cleaning store, which we did alteration pressing. The cleaning we send out. I call it a sweatshop. So my husband and I worked. It wasn't easy. It was very hard. We lived nine years in Hazelwood. And then God blessed us with another child. Jerry was born in 1952. So my husband got his son. He wanted a boy. So we have a daughter and a son. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] And it was hard. It was very hard. And I'm very grateful to United States. America gave me the opportunity, and I took advantage of it. Both of my children went to college. Jeanne is a teacher. And it's funny. She teaches now foreign children English. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] And Jerry's a lawyer, again, a blessing. Jerry has three children. And-- 
INT: What are their names? DI: They're-- they're Jessica, Zachary, and Marjorie. And I cannot forget the mother of the children, Suzie, who made me happy as a grandmother.  INT: Mm-hmm. And where do they live? DI: They live in Solon.  INT: Which is where? DI: It's near Cleveland.  INT: OK. All right. Now, tell me about your involvement in Jewish life. You're-- are you religious? Are you observant? Did you become more or less observant after the war? DI: After the war, I think for that I cannot forgive also. He took my faith away too-- Hitler. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] But still, as I said, I was very angry at the God. If it's a grudge, whatever it is, I have to hold on to him, because he blessed me too with two children and three grandchildren. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] I am more-- I'm not as Orthodox, but there is still orthodoxy in me. I'm more Conservative. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] And I'm very much involved in my community. I am involved in the Holocaust Center. I'm involved also in Technion, which it helps-- in Israel, and also in Na'amat, which is actually the welfare we are supporting the children in Israel. We have a lot of nurseries, homes for battered women, homes for young girls, who we take in and we teach them how to sew, and how to do. I guess, mainly, I'm involved in it because it's-- it's in Israel. 
INT: Tell me where your strong feelings for Israel come from. DI: Oh, [SIGHS] my strong from-- it seems like I was a Zionist when I was born. My father was a very big-- he was a Mizrahi. He was a Zionist. I'm going to give you a part of my-- of his saying before we parted. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] He said, I hope to God I will see you. But the one thing I wish to see before I die-- [CRYING] is the Jewish flag. [SOB]  INT: OK. And that meant a lot to you. DI: That-- now I'm trying. I don't have to try to hard, because I have a great love for Israel. And I have a great love for people, and especially my people, who have suffered so much through the age-- years. Israel is very much part of my life. If something happens in Israel, it happens to me too.  INT: OK. Now, you are involved in the Holocaust Center. Can you tell me some of your activities as part of that? DI: Well, I am involved, and I am on the Speakers Bureau. I go to schools, to certain universities, high schools, groups of people, and I tell them about my life.  INT: Why do you do that? DI: Why? Because people have to know, and mainly children, the youngsters. They have to know, because some of them, they're our legacy. Some of them will be in the government. And they should know what happened in the 20th century-- [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] to people-- that the world stood still, and nobody cared. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] And a great injustice has happened to the people, just because of a different religion, because of a different race. And I think the future-- in order to build a better future, you cannot forget the past. This happened. It's so unreal. And I still don't know why this happened-- by cultured people, by the Germans, who were so cultured. Can you imagine how much engineering it took to build the crematorium in different concentration camps? So that people can be killed more-- mass. 
INT: Are there any parts of your experience that you would like to tell us, that I haven't asked about? DI: Well, [SIGHS] there is one part before we were leaving the concentration camp in 1944. We were staying four in a row. The whole camp was evacuated. We were staying, putting up. And left-- to my left was a lady who was shot through a few months ago. Her leg was hurting. And to my right was a lady who had no idea what a concentration camp was. She was caught a day before or two days before. She was hiding in the forest. That lady [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] wanted to live. A Nazi came and said to her, come. You will go on a wagon. She says, no, sir, I can walk. There is nothing wrong with my legs. She knew the score-- what's going to happen. That poor soul had no idea what concentration camp was. She said, I want to go on the same wagon that she will go. I pulled her blouse in the back. I said, dummy, stay. They're going to kill you. The Nazi saw. Our eyes have met. And then I thought to myself, why did I do that for? He's going to kill me too. Because I know the score. I know what's going to happen. And he gave me a smile, such a-- [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] that poor soul was fighting. She said, sir, please let me go. I can walk. This one was trying to go on the same wagon-- what I pulled. I didn't bring it to her attention. She had no idea what I was doing. A few minutes, both of them were taken away. And we heard the shots. They were killed. 
INT: OK. Is there any other message or lesson that you think can be learned from the Holocaust? DI: Well, my message is not to hate, [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] and to be there if somebody is in need-- not to be a bystander. Be involved. See the injust if it's done to somebody. Be there. Try to help. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] I don't know what else to say.  INT: Thank you very much. DI: You're welcome, honey.  INT: All right. Dora, you're going to tell everything you want to tell about. CREW: OK. DI: This is my grandmother, Etya. She's my father's mother. And she was fortunate enough that she died before the war. She was a sweet lady, whom I loved very much. I didn't have a picture, but I have a cousin who lives in New York, and she gave me that picture. CREW: OK. DI: [NON-ENGLISH]. UNIDENTIFIED SPEAKER: You can be very proud. And this is very good for your [NON-ENGLISH]. This will be very-- CREW: Camera's rolling. UNIDENTIFIED SPEAKER: Oh. CREW: OK. DI: This picture, this is my-- my older brother. His name is Moshe Lazer. He was 18 months older than I. We had very, very, very pleasant years together. He was very handsome. And because of him, I had a lot of friends. And I miss him terribly. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] The picture I found. A friend of my brother's was in Italy, and he had a group picture. And I took out that picture. This is the only picture what I have from my siblings. I don't have any more. CREW: OK, Dora. DI: This is a picture was taken 50 years ago when I was pregnant with my daughter. I had this-- my husband and I. It was taken in Italy. And here are a couple of friends of ours who were with us. Unfortunately, both are-- they both passed away. CREW: OK. DI: This is a picture of my granddaughter's bat mitzvah. It's my son, my daughter-in-law, Jessica, the girl, the bat mitzvah girl, Zachary, grandson, and the little one, Marjorie. They are the pride and joy of my life. I'm sitting next to my husband, who is my partner 51 years, whom I love very much. Behind him is my daughter, my first child, who is my friend. JEROME IWLER: [INAUDIBLE]. DI: And my friend, and friend. Whatever I need any promise, I come to her. And behind me is my son. What do I-- what do I say about you, honey? He's my handsome son. [LAUGHS] JEROME IWLER: I live too far away for you to come to me with every problem. DI: Yes, I can't. And this is my sweet family. And of course, my three grandchildren unfortunately couldn't be here. They live in Solon. They were unable to come.