INT: Today is January 10, 1997. We are conducting an interview in English with Clara Heller Isaacman in Philadelphia, Pennsylvania. My name is Irene Dansky. And we are conducting an interview with Clara Heller Isaacman at her home in Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, on January 10, 1997. The interview will be conducted in English. Would you tell us your full name, please? CHI: My name is Clara Heller Isaacman.  INT: Could you spell that for us? CHI: Sure. C-L-A-R-A capital H-E-L-L-E-R capital I-S-A-A-C-M-A-N.  INT: And can you tell us, please, where and when you were born? CHI: I was born in Romania.  INT: In a particular city-- what city where you born? CHI: The city of Borsa, B-O-R-S-A.  INT: OK. When were you born? CHI: I'm not going to give you my date. [LAUGHTER]  INT: OK. [LAUGHTER] How long did you live in Romania? CHI: I lived in Romania-- I don't remember Romania. I must have been a year or a year and a half before my daddy decided to-- no, I was more than a year and a half-- four years old-- before my daddy decided to leave Romania.  INT: OK. Why did he leave Romania? CHI: He left Romania-- he used to tell me a story that he left Romania because of anti-Semitism. He was Romanian born and raised there. And he went to vote. And he had to cross a bridge. And every time he crossed that bridge to vote once a year, he used to be beaten up. And the last time, he was very sick and came home, practically nearly killed because he went to vote. And he decided that he didn't want his children to be brought up in a country like that. 
INT: So where did they move? CHI: We moved to Antwerp, Belgium.  INT: And who was in your family at that time? CHI: My older brother, Heshie, my sister-- and my younger brother wasn't born in [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] Romania. He was born in Hungary. Because my mother went to visit, I understand, her family. And that's what happened. But we had lived already in Belgium.  INT: What was your father's full name? CHI: My father's full name was Shalom, S-H-O-L-O-M, Heller, H-E-L-L-E-R.  INT: And your mother? CHI: Rose, R-O-S-A, Halpert, H-A-L-P-E-R-T.  INT: And where was she born? CHI: She was born in Hungary.  INT: When you were living in Antwerp, was there anybody in your household besides your immediate family? CHI: Yes. We had a helper, somebody who lived in with us, a maid.  INT: What was your childhood like there? CHI: My childhood, I remember, was very pleasant. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] My parents were-- we were upper-middle class. My daddy was in the diamond business because everybody in Antwerp was in the diamond business. But he also had a soda factory, the only soda factory in Antwerp. And I remember it very well. It was-- we had the house and then a garden, a little garden, and then the factory in the back. I went to Hebrew school. I went to public school. I went to camps. I belonged to youth movement. And I had a very lovely education. I also remember my parents, who, even they had-- they didn't always give me. I had to work for it. I had to do something for it. I think that's why I survived because they showed me the value of work. My friends were Jewish friends and non-Jewish friends. [PAUSES FOR 5 SECONDS] My best friend was a non-Jewish friend, who later on-- I will talk about it. Maybe I should right now-- but disappointed me, because when Hitler came in, she didn't want to see me anymore. 
INT: Now, about what time-- about what year did your family move to Antwerp? CHI: My family must have moved to Antwerp-- I really don't know exactly. But I would say in 1926, '27, or '28, between those three years.  INT: OK, so long before the war started. CHI: Absolutely.  INT: Were there special holidays? Were the Jewish holidays celebrated in a special way in your family? CHI: My father was an Orthodox Jew. So the, the celebration was according to the Bible, what you do according to Jewish laws. My mother was a worldly woman. And she bended. She didn't always follow exactly. But I remember our Sabbath. We had, every Friday night, a beautiful table set with the best china. My daddy went to synagogue. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] When he came home, my mother had lit the candles. And we had a Sabbath. We sang. We prayed. And we-- the family was together. That evening, nobody could have separated us but Hitler, who did later on.  INT: Were any of the holidays, Passover or Purim-- or any special things you remember about any of those? CHI: Well, during Purim, of course, dressing up and going to Hebrew school, and wanting to, to be-- win the first prize as the Queen Esther. But I, I don't think I ever won it. And also, Passover-- during Passover, my daddy always had strangers at our Seder, those who couldn't have a Seder. And I remember a lot of people in our home. And I also remember very well when we opened the door for Elijah during Passover, my daddy used to say, maybe somebody else doesn't have a room. And maybe somebody will walk in. Won't be Elijah, but it could be somebody who needs a meal. The other holidays were Hanukkah-- were full of gifts. We-- [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] my Christian friends and my Jewish friends, we exchanged gifts. But we never associated and never said it's the same holiday. Because we knew it was much-- it was different. So we-- one day, I asked my daddy, can I go to church? I would like to see how they are celebrating Christmas. My daddy was hesitant. He didn't want me to go. But my mother convinced him. And the only thing I remember-- and it rings in my ears-- he said, don't kneel. And Antwerp has a beautiful cathedral. And I went to midnight mass. And we-- [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] and I celebrated with them. Of course, I did not kneel. But I will never forget the holiness there that those people felt. I didn't. To me, it was something that I was learning. I was a Jew, and I should know this, too. And that's what my mother told-- convinced my daddy, that I should go and see it. And I [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] went home very satisfied that I was able to see somebody else's holiday, how they are celebrating it. 
INT: When your family was in Antwerp at that point, was there a big Jewish community in the city? CHI: Yes. The community was divided, very Orthodox and conservative. There were no reformed Jews, as I would put it now. And the community was one, though, when it came to anything to help, to do, to celebrate. It was a very big Jewish community. As a matter of fact, before Hitler, there were 50,000 Jews in Antwerp. And 5,000 remained alive. And I am one of the 5,000.  INT: Did the Jewish community fit in well with the rest of the city? CHI: Yes, as far as I know. Because I-- the only thing I can remember is the school, a public school, where my mother and all of us mixed with everybody. And I didn't feel anti-Semitism. I remember my street. It wasn't all Jewish, but most of them were Jews. And I didn't feel that I was different, better, or somebody else was not as good-- and my teachers. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] The rest, I remember my daddy having partners who were not Jewish. And I never heard him say anything derogatory about them. Or if he did, I didn't hear it.  INT: Were there any experiences of anti-Semitism other than in the school, something that was in the newspaper or anything like that? CHI: [LAUGHS] I don't think so. The only thing I know that-- I was brought up from when I was six or seven, I belonged to a youth group, to a Zionist youth group. Each one of us in my house belonged to different youth groups. One was more Orthodox. One was socialistic, and so on. And we, we-- our goal was once, when we grow up, to see Palestine then, of course, and maybe to live there. So my friends, and my ideals, and my, my looking to my future of my life, was one day to be with Jews. And there was no other question. Even if I stay in Antwerp, I will-- my dearest friends and my nearest friends will be Jews. Because I was with them in the-- I went to camp with them in the summer. I played with them. I hiked with them. I was-- the house was always full of children. 
INT: Let's get your family organized chronologically, OK-- the children. CHI: It was-- it was my brother, my older brother. There were first, Clara, then Heshie, then Frieda, and then Elie.  INT: OK. So you were the oldest? CHI: Yes.  INT: OK. I'm sorry. What language was spoken at home? CHI: We-- my mother and father spoke Hungarian and Romanian. They didn't want us to-- when they didn't want us to understand something, that's what they did. And the language that we spoke was Yiddish. When I went to class, and school, and on the streets, we spoke Dutch, Flemish. And we also spoke French.  INT: Were you aware of the changes in what was going on in the world? CHI: Yes, I was. Because in my home, we spoke about the changes. And there was-- I heard my mother and father speaking about changes. And I heard them speak about Germany and what's happening in Germany. As a matter of fact, in 1939, my daddy brought home a 16-year-old boy or so. And to me, he was like a big hero or something. And my mother said, where are your parents? And he was explaining at the table, at the dinner table, that he didn't know where his parents were and that he left. His parents gave them enough money to leave Germany because they were afraid of his life. [PAUSES FOR 5 SECONDS] My daddy always used to bring home-- my daddy went to shul every day in the morning to pray. And he always used to bring home people for dinner, also, in the evening. And my mother-- and that's why I remember it very well-- was upset that day that she didn't have such a big meal. And she said, why didn't you tell me you were going to bring somebody home? And my daddy said, so give him my, my food. I'll eat something else. And this is how I was brought up, my home. 
INT: How did you become aware of what was going on, besides visitors? CHI: In the youth group. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] One night, we had a meeting. We had an ulam, U-L-A-M, a meeting room. And our leader was telling us about what Hitler is doing. And he was saying that maybe one day, all of us will have to leave even Antwerp, Belgium. And he told us about the Youth, Y-O-U-T-H, Aliyah, A-L-- [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] how would I spell Aliyah? A-L-O?  INT: I. CHI: A-L-I-- my god, I can't spell anymore-- Y-A, Aliyah. And they were planning already, the-- in, in Palestine then, there were leaders who were planning to bring to Palestine young boys and girls.  INT: And that-- when was-- CHI: As a matter of fact, my leader, who was in charge of us in Antwerp, left end of 1939 with the Youth Aliyah. First, they were going to France. Then they were going to Switzerland. And then they were smuggled into Palestine. That was one of the stops. [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] I wanted to go. My brother wanted to go. My mother never-- she said, you're so young. We-- I can't let you go. And in 1941, one group went. And [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] they caught them on the street. They stopped to eat with the-- across the street a German barrack. And the Germans caught them. And they were all killed.  INT: Let's go back to 1938 for a minute. How did your parents feel about being in Antwerp at that time? Did they feel secure? CHI: They were very safe. They, they-- my daddy-- I heard my daddy say many, many times. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] My uncle came from Czechoslovakia in 1939. And he begged my father to go to Palestine with him. And I remember my uncle-- my father saying, it won't happen in Belgium, not in Belgium. And, as a matter of fact, I remember my uncle very well because he-- was my first watch. He brought me a little watch. And he left. And he, from Czechoslovakia-- he was in the furniture business-- and he hired a plane. And he filled the plane with all his belongings. And they flew to Palestine. And this is one of my mother's brothers. My mother had seven brothers, one that remained alive and has children in Israel now and grandchildren. 
INT: What was your uncle's name? CHI: Emil Halpert, E-M-E-L-I, Halpert, H-L-P-E-R-T. I have to see the word. [LAUGHS]  INT: That's all right. OK. What gave your parents a sense of security? CHI: Because they had trust in the Belgium-- people. And I think they had trust in the king that, later on, disappointed everybody.  INT: Did your parents belong to any political groups at that time? CHI: I don't know.  INT: Did you? CHI: Well, the Zionist group was a political group. It was a socialist-- but I was too young to feel that it's a political group. I knew it was a group that is for Israel.  INT: Did you belong to any other youth groups at all, or-- CHI: I belonged to the scouts. As a matter of fact, [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] one-- when Hitler already had occupied us, and I marched with the scouts, they pointed at me to the Hitler unit. We have a Jew.  INT: When did things begin to change in Antwerp? CHI: The first time was in end of 1941 or in, in middle of 1941, when we have to-- had to wear our Jewish star. And the Jews were not allowed to go out after 6 o'clock. The businesses were taken away from a lot of Jews. And gradually, systematically, Hitler did that for at least a year and a half.  INT: Did your family try to leave Antwerp at any time? CHI: Yes, twice. My family-- when the Germans invaded in 1940, my daddy had a car. And he filled the car. And we drove to France. But we were late. And when we got to the borders of France, already they didn't let us in. And we had to turn back and come back home. The second time-- and wasn't much later after that-- [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] there were still boats going to England from Ostend, O-S-T-E-N-D-E. And my daddy took us all. And we went to Ostend. When we got to Ostend, the last boat had left five minutes before we got there. In Ostend, the Germans were bombing. A lot of bombs were bombing Ostend. And they bombing the-- they were trying to bomb as much of the English soldiers who were there, and the English army, and whatever. And I was hit by a bomb. I have on my back a little-- for life. And-- but you don't feel it. See, the bombs were falling and falling. And my sister was near me. And I heard the bomb coming. And I lie down on top of her. I wanted to protect her. And I did. But I was hit. And I didn't even know I was hit. All at once, when it stopped, the bombing stopped, my mother gave a shout, Clara's bleeding! And [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] they took us into a place. And the only thing I remember is that it smelled from a lot of blood. And it smelled from a lot of iodine and all kinds of things. And there was a priest there. And the priest took care of me. And he kept saying to my mother, don't worry. She's not hurt too much. She'll be all right. And he gave me the piece of shrapnel that hurt me-- that had hit me. And then we saw that we have to go back home again. And we started going back home. Now, when we started going back home, we didn't have any more shoes. I walked with burlap on my feet. And the car-- was no more car because we didn't have gas. So my daddy exchanged the car for a horse. And-- but even the horse, he couldn't feed. And we were very, very tired on the way home. And we stopped on a farm. And when we stopped on the farm, my father still had enough money. And they asked them to-- if we could sleep over and to buy some food. And they were giving us. And we sat down. And the farm was so dirty, and so-- but we sat down to eat. And my mother said to us, go wash your hands. And this was the first time that I really felt anti-Semitism. I didn't know it was anti-Semitism. But I felt different. The woman there said, I thought the Jews are dirty. Why do you have to go and wash your hands? And [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] my mother looked at her and said, we wash hands before we eat. And she didn't make an issue out of it. And they were nice to us until the next morning till we left. But that 'the Jews are dirty' remained with me for life. 
INT: How did neighbors around react? CHI: When we came back, first of all, a lot of our friends, Jewish friends, had left. Some of them were caught by the Germans going I don't know where. And then the rest of the neighbors who remained with us-- the non-Jewish neighbors didn't talk to us, just like we didn't exist anymore. And the Jewish neighbors, we used to get together in the evenings in this home or in that home. And I used to hear them talk-- what next? Now they realized that it was maybe not too late, but it was too late. Because they didn't leave when the invasion came. And like us, we tried twice to get away. And we couldn't anymore.  INT: How about school? Were you still in school at that time? CHI: Yes. I would-- they would let us-- they let us to go back to school. And I have a few incidents that happened in school. One was-- of course, we had to wear out a yellow star. And one day, we came in. And our teacher looked at the window, looked outside. And she had just given us pieces of paper, like propaganda paper. And she gave them to everybody. And there were a-- quite a few, I would say five, six, still Jewish children in school in my class. There were more. And she said to all of us, I see Germans coming. And you better eat the paper.  INT: What was on the paper? CHI: On the paper was anti-German propaganda. We hadn't even read it. She wanted us to give this to our parents. And we all ate the paper. When the Germans came up-- it took us maybe 5 or 10 minutes. I can't believe if you would tell me [LAUGHS] now that I did it, but I know I did it. And when the Germans walked in, and they had Fraulein-- and they were very-- of course, the Germans were very sweet in the class. And they looked around. And they couldn't find anything. And they said to her, well, we were told to come into your class. And when they left, she said, you saved my life. The other incident was when I really started feeling that I am not going to-- I'm not the same. I'm different. As I came to school like every other day, and the teacher said she has an announcement to make. All Jewish children, take your books home because this is your last day of school. You cannot come to school anymore. And I refused to take my books home, not that I-- big deal. But I went home. And I cried. And I said, why? What's different? Why am I not allowed to? And my mother and father said, don't worry. It's going to get better. 
INT: About how old were you at that time? CHI: I was the first grade or a second grade. I think I was second grade.  INT: Were you going to any other kind of school, any private or-- CHI: Yes, a Hebrew school. I used to go Wednesday and Sunday to Hebrew school.  INT: And was that allowed to continue? CHI: Yes, for awhile. And I will tell you a story about what they did with the Hebrew school.  INT: Tape 2 of our interview with Clara Isaacman. Let's go back now to what we were talking about with the changes in school. What was the date of the actual invasion of Belgium? CHI: Belgium was invaded May the 15th. The 17th, it was all occupied.  INT: And what year was it? CHI: 1940.  INT: OK. And when did the king surrender? CHI: The king surrendered [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] May 28, 1940.  INT: Did things begin to change immediately? CHI: Yes. Because the Germans kept on saying whatever we're changing is only-- we're-- don't worry. We're just occupying to go past through Belgium. We're not going to stay in Belgium. And in the beginning, I think a lot of people believed them. And so did a lot of Jews because they went on with their business and they-- with their life. But it didn't take too long, and they started doing what they did in Germany. They started systematically taking away everything from the Jews. For example, [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] they said that the Jewish stores can't be open a certain time. And to make sure that they know that it's a Jewish store, doors at the store said, [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] Jews, Jude. And the other stores, some of the, the Belgium people-- and a lot of them collaborated with them-- wrote down, 'Dogs and Jews not allowed.' So in a store where I used to go and buy candy or bread, all at once there was a sign. I can't go in there anymore. And then they wanted to catch Jews and get money out of them. I remember my daddy getting a, a ticket. And the ticket said, you played cards in middle of the Keyserlei. That's like playing cards in Philadelphia on the longest street that there is, on Broad Street. Now, can you imagine people sitting down in the middle of Broad Street playing cards? First of all, my daddy never played cards. But that was another story. And I remember one of the men who got a notice like that went to the Stadt House where-- the Germans were there. And he was beaten up and taken money. And so my mother took the  note. And I can see her doing it right now. And she tore it in pieces. And she said, you're not going. And he didn't go. 
INT: Let's go back for a minute, OK? At this point, you were still in school when the inversion-- the invasion first took place. CHI: Yes, I was.  INT: You said that things changed among people, even you when you were in school and such. How did it change in the regular school, in the public school? CHI: In the public school, the children, [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] we, we weren't anymore friends. We were like poison. It wasn't-- they didn't come near us. They didn't speak to us. But when I was given notice by the teacher that we-- the Jews can't come to school anymore, I still felt that I had a friend, a non-Jewish friend that I used to go to school with them. And we used to buy apples together, and everything. And when-- after I was at home maybe a week, I decided to go to her home. And she lived in a beautiful place not too far from me. And I went there. And she was in her yard. And it was pretty-- she saw me coming. And she shouted [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] very, very loud that the whole world should hear her. Clara, don't come near me! I can't play with you anymore! [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] I went home. I cried bitterly. And I-- and my mother said, don't worry. She'll play with you again. I have to admit that I have never gone near her, even after the war when I went back to Belgium. And I have never seen her. But I know where she lives. I knew-- and I know she's in Antwerp. But that was it. My best non-Jewish friend became against me. I became poison. Now who told her that? And I, many times now think about it. And I think that my answer is pretty clear-- her parents. Because she was too young to have listened to anybody else. But  her parents say, you can't play anymore with Jewish children. And she couldn't play anymore with me. I was not anymore a friend. 
INT: How was this information being distributed to people? Why would her parents have gotten this information? CHI: It was all on the radio. You heard on the radio. You heard-- pamphlets, whatever you-- the papers, it was all full of what Germany is and what the Jews are. And the Jews are no good. They are like the museum said, mice. And they are-- they're not human beings. I remember very well-- I couldn't go to public school anymore, but I was still in Hebrew school. And I had to go to Hebrew school. But it was a birthday party of one of my friends. And my mother said, you'll go to the party after Hebrew school. I played hooky. I decided no, I'm going-- instead of to Hebrew school, I'm going to go to my friend. When I came home, I found the living room-- and I still see it-- with some of my friends' parents crying. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] And as soon as I open the door, my mother came over and hugged me and kissed me. And it was very, very emotional, dramatic. And I, I didn't know what it was. And then my other friend's parents told me [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] [CRYING] that the Germans had taken a truck and went to the Hebrew school and filled the truck with all the children who were there. And they were taken away. And I never saw my other Hebrew-school friends, my other Jewish friends again. They was taken away to Auschwitz. So [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] my mother always used to say, my [NON-ENGLISH], she knew when not to go to school. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] Maybe I did. And who knows why? 
INT: When did you first find out that there were people that were not supporting the Nazis, that were helping to work against them? CHI: We didn't find that out until we were in hiding.  INT: OK. Was your teacher at school, at public school, in any way involved in that? CHI: I think she was. But I never, during hiding, had anything to do with her. But I think, by this leaflet that she was giving us, that she was not one-- or a good friend of the Germans. I think she was with the Underground. There weren't too many.  INT: Mm-hmm. Do you remember what her name was? [INAUDIBLE] CHI: No, I don't. I know I, I should remember it.  INT: We can-- CHI: We'll look it up. [LAUGHS]  INT: All right. What were the rules that the Germans started to put into effect? What kind of regulations were there? CHI: As I was saying before, first, the Jewish star; no outside for Jews after a certain hour; no radios; no doctors could treat non-Jews; bankers-- it was systematically taking away every right of the Jewish people who were living in Belgium. And then, [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] one-- the Germans always started on Friday nights. Whatever they wanted to do with the Jewish people was Friday night. [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] One Friday night, we got a, a notice that if the boys-- my brother wasn't bar mitzvah yet, he was 12. So-- 
INT: Which brother? CHI: My older brother. If he would go to, to work for the Germans, then we would stay. They wouldn't touch us. And it took a week. They all were discussing it, he with his friends and the parents. And my sister said, don't go. I said, you-- maybe you should go. Maybe you shouldn't go. We all kept on talking and talking. And the Germans in the note said, if your son goes-- the oldest son in the house goes, then he will come back every week. He's just going to help us work for the German machinery. We need hands. And my brother finally decided to go--  INT: Why? CHI: --with his friends. Because his friends were going. And he kept on saying, I'm saving my family. And nothing is going to be wrong with me. So I'll work. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] Now, my brother left our home with [PAUSES FOR 5 SECONDS] a piece of luggage. My mother packed it real beautiful-- clothing. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] My daddy gave him a diamond ring to put on his finger, just in case he'll need something. He said, sell the ring and get whatever you need. And [PAUSES FOR 5 SECONDS] he opened the door. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] I really don't remember seeing him walk out of the door. I don't know if I wanted to look or-- maybe I saw it, but I want to forget it. And he never came back again. Later on, we received a postcard from him that he had thrown out from the cattle cars, saying, they didn't need us for work. We are going to concentration camps. [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] And I never saw my brother again, neither did any of us. 
INT: About when was that? What year? CHI: It was in 1941, before they started taking all of us, before they came to take all the Jews. It was a few months before. They took us in '42. I mean, not me. I went in hiding in '42. But those that they were able to catch and take, they went in '42. As a matter of fact, I have-- I was in Auschwitz in 1982, was sent by the-- from Washington. And I lectured there. And there's a room there that the Germans kept systematic the numbers of everybody they killed, the date when they brought in the person, and the date when they killed the person. My students, who were international students, after we saw Auschwitz-- the ovens and all of the other things, the barracks-- went in there. And they saw me staying outside. And they said, don't you want to come in, Mrs. Isaacman? And I said, no. They meant well. When they went in there, they looked at the register. And there are thousands and thousands of names there. And they found Heshie Heller. And they brought me out a piece of paper with the number that they had tattooed my brother, and with the date when he came into Auschwitz, and with the date when they put him in the oven. The next day, [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] we went in Auschwitz and in Birkenau. And we went into the rooms where the ovens were. And I really thought that after speaking so much about the Holocaust and seeing movies and films and everything else, nothing will touch me anymore. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] But I put my hand on the oven, and I really felt my brother's hand pulling me. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] And then realized that nobody, nobody can think that they really know or they know everything about what the Holocaust is, even those like myself, who went through it as a hidden child. And [PAUSES FOR 5 SECONDS] I think that I'm telling this story right now-- very seldom that I'm telling this-- is because of my brother. There's nobody else to, to speak for him. So I'm here to speak for him. By the way, I like you to know that the first 20 years after the Holocaust, nobody knew that I was a survivor. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] I came to America in 1946. [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] My husband was 19. I was a little younger. I wanted to go to have an education. I went to temple. And it bothered me that wherever I went, wherever school I went, I never heard anybody mentioning the Holocaust. And nobody-- and when I asked my Danny, my husband, are they speaking at university about it or so? He used to say, it's taboo. Nobody speaks about it. [PAUSES FOR 5 SECONDS] I think after all of this, [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] I still didn't want to talk about it. There was something there that just didn't let me do it. I was encouraged by Elie Wiesel to speak and to write. And I-- if it's OK, I'd like to tell a very short story how it happened. My husband was president of Gratz College. And he used to share platforms with Elie Wiesel. And we were at an international conference of Catholics. And there were only three Jews-- Elie, Danny, my husband, and myself, who went there just for fun. And we were having dinner. The rest were-- and my husband said to Elie, tell her to write. And he said, what should she write? And my husband said, my wife is a survivor. [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] And he said to me, write. I said, you have written for all of us. What can I say that you haven't said yet? [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] And we had a long conversation. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] And he said, what you can write, I can't. And what I can write, you can't. So go home and write. And he gave me instructions what to do. And I came home, didn't want to do it. But I had a very wonderful man who said, you're not going to bed before you do it. And I started writing. And that's how I started telling my story and the story of my family and about the Holocaust itself. 
INT: Let's go back a lot of years and talk about some of the things that happened to you once they started putting the regulations in and how it affected your family's way of life. You were-- CHI: Our family, I'm sorry.  INT: That's all right. CHI: Oh, I thought you had-- my family's way of life was affected that we started feeling, all of us, even those of us who didn't say it. And my mother and father used to speak that we shouldn't hear. I guess they didn't want to scare us too much. It was hush, hush when we heard, I mean, when we were listening. But they realized, and we realized-- I, right away, with my education that I had on the Zionist movement-- realized that what they taught me, they didn't want to tell me straight what it means to be a Jew. But they told me, they taught me what it means to be a Jew. And my Hebrew school taught me. And the Bible taught me. But then I realized what it meant to be a Jew. And I knew that I am different. I can't do what everybody else can do. And I kept on asking, why? [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] And I kept on saying, am I not the same? Don't I have the same-- like a little child, like a kindergarten kid. I have two eyes. I have a heart. I have a mind. I have ears. What's different from me to them? And what did I do wrong to those people who hate me, who don't even know me? And I started feeling hatred. [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] When I walked in the streets with my star, I felt bigotry. I felt everything that is wrong in the world. And I started feeling very sad that because I was born into the Jewish people, into my Jewish religion, I became so different to the world. And they don't even know me. And then we all started feeling it very strongly. 
INT: How did it-- CHI: Sadly enough, I still feel it.  INT: How did it affect your everyday life? CHI: I couldn't do anything anymore. I mean, everything I did was thinking, hey, are they going to see it? Are they going to know it? Am I allowed to do this? Even if I had rules, I still-- I still felt-- I made myself more rules and more feeling. And it wasn't-- the world wasn't mine anymore. It was like I was living from day to day. But looking back, I still lived, [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] quote, unquote, 'a normal life.' I still had my own room, my own house, my parents around me, not my brother, but my sister and my younger brother. And I still lived.  INT: Did your father still have his business? CHI: My father had his business, but it was only between the Jews. As a matter of fact, they had once-- my father went to the bourse, to the diamond bourse. And he came home. And he said, I'm lucky I'm here. The Germans walked into the diamond bourse. And they emptied every pocket from all the Jews in there. You could find, they threw-- because the Jews saw who were coming in, they threw the diamonds through the windows. You could find diamonds on the streets of Antwerp. They threw diamonds in-- [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] I have a plant here, in the plant things. And my dad told us that everybody emptied their pockets. Everybody threw everything away that they shouldn't find anything on them. 
INT: Did he still have his soda business? CHI: Yes, but he closed it after a while. He had nothing after a while.  INT: How were you able to get by day to day to have food and-- CHI: Well, he had enough money still to go in someplace and buy. And then he had-- a few here and there, a friend, a non-Jew, who, for a little money, would go and buy and bring-- so you paid them. But they at least got it.  INT: How-- was he able to put away anything for security, for later, in case you needed it? CHI: He, he had put away, I guess, enough. Because my daddy-- just before they round us up, my daddy decided to put away packages of diamonds. It was one or two, I don't know. And he called us all together one day. And he went to the door. And he took the wood off from the door, one piece of wood. And he made a hole. And he put in diamonds there, package of diamonds. And he said, children, I want you to know that if you ever need something, it's here-- if we get out of the house. I guess by then, he felt that they're going to round us up. They're going to take us. But he didn't want to say it. And he put that wood back. And we knew where we had diamonds. And, by the way, he gave us all a ring, a diamond ring to carry, to have with us. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] That package of diamonds has caused quite a story after we were in hiding. When I'll get to the hiding, I will tell the story about the package of diamonds. 
INT: At, at what date or about what time do you think they got started rounding up the Jews in the neighborhood? CHI: In 1942-- I think it was July. I don't remember exactly. And they-- and again, it was a Friday night. And that Friday night-- everything will stay with me. But that Friday night will never, never [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] go away. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] And after so many years, I still have nightmares. Once or twice a year, I dream. It was pleasant when my husband was around, and I used to get up and scream. So we used to sing. He had a way of, how many languages we can sing songs in bed in middle of the night? But now it's not so pleasant. Because I get up, and I am alone in bed. And, and, and I-- the only thing is, I jump out of bed. I change my security. And I start walking as big as the house is. It was a Friday night. And it was blackout. I think that we should all know about it. And I'm going to try and describe it. [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] The war was on, of course. My daddy had just come back from synagogue. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] We were all, the rest of us, home. In the dining room, there was one empty chair, my brother's. Nobody ever sat in that chair. [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] The table was set beautiful. And [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] all at once, we heard trucks. Now, I was used to hear those trucks. But this time, the trucks stopped. [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] And we were wondering, why did they stop? [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] But they stopped. Now, we would have loved to look out. But my daddy didn't let us get up from the table. 
INT: We're going to stop here and come back to this.  INT: --of our interview with Clara Heller Isaacman. Clara, would you go back and tell us where you were living and what happened that night, that, that Shabbos night? CHI: I was living in Antwerp, 48 [NON-ENGLISH] Street. And when we heard the trucks and they stopped, we were wondering why they stopped. Now, I had seen them from 1940 to 1942. I saw SS people in my house. And I saw a lot of German trucks. And I was used to all of this, seeing it, but not at night, the trucks-- the trucks stopping. They stopped. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] And we heard shouting, screaming. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] And my daddy got up from the table. And he pulled a little bit the drape-- and aside. And he said, oh, my god, this is it. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] In Yiddish, he said it. I'm saying it in English. [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] And then he let us all, one at a time, look out for a minute. What did I see? [PAUSES FOR 6 SECONDS] I saw German soldiers [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] carrying, in their hands, flames, like they were making a movie, [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] going from door to door, knocking at doors. [PAUSES FOR 6 SECONDS] Those people who did not open a door, they broke the door. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] And then I saw people in the street. And I heard, I want to see my mommy! Where is my mommy? Please don't pull her by the hair. She's paralyzed. [PAUSES FOR 5 SECONDS] Daddy, where are you? [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] Please, don't kick her. She's pregnant. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] And I heard many more things, shouting-- and seeing chaos. [PAUSES FOR 7 SECONDS] I knew that we had a paralyzed woman in the street. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] Some of the voices [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] were my friends' voices. I could hear them-- or their parents' voices. I still hear them. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] When they got to our door, [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] my daddy pointed at me. And he said, go and open the door, Clara. And I did. [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] I guess my daddy wanted me to open the door because he didn't-- he thought that they won't harm a little girl. [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] But I opened the door. And husky soldiers-- the Germans, with their black uniforms, with their boots, with their guns, with their clubs-- gave me a push. And in German, they said, 'Jude?' [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] And of course, I don't know why they even said it. I-- they knew who they had. And they came into my daddy's and to my dining room. When they walked in, they asked my parents for their passport. [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] When my parents took out their passport-- and I have to admit, I always repeat that because, to me, it was a miracle. I didn't even know my parents were carrying passports with them. But when they took out the passport and showed it to them, the Germans looked at each other, and they said, tonight-- remember that word, 'tonight'-- we're not taking Romanian Jews. This time-- my father had left Romania because of anti-Semitism. This time, he was saved because he had a Romanian passport. But tonight, not tomorrow night. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] They were in our house. Our house was a three-story home. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] And on the third floor, my daddy had a diamond cutter who lived there, Mrs.-- 
INT: Chaimowitz. CHI: Chaimowitz-- a blank. What a man. And Mr. Chaimowitz lived there with a little girl and a little boy. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] The Germans made me take them up. [PAUSES FOR 5 SECONDS] Walking up, [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] they made me go first. Why? Because they wanted me to-- they wanted to be able to give me a good push, take out their gun and put it near my neck and say, do you want to be killed? And all kinds of things they did until I got to the third floor. When we got up there, [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] we opened the door. And I look around. And I don't see the little girl. I just see the little boy. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] And the Germans, they never talked. They shouted when it came to the Jews. And they started shouting, is this your family? In German, of course-- is this your family? And Mr. Chaimowitz said, yeah. And they said, where's your little girl? You had a little girl. And he said, they took her yesterday in the street. What the Germans used to do, by the way-- one of the things too, when they did systematically, is if they decided to go with a truck on a few blocks and watch somebody go with a star, they just picked it up, put them in the truck, and that person never got back home-- a young child, an adult, whoever. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] They looked around. And then they looked at me. And they shouted at me. And they said, are they telling the truth? They didn't say it like I'm saying it. They shouted at me. I don't know what made me do what I did. But I said, yes. Now I knew that they had that little girl hidden in the room because I had seen that little girl a few minutes before, or a half hour before. [PAUSES FOR 5 SECONDS] They looked around again. And if they would have looked another about five minutes, they would have found her. Because the apartment wasn't so big. And they left with Mr. And Mrs. Chaimowitz and their son. And their names, too, are in Auschwitz. The little girl came down after we closed the door [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] and was speechless. I think she was seven, eight. And my mother-- she was sitting on the steps. And my mother said to her, [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] you want food? And she nodded. She never said a word. That night-- [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] when it became light in the morning-- of course, we didn't sleep that night. But when it became light, we looked out.
[PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] And we talk a lot about [PAUSES FOR 5 SECONDS] things that happen in the world-- a fire, a flood, all kinds of things. This wasn't the fire. This wasn't a flood. This was a street where dogs and cats and flowerpots were outside. The street had a [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] path where they pulled the woman who was paralyzed-- of blood. [PAUSES FOR 7 SECONDS] And there were no more Jews in that street. The only ones was the Heller family. [PAUSES FOR 14 SECONDS] The-- we, the Heller family, sat quietly, [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] looked out, walked in, walked out. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] We, too, couldn't speak. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] We, too, were speechless. [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] I'm sure that what my parents were thinking and what I was thinking were two different ways, two different things. I was thinking of my friends. Where are they? I'm sure my mother and father were concerned-- how are they going to save their children's lives? [PAUSES FOR 6 SECONDS] Around 6 o'clock in the morning, [PAUSES FOR 5 SECONDS] my sister's music teacher-- blank again-- [LAUGHS] [PAUSES FOR 5 SECONDS] Mr.-- [PAUSES FOR 8 SECONDS] Yeager, [PAUSES FOR 5 SECONDS] who was a German, [PAUSES FOR 5 SECONDS] came into our home [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] and said the following. [PAUSES FOR 6 SECONDS] I'm going to try and save your life. [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] You have 10 minutes to take something in your hands. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] And then you will leave the house. [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] My mother and father said to us, did you hear? [PAUSES FOR 5 SECONDS] We all went into our rooms. [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] And each one of us took something in our hands. Because if we would have taken luggage, the Germans would have seen that we are running from our home. I took my photo album-- that we will see pictures later on. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] My sister took some of her music. My sister had a beautiful coloratura soprano. My daddy took his tallit, his prayer shawl, and the Bible. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] And each one of us took something. And we left our home, [PAUSES FOR 5 SECONDS] [CRYING] never to see it again. [CRYING] Where did he take us? He couldn't-- he told us not to-- he's not going to take us to his home because his wife hates Jews. He took us to a bakery basement. [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] We went down to that basement. And he said, you have to stay here as long as I want you to, until I find the place where you can hide.
[PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] Now, I want you to imagine that bakery. [PAUSES FOR 9 SECONDS] It was nothing but sacks-- stacks of sacks of flour-- [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] no water in there, no toilets, no food, nothing. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] I guess we all-- I'm sure I did, because I remember, when I got up, what happened to me-- we fell asleep. [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] When I got up-- my mother, before we left, said take two clothes-- two pieces of clothes on you. Put it on. And I put my coat on. And when I got up, all my pockets for my clothes were full of mice. They were crawling all over me. And I wanted to shout. And my mother put her hand on me. And she said, the mice won't kill you. If the Germans hear you, they will. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] And I stopped. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] That basement had a little window, like a lot of basements do, even now. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] We took turns to look out. [PAUSES FOR 8 SECONDS] I looked out, standing on a sack of flour. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] And I saw a little boy [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] running with a bread in his hands, [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] and the Germans in back of him, shouting, halt! Halt! Stop! Stop! [PAUSES FOR 5 SECONDS] The child did not stop. The Germans shot the child in the back. [PAUSES FOR 5 SECONDS] I don't know who this child was. But I'm sure if I would have seen his face, I would have recognized him-- must have been from our neighborhood. [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] Nobody walked over to help that child. I don't-- I'm sure that the child died. [PAUSES FOR 7 SECONDS] We sat down in the basement. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] Everybody looked out, I guess. And everybody felt different. Nobody said a word. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] My mother [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] said to us, [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] we're still alive. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] So let's try and live. [PAUSES FOR 6 SECONDS] We waited in the basement for two, three days. My daddy finally found in the hallway some water. [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] And I think that he took a chance and walked in, in the store, because he brought us back not cake, a piece of bread. I remember it very well. It was so big, maybe as big as my hand. [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] And we waited for Mr. Yeager to come back. [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] When he came back, he said, I found a place for you. But you can't go in the daytime.
We will have to go at night. And he brought us to a place, a family, Catholic family, the Adams, where we were in hiding there for three months or so. That family-- first, I want to make sure that the world understands that no matter what we gave that family, they gave us more. They gave us life. They hid us. And they put their life in danger. They were Catholics. They had six children. And I will speak about one of them who just sent me a Christmas card that I have. And we will show it. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] We were in one little room. We weren't allowed to go out. And in the basement-- [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] I should have said it-- started our wandering for nearly two and a half years in hiding where we did not see the daylight. We did not have fresh air. We did not have time to breathe because we were thinking and listening if the Germans are coming for us. [PAUSES FOR 7 SECONDS] But we were alive. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] Some days, [PAUSES FOR 6 SECONDS] I [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] couldn't think. It was like a black blanket in front of me. I was living, but I wasn't existing. Or I was existing, but not living. I remember very well sitting for hours and hours and not saying anything. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] The very difficult thing is that I would love-- would have loved to remember, but I guess I blanked it out-- what I did all those two and a half years, all those hours, all those minutes, all those months. But I can't remember. I do remember some things. But for so much, I don't remember a lot. Because I must have done many, many more other things that I maybe blanked out. [PAUSES FOR 5 SECONDS] We thought we were safe at the Adams'. The Adams had trained their children not to tell anybody. Anybody who walked into our little room had to know the secret code. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] And we lived there. We had money enough. My father gave them money to buy stamps on the black market. Because it was black market, you know. You had to have stamps. They had a family to feed. But then one day, [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] my mother and other ones decided it's not safe anymore. Neighbors are starting to know that they're hiding Jews. And one of the neighbors, who worked for the Germans, would have loved to tell and have his reward. And by the way, the reward for the Germans was, if you found a Jew, you got a carton of cigarettes or 200 francs or a bottle of whiskey. And that was the life worth of a Jew. That's what you paid-- you got paid for. 
INT: Mrs. Isaacman, let's go back one minute, if we  might. Do you remember the name of the bakery where you were hidden? CHI: It was in-- the, the name of the bakery, I don't remember. Oh, on the [NON-ENGLISH] Street-- that was the street of the bakery. The name, I don't remember.  INT: OK, then. CHI: But it wasn't too far, by the way, from our [NON-ENGLISH] Strasse. [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] Maybe I should show the map of the-- of, of Antwerp. I have it with me. And I'll show you the, the bakery. And it was-- I am sure it was a, a Jewish bakery because nobody was there anymore. It was empty already. So the Jews must have run.  INT: How, how far away was the Adams' house? Was that in the same neighborhood-- CHI: No.  INT: --or that was further away? CHI: The Adams' house was far away. We walked at night. See, we weren't allowed to go on trolley cars-- that's Antwerp-- because we were afraid the SS would recognize us. They would see something strange. So all it was-- sometimes-- I was hidden in 18 different places. And sometimes, we went with a car if the Underground had a car. And if not, we walked.  INT: OK. CHI: We walked.  INT: Well, if we stay with the Adams-- first of all, when the people were taken away on your street, were they-- was it the SS, or the Army, or-- CHI: It was the Gestapo-- 
INT: Who did the transport? CHI: --the SS, SS.  INT: OK. And can you tell us any more about the Adams family? CHI: Yes, the Adams family, as I said, they were very lovely people. He was a trolley-car conductor, a very simple person. They went every Sunday to church. Mrs. Adams-- my mother and we all knew that she used to love to drink a little. And she spent a lot of money on her drinking. But we didn't care because she was a good-hearted, wonderful person. And she was very nice to us. And--  INT: What, what risk were they taking by having you in there? CHI: They were taking a risk. Mr. Adams could've been in jail until the war is over, if there would have been a war over. If there would have been real SS men coming for him, they could've shot him, too, take him away to a camp. And he should never come back. Every one of the people who hid us, or who hid any Jew, took a risk. And the risk, even the smallest risk, was a big risk because you had to feel that you're ready to go to jail, at least. So the people, I feel-- and this I'm saying in general, because mine-- the people who saved us, each one of them has a different story what is very heartfelt. Well, I think the Adams did it because they were good Catholics. They really knew what means life. And they really knew their Ten Commandments. 'Thou shall not kill.' And they felt that if they have children, what would happen if they would go for help? They would want somebody to help their children. But I think all the rescuers, those-- they put their life in danger. And they were the real human beings. They were the 20th-century human beings. The other ones didn't understand-- forgot that we are not living in a Stone Age anymore, that we are living some more-- [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] in a world that should be much better than the Stone Age. 
INT: About what period of time was this that you were with the Adamses? CHI: With the Adams? As soon-- well, in '42 we went in hiding-- beginning of '43.  INT: And who helped you to move from their home? CHI: It was Blancha. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] We had two or three people who helped us, in general. And they worked with the Underground, with the Antwerp Underground. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] Some of them never told us that they were working with the Underground-- until later on, we knew about it. They were individuals. They were just good people who knew Jews need help. Somebody told them. The Adams must have telled Blancha she needs help. Or my mother knew Blancha, and she went to ask. And that's how we got help.  INT: OK, on the next tape, we'll talk more about Blancha.  INT: Four of out interview with Clara Heller Isaacman. Mrs. Isaacman, we were just talking about Blancha, who helped you go to your next hiding place. Can you tell us a little about her and what her affiliation was? CI: Blancha worked from the underground. And she was married to a Van Oste, O-S-T-E-N. He was one of the highest generals in the Belgium army, worked for the underground. During the daytime, he worked with the Germans. And at night, he sent messages to England. He helped over 100 Jews. My mother knew Blancha. From where, I don't know. But when Blancha heard that we are in danger at the Adams' she started looking for a place for us. We have to remember that the Belgian people weren't ready to help so easily. I don't know if I mentioned it, but if I didn't, it will be repeated. There were 60,000 Jews in Antwerp. And 5,000 remained alive. And I'm one of the 5,000. And now I remember that I said that. There were very few Belgiums who wanted to put their life in danger to help. Blancha was one of those who did, and Van Oste, too. Blancha looked for a place for us. And before she found a place at the Adams', [PAUSES FOR 6 SECONDS] she-- we went to [? Beam ?] Street. [? Beam ?] Street was an empty house. Downstairs was a prostitute home. So that mean-- meant that we had to be-- even if the empty house, we had to be very, very quiet. Because the Germans downstairs shouldn't hear that somebody is at the attic. [PAUSES FOR 6 SECONDS] We were there for quite a while. I don't remember how long. And then we again had to move. I forgot-- I guess it was because I didn't want to talk about it. When we were at the Adams', my daddy ran out of money. And-- but he still had enough to go to one of his friends, non-Jewish friends, at night to exchange diamonds. He still had some diamonds. And when he got to his friend, [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] the friend decided that he wants the diamonds, but he doesn't want to pay for it. So instead of taking away the diamonds when my daddy slept over there, he gassed my daddy. [PAUSES FOR 7 SECONDS] The next day-- 
INT: How did you find-- I was just going to ask how you found out about it. CI: The next day, a police who worked for the underground came to tell us. My mother took my daddy's prayer shawl [PAUSES FOR 6 SECONDS] and told the police to make sure that he is buried with that, that he's put-- that it's put around him. We could not go to the funeral. Because if we would have gone to the funeral, then we would have been killed. What he told us is that the casket will be in a truck. And he can make sure that the truck should go through the house where we are hiding so that we can see the casket. We're all saying we saw the casket. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] I guess I did. [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] My daddy was buried in the cemetery, in a Christian cemetery. [PAUSES FOR 5 SECONDS] My mother [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] said after years of liberation that she cannot die if she doesn't rebury my daddy in a Jewish cemetery. When my son was-- I don't know-- younger-- that must've been six or eight years old, my husband, my son, my mother went to Antwerp. And we reburied my daddy in a Jewish cemetery. Now Antwerp doesn't have-- Belgium doesn't have Jewish cemeteries. It has a no man's land between Holland and Belgium. And there is one place there that those who were killed during the war in-- are buried on one-- in one grave. My daddy has, though, a separate grave. Because we reburied him. And he has a stone. And I remember my mother saying, now I can die. [PAUSES FOR 6 SECONDS] We needed mon-- sorry. 
INT: I was going to say, how did the family react to your father's death? CI: We-- first of all, my, my younger brother, Elie-- my younger brother-- my only brother who was with me in hiding-- he, he really didn't want to live. He wanted to go outside and be killed. He used to say, why do I have to live? I don't want it anymore. I can't take it-- day and night in a little room, not allowed to even talk loud, and so on. My mother used to say, Kinder, children, [GERMAN SPEECH]. We must live so we can retell. The world won't believe it. But the meantime, when my daddy died, my mother lost hope of living, too. My mother was a big smoker then. She smoked cigarettes. And I remember my mother used to say, I don't want food today. I want a cigarette. And I remember rolling cigarettes for my mother, the tobacco and the thing. How she finally got those things, I don't know. But she had a cigarette rolling. When daddy died, she stopped. She didn't ask for that cigarette. And we were very much concerned. Because we knew that if mother doesn't want to smoke, she's very, very sick. She's not going to live. And I remember after a week-- or I don't know how many days, because the days went into nights, the nights went into days-- she said, Clara, roll me a cigarette. And that was one of my beautiful things in hiding. My mother asked for a cigarette. And we decided that we're going to go on and try and survive. And we did go on. 
INT: And that's when Blancha came, right? CI: That's when Blancha came.  INT: And took you to-- CI: To.  INT: To Beam Street? CI: [? Beam ?] Street, and in [? Beam ?] Street to that horrible place.  INT: To the brothel? CI: Prostitute. And by the way, it was an old house. But if you were able to-- the windows were black, painted black. But there was a little thing through the window, you know, where it wasn't all painted black. And you looked out. You saw something beautiful. And I remember myself going there many, many times when I was a kid and hiking there. It was the [? Skelder ?], where it used to be the third port in the world. It's magnificent. And here, I could live a little bit with memory. But in the other hand, I lived with saying, why was I able to go out then and not now? What's the difference from now to then? And I, of course, had an answer but didn't have an answer. The answer was, I was born Jewish. I'm different. And the, the non-answer was, where is the world? Why did they let this happen?  INT: Were there any other people in hiding there? CI: Not there, not there-- but we were in certain places that I will mention where other people were in hiding with us.  INT: OK. So you were there just a short while in the spring of '43? Is that-- CI: Right. Right. We were in spring of '43. 
INT: And then who helped you leave there? CI: Kroll. Kroll helped us. And--  INT: And who was Kroll? CI: Kroll was a very, very fascinating person. He was a very, very poor person. And I just saw Kroll again. He's 92 years old. He was brought up in one of the most poorest sections in Antwerp. They have farms there. But they're little farms, very, very poor. Kroll used to say he's a commie, he's a communist. But Kroll was the heart of an angel. And he, too, helped a lot of Jews. He never wanted to be-- after the war-- recognized. He didn't want his name in the Yad Vashem. But I tried very hard. He didn't want anything. And he's still very, very poor. Last time I saw Kroll in his home, there wasn't a chair that you really could sit down on-- very, very poor. So I said, to him, Kroll, what do you want me to do for you? Anything you want, just say it. And I would have. I would have sold my shoes even. So he looked at me. And he said, you did it. You're alive. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] Well, before I left back for America, I left chairs there. I mean, he couldn't send them to America. So he had to accept it. But this was Kroll, a very uneducated person but a good-hearted person and a very poor person. So Kroll took us, first of all to a-- we had to leave that place. And he took us to a bar. And we were there for a few days or a week. When we [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] left the bar, he took us to a farm, to a very, very-- really, we slept with the cows. [PAUSES FOR 5 SECONDS] Now, it's easy to say, took us. We went. But I want you to know that one night, for example, neighbors told that we are at Kroll's. And the Gestapo came in from one door. And my mother threw us out from the window. So that's how we survived. If my mother wouldn't have thrown us out from the window, we wouldn't have been-- I wouldn't have been here. It was very, very difficult for me, and I'm sure for my sister and my brother, my younger brother too, [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] to be in a farmhouse, to be in a place where the sun shines outside, where there's a little river, where there's fresh air, and where you can't make a move. You have to lie there with the cows on top. You have to wait til they bring them in and milk them. That's how we got a little milk.
And you have to spend there day and night and night, and day. And you don't know what the end will be. You start wondering, really, is it worthwhile? On the other hand, I never wanted to die. I wanted to live. I felt I had a lot to give to life. And my mother used to say to my little brother, who every day was ready to walk out to be killed, watch Clara. You'll see what she's doing. Just watch her. Finally, my mother got something for my brother that was good. I don't know where she got a chess set. And she played a lot of chess with him. And I'll never forget. I don't know which place in hiding, mother lost her game to my brother. And I think that she could never forgive herself. And, and we kept on saying she did it purposely. And she said, no. I didn't. I just lost. He really knows. I taught him too good. And this was one of our little vignettes of hiding. I'd like to remind the world of the Warsaw ghetto uprising and where I was when this happened in 1943. I was also in a hiding place at Mrs. Brussels', a very chic home, three-story home. Every luxury you want was in that house. Even now, you would call it a very upper, upper middle class home. She lived alone there. This Mrs. Brussels had-- she wasn't Jewish. And she had a husband who was Jewish. He was taken by the Germans at the [? bursa ?], the story I told. She felt-- she was very much afraid, but she did. But she couldn't-- she kept saying, my conscious. I won't be able to die if I don't do it. She decided to take in a family and hide them. And she took us in when we had to run from one place to the other. And she took us in. And she hid us on the third floor. [PAUSES FOR 6 SECONDS] My, my sister, who loved to play the piano and hadn't played the piano for quite a while, went downstairs one day and played the piano. Mrs. Brussels' neighbors got to know that she's hiding Jews. And one neighbor went to the Gestapo and told. They rang the bell. We had signs that if somebody comes, we should know. And we knew that the Gestapo was in the house and that my sister is sitting near the piano, playing the music. They didn't even look at my sister. They asked Mrs. Brussels where those Jews are. Now, Mrs. Brussels that day had a toothache. And she had the scarf around her face. And she looked very sick. And she said to them, I have no Jews. I'm not hiding Jews. And my sister is sitting at the piano. And they, of course, said, we have to search the house. They searched the house. They were at our door on the third floor. And she said to them, you have been all over already. What do you think, you wouldn't have found anybody? And one of the SS men said in German, let's go. And they went down. And they left-- another incident that only destiny can explain. And if you're a very religious person, only God can explain. [PAUSES FOR 8 SECONDS] 
INT: There were a couple of other stops you made before you got to Mrs. Brussels' house. What were some of those places? And how did you get help in getting there? CI: The, the help of getting in was one person only knew from the other. Because if the Germans would catch you, let's say, and you were hiding Jews, then they didn't-- and, and they would torture you, then you would tell about three, four hiding places. So it was like a chain of command. Only one knew about the other. Now, before we got to Mrs. Brussels', we were in five, six places only for three, four days. Because there was a bell someplace that rang and said, they know you're here. So I, I only remember myself taking my coat, or my jacket, or whatever sweater, and mother saying, kinder, children, we must go. And we went from one place to the other. And the underground helped. Our most important people were Blancha, Kroll. During the hiding, one day a priest-- he wasn't a priest. He was a Jew who was dressed as a priest-- came to us and said that they are letting Romanian Jews live in peace in Antwerp and that we should go out of hiding. When we heard that, we were very excited about it. And my mother too. Now, this Jew who was dressed as a priest had contact with priest and nuns. And mother said, let's try it. She took a chance. And they brought us to a house where they called it the nuns priest home. It was like an empty home near a church. And we weren't allowed to walk out. That they told us not to do. But we can sit at a window and look out. And that was already a very, very big thing. Because you see the daylight. And you're sitting freely at the window. But one day, my mother realized that her passport had run out. And she had to go to the [? stuthouse ?] to renew the passport. 
INT: Was that in Antwerp? CI: Yes-- and-- no. She was in Brus-- Brussels. She went to Brussels. I'm sorry I said.  INT: And how would she get to Brussels? CI: By train-- she went alone by train. I'm sorry I said Antwerp. She went by train to Brussels and she-- to renew the passport. And she left us messages. I'll get to one of them. She left us quite a few messages. When we figured out that mother should be back, mother wasn't back. And we started being very much afraid what's happening. Mother knew that we are worried. And she had one of the underground people, who I am sure helped her to get to, to Brussels, because how did she get a ticket, or how did she-- she never told us. I don't know. And the man came. And he said, don't worry. Your mother is all right. She's going to come back. Well, when she came back, she told us the horror she had in that office. The Germans nearly kept her. They called her all kinds of names, this and that. And they nearly kept her. When she got back-- also, one of the nuns and the priest, the Jewish priest, said to her, Rose, you got the passport. But it's time to hide again. I think they are taking Romanian Jews again. And we went into hiding again.  INT: All right. Now, that was before or after you went to, to Mrs. Brussels? CI: It was after. No. No. It was before. I'm sorry. 
INT: That's OK. CI: Before. I'm--  INT: And then you went to Mrs. Brussels' house? CI: Yes.  INT: And when you had to leave there, who helped you to go to your next place? CI: It was-- I'm sorry. Go ahead.  INT: I'm sorry. You started to say that you wanted to talk about learning about the Warsaw ghetto uprising. CI: Yes  INT: And where you were at that time. CI: We were at Mrs. Brussels'. And after this incident with the SS man, she felt that we were safe. They had been here. And for a while, we were safe. Now, we did not have radio, or we don't-- forget about everything else-- no papers, no nothing. When day during the Warsaw-- the, the first up-- the day of the-- of April 14, 1943, the Warsaw-- she came up with a radio. And she said, I want you to listen to this. And we listened to the BBC radio-- England, or course. And it was describing the Warsaw ghetto uprising. When we listened to this, we felt that tomorrow, the world is going to liberate every Jew. And my mother kept on saying, this is going to be the Passover of Passovers, because we were liberated. Moses took us out of Egypt. And now, the world is going to take us out of Egypt from Hitler. But it didn't happen. The Jews fought for a month there. They fought most-- the strongest army in the world. They, of course, at the end, lost. The Warsaw ghetto was burned. And we listened to all of this. And then we really lost hope. Because we said, now after the whole world knows about this and nobody says anything, then there's no hope. And even my mother that I don't remember too often saying anything that wasn't hope, she said many times during that 30 days, where is America? And where are the American Jews? 
INT: --number five of our interview with Clara Heller Isaacman. Mrs. Isaacman, all the time that you were in hiding, how did you manage to survive? How did you get food and any other things that you needed? CI: Some of the places we had very little food, very, very little food. And we practically-- there were days we didn't eat. We were lucky we had a piece of bread, a little bit of water, and that was it. But we still remembered that we had some diamonds at my house, where Daddy had shown us what we had. So my mother said she's going to go for them. And we said absolutely not. Then started, who is going for them? Well, my brother said he is. All of us were going, because we knew it was very dangerous to go into that street. And we knew that you can go in but not come out maybe. We drew lots. We excluded my mother. She was-- no question about it. We said that we can't live without her. And if one of us will go, so at least she still has two left. So we drew lots between the three  of us. And my brother, my youngest brother, got the lot. He was going for the diamonds. And of course, we were very, very nervous and very sick and very afraid. And he went one night to Leeuwerikstraat, and it took quite a few hours. And we nearly had given up hope. And there he was at the door, he came back. And for the first time, he laughed, he smiled. I think he could have sang if he wouldn't have been afraid to sing. And he said, I got the lokshn. He didn't even say, I got the diamonds. What does lokshn mean? Lokshn means noodles. So if you make chicken soup, you put in the noodles. That's the great thing. So he was explaining to mother that he finally got enough diamonds that she can make chicken soup and noodles. And from then on, this lokshn remained with us. He got the lokshn. And we were be able to live on that for a while. Then my mother, who had a cigarette box made of 18-karat gold with her two initials with diamonds, had it with her. And she gave it in one of the places, and they sold it. And we lived another six months on that. And that's how we lived from day to day, from week to week, with whatever we had. My mother had a diamond ring with 50 little diamonds that I have now. That she refused to sell. That was my father's engagement ring. And she said she wants one thing to remain with her. And it remained, and I have it. But everything else she had. Now, my diamond that I had went to Blancha. When we were liberated, I took it off my hand and I said, Blancha, here. And she put it on, and then she took it off. And she said, no, it's for you, it's yours. We had quiet discussions. But at the end, she took it, and she's wearing it. I mean, she just died, but she wore it all the time. I like to tell an incident also during the hiding of 1943, Passover, what I think will also show and will remind me and the world what means food, what means strength, what means religion, and most of all, what means a mother. That Passover night, Kroll, I don't know where he got it, but brought us a pound of matzah and a chicken. It wasn't cooked. And we saw this, and we, ha, it was like somebody was bringing in the world to us. We'll finally eat a piece of chicken after a year or so, and we had matzah. We had a pound of matzah. Kroll and my mother-- I don't know if we knew-- but Kroll and my mother knew about a rabbi who was in hiding. And my mother looked at this pound of matzah and the chicken and she says to us, don't get so happy. Don't put your hopes up because this is not for you. We will eat bread if we have. But the rabbi will die if he doesn't have matzah, because he's not going to eat anything else. My mother cooked the chicken, I don't know how. And she asked Kroll to come at night and take me to the rabbi. And I went to the rabbi with the chicken and with the pound of matzah. Now, the rabbi lived in a cubicle. There wasn't even room-- I think he slept on the floor too. But he had a little, not oven, those two burners. 
INT: Hot plate? Like a hot plate? CI: Yeah. And he said to me, he said, now who's going to light the fire? So I said to Kroll, light the fire for him, it's small. It's Passover. He won't-- he's not putting a match. So Kroll says to me, if he doesn't want to do, let him starve. That was Kroll's-- he felt already too much you want. So I said to Kroll, I said, you know what, you talk to him, and I'll do it. So he talked to him, and I lit the little oven, the flame. And I left the rabbi with a pound of matzah and the chicken. That rabbi was my rabbi for my wedding. And his message to me was, before I went on under the canopy, before I went under the huppah, [PAUSES FOR 6 SECONDS] he said to me, you're going to America. Remain a Jew. [PAUSES FOR 7 SECONDS] I think I followed his-- I told him not to worry. Because he knew before he gave me the blessings, they had to send telegrams from America who this Danny Isaacman was. He wanted to make sure that Danny Isaacman was a good Jew, that he had a bar mitzvah, that he was circumcised, and all of this. And I have telegrams that we're going to use that say it. So he made sure of this. But he still was afraid that I'm going to go to America and not remain a Jew. And this is already after the war. I'm sorry I jumped a little. But I think we had to tell this story. It should be there. 
INT: Now, when this incident happened at Pesach with the rabbi, first of all, what's the rabbi's name? I know the rabbi's name. Halpern. Halpern, not Halpert. That's how I remember it-- E-N, Halpern, OK? I said to him, are you my mother's family? He said no, it's spelled different.  INT: All right. And where were you living when that took place? CI: At [NON-ENGLISH] Street. When the rabbi?  INT: Yeah, when that incident took place. CI: At Stadion Street we were.  INT: So that was a little later on? CI: Later on, yes.  INT: OK. CI: It was the last Passover.  INT: OK. Between Mrs. Brussels and Stadion Street, did you make any other stops? CI: No. When we were at Mrs. Brussels, Kroll, went to Stadion Street, and he found an empty house. [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] It was a big house, a row house. There was practically no furniture in it. At the back of the house was a wall, a tall wall. I think that what made him decide that he can hide there a lot of Jews. And when Mrs. Brussels decided that she was afraid that somebody again will tell on her, she told Kroll and Blancha-- Blancha was part of it too, And von Oste was part of it too, her husband. And they all decided that it would be OK if we go to Stadion street and live there. Now, Stadion Street was outside of Antwerp, it's called Hoboken. And we went there. They took us at night, and we went there. And there they filled the house with a lot of strange people, Jews, who had wandered from one place to the other, and just like us were still alive. One of them had, I'm sure, lost his mind because he was there, but he didn't know what he was doing. Used to open the door, used to open a window, what he wasn't allowed to. And one day, he walked out and never came back. They must have caught him, the Gestapo. Some of them just left by themselves. There were a lot of times that they brought in a child, young kids, 10, 12, 15. And the other people didn't want them. My mother always said, if my child is here, this one has to be here, until they find a place for it. And I remember quite a few arguments. I remember once I slept on the steps of the house, because my mother wanted this child to sleep with her, near her, like I used to sleep near her. Because she was afraid that one of the men or one of the women, somebody there, will get that child out of the house, because that child used to cry a lot. It was Anika. And Anika was with us in another place too. But Anika now is in Antwerp living and has a row of business in one street. 
INT: What's Anika's last name, or what was her last name-- CI: Noble.  INT: --During the war? CI: I said I won't need this. [PAUSES FOR 10 SECONDS]  INT: And how did Anika come to be  in the house? CI: Anika-- one person from the Underground, Anika had been with her brother and her father hidden someplace. And [PAUSES FOR 5 SECONDS] somebody had told that Jews are there, what always happened. That's why we had to run from one place to the other. And they had to divide the three of them. They couldn't find a place for all of them together. And they brought Anika to us. Excuse me. Now, Anika one night decided she's going to visit her father. She knew where her father was. And she made herself a mark, that the door was green or yellow, and that she will recognize as soon as she gets in that street. There's no door that color. That's the only door that has this color. And when she came back, she couldn't find the color of the door. And she walked in the streets and she walked in the streets. And she knew that if it comes in the morning, she will be caught by the Gestapo. All at once, she realized that the door had that color inside, not outside. And she tried to recollect which house she was in, and she found the house. But up till today, she tells this story. 
INT: Was she reunited with her father? CI: Yes. She was, after that, reunited with her father and with her brother too. I see him a lot when I go there. Her father's dead already, but Anika I see and her brother too.  INT: How long were you  at Stadionstrasse?  INT: Until the liberation, quite a few months. I remember D-Day. I remember Normandy. By the way, Normandy, my husband landed in Normandy. He was there. And von Oste came to us one night, not late. I remember it so well. And he said, we're going to be liberated. But don't go outside until I send somebody, or I come to tell you that you're safe enough. Now, you will hear all kinds of things. You will hear cheers. You will maybe even see prisoners of war in the street. Don't go out until I come to tell you. And it took two days. And we were waiting. And we heard in the streets all kinds of things. But my mother, of course, didn't let us even look out. Then von Oste himself came and said, I'm going to leave. I don't want to be seen-- he was in the uniform. But in an hour or two, you can walk out. You're free. And my mother and all of us-- my sister said, can I sing my first aria. So my mother said, if you want to, go ahead. And my brother said, I want a gun. I want to shoot every German I'll ever see. And my mother said, no, we don't kill. I can understand how you feel about it. But we don't kill. I don't think I said anything. I just was wondering if anybody else survived, if any of my friends survived or any-- my neighbors or any Jew. Is there still another Jew in Antwerp? And we walked out, and we opened the door. And the next-door neighbor apparently thought that there are Germans living in that house. And he was with the Belgian Underground. And he came over with his gun. And he was ready to shoot. And he said, I suffered enough knowing I have Germans living near me. And I don't know what I'm going to do, whatever. And across the street, there was another man who was living-- who was from the Underground, a policeman. And he ran over, and he said, those are Jews. You just didn't know. I knew that there were Jews living here. And I fainted. And my mother, of course, I guess-- I didn't see it-- got panicky and so on. But I fainted because of the air. I wasn't used to  anymore fresh air. And I came back, and we were liberated. And two hours later, we really saw hundreds of prisoners of war who were taken to camps, to get putting together. And the first soldiers that we saw weren't the Americans. They were the English soldiers. The Americans came in two days later, two or three days later. 
INT: What was life like in Antwerp at that point? CI: In general, life was OK. When I was liberated, the first thing I wanted to do is-- we were in Hoboken. I wanted to go back to my home, to my street, to the streets that I was used to. And my mother didn't let us. Finally, she agreed after a few days. So my sister and I started walking in the streets there. And whoever passed us, we wanted to say, hey, you know, I'm alive. You know who I am and so on. But of course, just like here, I wouldn't ask anybody, why are you passing me or so. And then we started looking for Jews. But we couldn't find in the beginning. Then once in a while, second day or the third day, we walked the streets and somebody passed us, and it was like [PAUSES FOR 5 SECONDS] magnets. We felt somebody pulling us like. And we turned around and we said in Yiddish, are you a Jew? And they said yes. And that's how we started finding a few Jews. I remember, I don't know, for the first time, it was a week later or two weeks, I decided finally to go to my home, to my street, to Leeuwerikstraat. I knew where Leeuwerikstraat was. But I walked around Leeuwerikstraat maybe for two hours without getting into Leeuwerikstraat. I couldn't find it. I could find it. I guess I just didn't want to walk in there. And finally, when I walked in there, [PAUSES FOR 7 SECONDS] the rocks were crying under my feet, because there was nobody there. I went over to my door. I knocked at the door. Nobody answered. It was empty, but there was nothing there. Everything was ransacked, everything was taken. I took  later on my husband to see it. The liberation did a lot to us. I am a hidden child. I think we should all remember that when we say survivors, that there are different kinds of survivors. And each one of us feel our story is the most important, should be told, what everybody feels. But nobody can feel what the other one went through. The survivors from concentration camp, after I saw concentration camps-- and I didn't see it until '82-- I don't know how any of them came out, not one of them. And I feel that each one of them has a hidden story, just like I do. I'm not telling my story. I'm telling my story, but I have a hidden story. The children of the survivors, the hidden children, have quite a story too. Then there is the Resistance survivors, who were hidden in the woods. And they have a different story. But all of our stories are stories that if the human race doesn't learn from them, they won't learn from anything else. Because there is so much to think about and to wonder. I myself wonder. How could I have done this for two and a half years? Even if I tell it in six hours, in 10 hours, in a month, this was two and a half years. This was two and a half years of my life that was taken without any reason, only because I was born Jewish. And I think that's part of us survivors. When we're telling our story, sometimes we tell it as a matter of fact. It's not as a matter of fact. We tell it as it is, but it goes fast. Our minutes and hours and days went very, very slow and scary. I have a fifth sense, a sixth sense. I can hear a bird singing outside, in the middle of the night, because I listened. My whole two and a half years was listening. Are they coming for me? Am I going to live tomorrow? Are they going to kill me tomorrow? What's tomorrow going to bring? Am I going to be able to breathe again free? And I guess, here I am, breathing free, but not as free as I would like to. Because [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] we know. When I came here to the United States of America in 1946, the United States of America was less anti-Semitic, less prejudiced, less hatred between one and the other. It was less of a lot of things that we should try and get it back like it was. 
INT: Let's go back to right after the war. How did you meet your husband? CI: My husband [PAUSES FOR 5 SECONDS] had left the University of Pennsylvania and volunteered to fight the war. [PAUSES FOR 8 SECONDS] Because his father had a drugstore, he didn't carry a gun. He was put right away in the medics. And he landed in Normandy. He delivered a baby in Normandy, landing in Normandy, with his American Army. It's quite a story, but not now. And then he came to Antwerp, to the Scheldt, where he was there with the army unit and the medics unit. He gave over 100 injections a day. He learned how to give them, I guess, there. And he was, in America, educated as a very big patriot but as a Jew, a very dedicated Jew, not an Orthodox Jew, far from it. And when he got to Europe, he decided he wants to see and he wants to hear what happened to the Jews. And he-- in Antwerp, started looking for survivors. Somebody told him that there were a group of young boys and girls, 10 to 17 and so, who are meeting once a week in a little room. And he decided to come to that little room and meet those young people who survived.  INT: Tape six of our interview with Clara Heller Isaacman. When you met Danny, what were you doing at that point, after the war, in Antwerp? CI: The first thing after the war I did is I volunteered to work in the stadt-house. They needed somebody to record and see who left Antwerp. And what I did is I-- they had at least 1,000 children who died in Antwerp, without anybody recording their names and everything. But they had the shoes, just like in the concentration camps. And I recorded names. And I worked there for six weeks. But then I couldn't take it. I was very sad because I recognized a lot of names. So I recorded and helped count the children-- record the names of those who died not in the concentration camps but in Antwerp. After that, I said to my mother, I must have a job. (LAUGHING) So she said, what are you going to do? You don't know anything. I went-- there were a few ads. The American Army, I guess, wanted to help the Belgian people. And one ad was they needed a secretary translating to work with the Germans' PLOs. So I decided, well, I don't know how to type. I've never typed 10 words, but I'll go for an interview. I speak a little German, I speak Yiddish. I'll mix it in, and I'll be fine. I was interviewed by a Jewish captain who lives here in Philadelphia. And as soon as he knew and talked with me and knew what I went through, he hired me. What was his name? Auschwitz-- uh, Auschpitz, from the Daley-- the Daleys on Bustleton Avenue and on Fifth. He was one of them. He interviewed me, and he hired me. And I became his private typist-secretary. But he had another one too. And I also became his translator for the German PLO. There were a lot of German PLOs who were working there. Go ahead. 
INT: POWs, the Prisoners of War? CI: I said PLOs. I'm sorry, thanks for correcting.  INT: That's OK. CI: POWs. And he used to say to me, why don't you punish them, if they used to do something wrong in the office or so? I said, I can't. Well, he used to punish them plenty. But I worked with, for at least six months-- no, more-- as a secretary for the United States Army. I had a very good job. They were very nice to me. I was the only Jew, of course. The rest were Belgian people. But they had to know German to be able to work with them. And they were good typists. I typed with one finger. [LAUGHTER]  INT: And what period of time was this? CI: This was right after the war. It was up till '46, January or February '46.  INT: And when was it you met your husband? CI: My husband, I met a month after the war, after the war was finished. And I remember meeting him sitting in a little room, being in charge of 50-- maximum 50. We never counted them. I wish I would have-- boys and girls who remained alive in Antwerp. We got together, we organized ourselves. We called ourselves the Jewish Zionists. And there was no division anymore of Labor Zionists, Reformed, Conservative, whatever-- the Jews. And we had meetings together. Now our meetings were very traumatic, because each one of us there was one or two who remained alive of a group. The rest of them weren't there anymore. They were all gone. And we had a goal. The goal was to tell the world, to show Belgium that we're not afraid, that we're coming out as Jews. And the other goal was that-- in Belgium, they used to bring survivors from concentration camps to Antwerp. There was a street that the Belgian government gave, and they could bring them there. And we helped them. We helped them. And one day we were sitting and discussing, yes, go to Israel, not go to-- to Palestine there, illegally. And from far away, a soldier opens the door, handsome fellow with a Red Cross thing, and walks in. And then he couldn't speak too well Yiddish. But in his broken Yiddish, he says, can he stay. He came to see Jews. And we said yes. And he sat there and listened to our conversation. When it was over-- I was the leader, I was in charge-- he came over. And he said, could he come again? I said, yes, but we are having a concert in a week, there and there, of all of us who got together.
My sister was giving the concert. She was our voice and everything. I said, if you can, come and listen to the concert. So he came. And he went over to Frieda. And he said to her, your voice is beautiful, but you made a lot of mistakes in Hebrew. [LAUGHTER] So he wrote home for Hebrew books. And his father-- they were very poor people here, by the way-- and his father sent a package of the first Hebrew songs, the first Hebrew books, and everything else. And then he used to come to the meetings. And one day he came over, and he said to me, could he come to my house? So I had told my mother about this, of course. And my mother said, yeah, you can let him come. But don't ever walk with this soldier alone, your reputation is going to be gone. I mean, with a soldier, an American soldier, you're going to walk? So I listened to my mother. So when I told her, I said, Mom, he would like to come for a Friday night meal. So mother says, well, I'll make him the dry eggs. I said, well, whatever we'll eat, he'll eat too. So she says, OK. First of all, she wanted to know, does he speak Yiddish. I said, no, he speaks a little bit Yiddish. But he speaks Hebrew very well. I said, you can converse with him in Hebrew, you can have a conversation. And then I said, you and I know English. I knew 50 words, that's all, if I did know 50 words. I don't know if I knew. Anyway, then he started coming to our Friday night meals. And he had to walk 6 miles to get to the Friday night's meal, from the depot to our home, to Hoboken. And then he started bringing ration things that he got from-- and got from his soldiers. He started bringing. So Mama made the challah. And Mama made the chicken. And Mama made this. And Frieda used to sing. And Danny was in the Army Band also. So I have three violins here from him. So he used to bring the violin, and Frieda used to sing. I don't have a voice, I can't sing. I sing, because I love to sing, but-- and we used to have beautiful Friday night evenings. Danny came for quite a few months in my house. And I never went out with Danny once. I was never alone with Danny. Finally, one evening or so, he came. And I said to my mother, I said, you know, I don't know if he ever saw Antwerp's underworld. It's official there, the prostitutes.
You just go, and they sit in the windows. And that's Europe. It's in France like that. It's in Belgium like that. It's Holland. So my mother said, OK, for a few hours, you can go to the Belgielei with him, Kaiserlei. You know, can show him the opera and this and that. So I went with Danny. And I really went with him and showed him all of the underworld. And we walked the streets. And we had an awful lot in common. I mean, whatever subject he brought up, I had too. I had a little less knowledge because I didn't have knowledge. I mean, I was in hiding. But I knew. What he saw from us-- he kept on telling me about America. I shouldn't think America is a rich country. It's rich for certain people. He told me about his parents, how poor they are and how the drugstore barely they can live on it. And he lives in a neighborhood, he said, not like-- I showed him my neighborhood. That's not the neighborhood he lives in. And he used to tell me all the reality of America. And he used to speak a lot about this father and mother. Now he was an only child, of course. Yeah, and then I took him to a cafe, a very beautiful cafe right in the heart of Antwerp, where the violinist plays beautiful music and so on. And I told the violinist what I want him to play for me. And I'll never forget that song, 'Solveig's Song,' Grieg's 'Solveig's Song.' I don't know if you know it. It says, the winter [GERMAN]. The seasons can go and come, but your love will always stay with me. It's a very beautiful Grieg song. Edvard Grieg wrote it in German. And I knew it from when I was so, my mother used to sing it to me. So first of all, Danny picked that up. I mean, Danny had very good-- he didn't need music. I mean, he used to play the Sibelius violin concerto like nothing, without music. And I came home, and Danny went back to the depot. And I came into the house. And my mother asked me, how was it. It was late at night already, and so on. I said, Mom, I'm going to marry this man. So she looked at me. She said, you schnook, little kid. And she says to me, did he ask you? I said, no, he didn't ask me. I'm just telling you that I will marry him. (LAUGHING) And the truth came out. Danny was settled in Antwerp. And I really don't know. He always said to me, I never asked you, you never asked me.
But all at once, we planned the wedding. But he kept on saying, remember, you're going to a very poor place. My parents have nothing, I have nothing. I'm going back to the University of Pennsylvania. You'll have to work like a horse. You're getting nothing. So I used to say, I'm getting you. And that's-- anyway, when Antwerp Jews got to know that there's going to be a Jewish wedding, everybody started participating in that wedding. Every family that was alive or person that was alive made a cake. One was decorated with a hammer and sickle. And one was decorated with a Jewish star. And one was-- whatever you want were the cakes. The American Army gave us their band. I had an honor guard of the American Army. And we got married. His father and his mother, I'm sure, were very, very disappointed. Here is this 19-year-old boy who is a very bright fellow, who is marrying they don't even know who, a survivor. And what's he going to come home to, bring her home to-- I mean. There's no-- he's going to get $90 on the GI Bill of Rights. We were married. Our honeymoon, by the way, was in Ostend, where we were running for. The honeymoon was, Danny had in his knapsack what his Army officer and the friends gave him, of cigarettes and booze and all of this. And he sold it all, and that's how we got a room and food. We had no money. And when we came back, Danny had applied, in a joke-- he didn't know that it would ever happen to him. The United States Army was sending 2,000 geniuses to Biarritz, to study for two weeks, college courses, to remember that you are still in college. And Danny was picked. And here I'm married two weeks or three weeks. And Danny says he's not going. And I say, yes, you're going. This is an opportunity of a lifetime. And this is the Army. And he went. I have a lot of letters from him. That's going to be in the book. And he came back. And we got a telegram from his parents that his father is very, very sick, and that the Army wants to bring him back home. Because he was an only child, so he can come back home. And here I am. I just came out from hiding. I told you, I had nothing in my life. All at once, I found somebody that I really have-- Danny. And I feel I'm losing him. Not I'm losing him because he doesn't want me anymore, but wherever I go, something is happening. And he shows me this letter, this telegram. I think I have it on the table. And I say, you have to go home. Your father needs you. And, when are you going to come? Whenever the Army will bring me, I'll come. You know, I was a war bride. I was away from Danny for six months, separated after only being married for a month or so. We wrote to each other every day. His father wrote to me love letters, what his son is telling him about me. His mother, I never got a letter from. Danny, when he came back-- his father was very, very sick-- started working for the Zionist movement-- went back to the University of Pennsylvania, of course, after he was discharged. And got there his master's, his bachelor's, his PhD, whatever. And he wrote to me everything. I mean, every day. But the meantime, I was sitting on Stadien Street, on the steps, waiting every day for a letter from Danny. If the letter, god forbid, didn't come that day and the next day came too, I was back in the Holocaust and maybe worse. My mother and all of us had to worry for every day a piece of bread still, because we didn't get yet anything. Later on we got a little help. They gave everybody a little help, the Jewish gemeinde. And my wedding, if I would describe it, would take over a half hour, maybe more. But I felt, and so did Danny feel, through my letters, through his letters that I read, that we're going to have a very rich life together. When I came here, I went to high school, college, and I started working. So did he. And we built a very beautiful life. We didn't want too much. We just wanted each other. And there too, I think because I'm a survivor, I was able to survive so many things. He died, he was 57 years old. When I finally felt that I have something, and that I am-- I can live, I can do, then my husband died. 
INT: Clara? CI: Yes?  INT: When were you married? What was the date? CI: July 24, 1946.  INT: And you came to the United States-- CI: I came March 1946-- I'm sorry. 1945, I was married. I came to America, March 1946. Sorry. We have a son. His name is Yonathan. He's an adopted child. For years-- I mean, when I came here, every doctor that I went to, and Danny-- there was nothing wrong with us. They felt that the Holocaust did this to me. [PAUSES FOR 10 SECONDS] We talk about surviving. I think that we survivors-- I really think, and maybe it's not true, but I think it is. I don't think that an average or even a very bright American girl who wouldn't have gone through the Holocaust, what I went through, would have been able to take so much and not break down, or not something happen. I am a lucky person. After Danny died, and before he died-- he died from a heart attack. He was president of Gratz College. I know that he was loved by everybody, by his students, by his faculty. I have diplomas and things from them, and letters and everything. I could have done two things in life after he died. One, start crying and give up and say, what do I need it all for? It's gone. Enough is enough. I took the other way, the other road-- Dorothy, with the roads. I took the road that-- Danny wouldn't have wanted me to do that. And I wrote books. I teach. I lecture. I miss a lot of things. Danny and I used to go-- Danny knew that I loved the opera. So instead of going wherever, once a month, Saturday afternoon, we went to New York to the opera, had dinner, and saw the opera, and came home. We had tickets to the concerts here in Philadelphia twice a week, Saturday night concert. I had to finish with that too. There are a lot of things that I miss. But they're things that I have had a lot also. So I miss it. But I know I had it. Danny and I used to travel every summer for a week to one country. So we really saw Europe. But only every summer, after I took students to Israel, he met me in a country, like in Italy, in France, whatever. Because he couldn't go to Israel for six and a half weeks with the Gratz College students. I went, I went for 13 years, every summer, and traveled and really enjoyed it and had a wonderful time. America, I saw a lot. But California, when I used to say, I want to see California-- we have time. Well, we didn't have time. I hope I'll do it without him one day. But I think too, I learned lessons of life through the Holocaust that made me, I think, and some of us survivors. I don't think I'm an exception to the rule. Maybe I am in certain ways. That you can't give up. Because if you give up, you become that poor Clara, or that poor Mrs. Isaacman. What is she doing? I'm also lucky that-- I can count them on one hand. But I have a friend. I have two friends. And the Gratz College Board, when Danny died, was very supportive. Gratz then didn't have life insurance, didn't have pension fund, didn't have anything. So I remained a poor widow but a rich widow, very rich. I wouldn't change it for millions. But it was life that's teaching me that. And I think that our messages and our videos and all of this, if we don't teach people about those things, then we are only telling a story. I don't want mine to become a story. I want it to become a lesson. I want it to become something that people will be able to learn from and say, hey, she could do it. I can do it too. And that was part of my meeting Danny, living with Danny, and having wonderful days and years with Danny. 
INT: Let's go back a minute. You said that you took children to Israel every year. OK, what was that in connection with? CI: Oh, yeah, that was very, very-- Danny, in 1962, organized-- Danny used to be in charge, we used to be in charge here of a camp. Danny bought a Zionist camp in Galil, in Bucks County. It belongs to the Zionist movement. It doesn't belong to anybody. He went and begged a few rich people. They paid for it. And it's 60 acres in Doylestown, near Ottsville. And every summer, there are 200 kids there who are learning about Zionism, Israel, co-operative living, Judaism. Rabbi Albert Storer goes there. Then Danny became president of Gratz. Although, Danny was first a teacher at Gratz. Then he was a principal of Gratz. Then he was administrator. And then he became president of Gratz. And he decided that it's time for Jewish students to go to Israel and see what Israel is. And he went to Israel, and he made a program of a six and a half week program-- study and travel. And every summer, 80, 90 students from Gratz and from the synagogues all over the city of Philadelphia-- Cheltenham, Abington, all over-- went with Gratz College to Israel. But they had to study too. It wasn't just travel. And there was a certain program. And I went for 14 years, every summer, with a professor, because there had to be professorship too-- not enough teacher, because they got credit. Even Penn gives them credit. And we studied and traveled. I went up Masada 100 times. [LAUGHING] And that was the program. 
INT: --our interview with Clara Heller Isaacman. You said that you came in 1946? CHI: Right.  INT: How did you travel to get here? CHI: I had to go from Belgium to France. And we took a ship out-- at Le Havre. And the ship was an American boat that had 800 war brides. And it was very fascinating that most of the war brides really wanted to see America and didn't know who they married or what they married. And a lot-- many of them went back. Quite a few of us, I hope-- and myself included-- we knew who we married and who we-- what became. The, the trip was a very fascinating trip because I learned a lot about life of the years that I wasn't around, that I didn't exist. Because I felt I was reborn after the war. And the ship gave me a lot of insight on the people, on their values, on their understanding, and also even on the war. They had gone through Second World War. And they didn't realize what they went through. And I came over with that ship. I will show the articles on that.  INT: OK. You said that you have been back to, to Antwerp? CHI: Yes, I have been back to Antwerp many times. First of all, the-- a, a few times because my book was translated in Dutch. And they're using it in Belgium. And I had to go back for that. But then I also went back to see those who are still alive and who saved my life. And I, [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] I enjoyed it. I remained friends with them. Most of them don't want to be recognized per se. They don't want a tree here or something there. They did it because they did it. And they remain my friends. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] Too many of my Jewish friends I didn't find. Most of them perished in camps, and God only knows where else. 
INT: When was the first time you went back? CHI: I went back with my mother to rebury my father, when I told the story.  INT: Yeah. CHI: It was in 1956.  INT: So you had your mother come here to live at that point? CHI: Yes, my mother lived in upstate New York.  INT: And how long did you stay at that point? CHI: We stayed, I think, 10 days.  INT: Did you find much changed from after the war as compared to before the war? CHI: Yes, the-- first of all, the Jews in Antwerp now are not Belgium Jews, like they-- you know. There are Jews who came from Israel who live there now, and Jews who came from other places of the world. Very few real Antwerp Jews live in Antwerp. There are [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] two synagogues and one very Orthodox school. The sad thing, when I went to shul-- to synagogue there on Saturday, there is guards on the synagogue. You have to-- they have to know you to go in because they are afraid for anti-Semitism, for a bomb, for something else, or whatever. So the synagogue is protected, what I felt very ill at ease. I went into that synagogue before the war. And nobody at the door asked me who I am. And here, I had to show my passport and say, I'm a visitor from America. And somebody there recognized me. They knew anyway who I am. But there is a lot of changes there. 
INT: But it was the same synagogue? CHI: Yes.  INT: What are you doing now? What have you been doing the past many years? CHI: First of all, I try to be a good mother to my son. [PAUSES FOR 5 SECONDS] I try to be very busy [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] with things that I feel that when I'm gone I will leave something of value. And that-- I don't mean money. I am writing. [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] I've written two books. And I'm writing another one. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] As a matter of fact, I'm writing two. One is a children's book. And one is an adult book. And the children book is a Haggadah for Passover on the Holocaust and on the Haggadah. And I'm writing it together with a rabbi. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] I teach what I-- it's my life. I love to stand in front of a class. I love students. There's not a student that I do not find a challenge in. So I love to teach. I lecture a lot. I've lectured at the Washington Museum, lectured in many states in the United States of America. And I give seminars to schools. [PAUSES FOR 5 SECONDS] The rest, what I like to do is sit Saturday afternoon on my chair and listen to the opera. When I'm not going now to the opera-- so the opera comes to my house. I, I have a few friends that we go sometimes to a good show, but not too often. I read a lot. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] Whatever there is new, I want to know. And I read a lot. [PAUSES FOR 5 SECONDS] I used to love gardening. But I don't have time for it. So I don't do it anymore. All my trees outside, everything that is around my house was planted by me. I loved it. My husband used to sit inside with this book and with his hi-fi. But I loved it. But now I feel-- it's not a waste of time. But I don't have time for both. So I can't do-- so I'm choosing what I'm doing. I don't go to many meetings. I don't belong to many organizations. I will support them, but not go because I don't have time. I don't-- I don't-- I can't think of anything else that I'm doing. 
INT: Can you tell us about a couple of the things that you've done in connection with the Shoah and-- CHI: Absolutely. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] With the Shoah, [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] I really live my life, in part, on the Shoah because I feel that when I'm gone-- we survivors are gone, there will be a gap. Even if our children-- the best who understood us and who will read will still not feel what we felt and will not understand. So the Shoah and what is being done today here for me-- and I hope, for the future generation-- is something that has to be taught. And every little article or every lecture that I can do, that I can teach the younger generation-- I think that we have-- we missed a generation from teaching the Shoah, at least one. 20 years after the Holocaust, nobody was taught about the Shoah. Then it became a fashion. I hope it's not just a fashion. But I-- so I, I write a lot of articles. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] I teach at synagogue schools, particularly. I like to teach eight grades and up. And our children-- it's amazing. When I go into a public school, the teachers there, particularly not the Jewish teachers, think that our Jewish children know about the Shoah. But they don't. They're not being taught, maybe, in some schools, as much as in the public schools. And I'm trying very hard to spread the word, to make people understand that that's part of our history. It doesn't have to become our life. It's not mine neither-- all of it. I like a good football game. I will watch it on television. I like a-- I don't play golf. But I love nature. So I love to watch those golf clubs. And, and I know a little bit the rules, so-- but just to watch. What I'm trying to do is have a life, not a one particular thing, but live my life, a rich life for everything else. But the Shoah is my heart and my soul and my body. And it can't be different because I went through it. And what I'm trying real hard-- and whenever I speak about the Shoah, deep down in my heart and in my mind are all those people who cannot say a word-- my brother, my uncles, those that I know, that I knew. I'm not talking about the millions that I didn't know, but those hundreds that I knew that are no more there. I'm trying to make people understand that this shouldn't happen again. And that's what I'm doing for the Shoah. 
INT: Thank you very much. CHI: You're welcome.  INT: Who's the lady in this picture, Mrs. Isaacman? CHI: This is my mother, Rose Halpert.  INT: And where was this taken? CHI: This picture was taken in Romania.  INT: And when was that? CHI: When she was maybe 21 years old. And that's maybe 70 years ago.  INT: Who are these children? CHI: Those are my two brothers, my sister, and myself. The smallest one is Elie Heller, Frieda Heller, Heshie Heller, and Clara Heller. The picture was taken approximately in 1939.  INT: And where was that? CHI: In Belgium, Antwerp.  INT: And these two girls are? CHI: My sister and I. The smaller one is Frieda Heller-- Clara Heller. And this was taken the same year, like in 1939.  INT: In Antwerp? CHI: In Antwerp, Belgium. This is the last picture that was taken of my whole family together. And it was taken in 1941. The first, near my father, having my hand, is me, Clara Heller. Then it's my daddy, Sholom Heller, Elie Heller, Rose Heller, Heshie Heller, and Frieda Heller. It was taken in Antwerp. [SIGHS] This is the last picture of my brother that-- when we ever saw him. And it's Heshie Heller.  INT: And when was that taken? CHI: In Antwerp in 1941. My father, Sholom Heller, taken in Antwerp, Belgium, in 1941. My mother's only sister, Esther Halpert. I don't know when it was taken. But I know it was taken in Hungary. My mother's brothers, taken in Budapest. I don't know the year. 
INT: Do you know their names? CHI: One was Emil, and one was Baruch-- with their wives. I know it was taken before the war, so it could be in 1940 or 1939. This is another brother of my mother with-- mother's-- with his wife. I don't even know his name. It's a Halpert. That's all I can tell you about this picture. This is Zigo Halpert with his wife. He survived the Holocaust. His wife and children were killed in Auschwitz. This is his second wife. And this picture was taken in 1962 in Netanya, Israel.  INT: And how is he related to you? CHI: My mother's brother, my uncle. [SIGHS] This is a cousin of mine, one of my mother's brother's children. I don't know more about him. My grandfather, my mother's father, Heshie Halpert.  INT: Do you know where that was taken? CHI: Yes, in Hungary.  INT: Do you have any idea of when? [LAUGHS] [LAUGHS] My mother told me, if I recall right, when she gave me this picture and the other one, that she was a young child. So 1800-something?  INT: Mm-hmm. CHI: My grandmother, Rivka Halpert. The same thing-- those two pictures were taken in the same years. When, I don't know. This is Emil Halpert with his wife and his daughter in Ramat HaSharon in Israel. He gave it to me in 1969.  INT: Do you know the, the ladies' names? CHI: No. Elie with his girlfriend in camp, just before the war. I don't know his girlfriend's name. Belgium, Antwerp-- or not exactly in Antwerp, in a little town in Antwerp. The third one from my left is my brother, Heshie, with his friends. This was taken in camp two or three years before the war. 
INT: Where was the camp? CHI: I don't know.  INT: In the country-- CHI: In--  INT: --inside of Belgium? CHI: In the-- in the-- in the country inside of Belgium, definitely. My sister at a farm, also in camp in the country outside of Antwerp. This picture are my friends of Hashomer Hatzair the last year we went to camp. And they all perished. There isn't one alive.  INT: And that was in Belgium? CHI: Yes. This is in [NON-ENGLISH] Park in Antwerp. And I am-- [LAUGHS] my leader is right near me. And we are playing games. And we, we took this picture.  INT: Can you point out which one are you? Or is it too difficult in the group? CHI: No, it's right here. Oh, no, it's not.  INT: OK, now-- CHI: Sorry.  INT: Can you describe where you are, which person it is, for me? CHI: If-- from the right, the first girl.  INT: OK, the first girl on the right. CHI: Yeah.  INT: OK, and about when was that taken? CHI: That was taking-- taken in 1940. The same here-- Hashomer Hatzair. And I'm there. [LAUGHTER] You want me to point it out? I can--  INT: Was it a special occasion? CHI: Yeah. We used to march and sing on the streets of Antwerp. And this is one of the, the-- going to a park, marching and singing in the streets of Antwerp. I spoke about non-Jewish friends. Those were a group. I am the last one to the right. The rest were all my friends, but non-Jewish friends. 
INT: And when was that taken? CHI: It was taken in 1940. Yeah, it would be '40. All of those perished. This is another camp that we were-- what I was in 1939.  INT: And that was in Belgium as well? CHI: Belgium, yes, outside of Antwerp someplace. [SIGHS] Those were my brother's friends. I don't know their names. This was taken-- as you see, it's winter. And they-- it could've been even in the backyard of our home-- having fun and playing.  INT: And approximately when do you think that was? CHI: Approximately-- I think it was the year he-- in '39.  INT: Mm-hmm. CHI: Those were my sister's friends. All of them perished. And this was taken in 1938. And I know why I remember it so, because it was one of her birthdays.  INT: And this lady? CHI: One of my best friends, Elaine.  INT: You remember her last name? CHI: No, a blank.  INT: OK, and that was about when? Was it before the war? CHI: Oh, definitely. It's before the war. I just don't remember the year.  INT: OK, do you remember what happened? Do you know what happened to her? CHI: Oh, she, she died. She was-- she perished in Auschwitz. Her name is there. Those were my Hashomer Hatzair scout leaders. Not one of them remained alive. This was taken in a park in Antwerp.  INT: Do you know their names? CHI: One was [NON-ENGLISH]. One was [NON-ENGLISH]. I don't know the other ones. My sister is on the left, kneeling, with her best friends and her group. And this was taken in Antwerp. I remember her-- when she gave it to me. It was in 1938. Also, my sister used to love to give me pictures when her birthday was. And that's-- I should put in my album her friends' birthdays pictures. 
INT: Do you know the names of any of the other people in the picture? CHI: No, I don't, not now. This is the same picture. And you can see my sister standing-- where's the picture?  INT: It's over here. CHI: I can't do it. [LAUGHS]  INT: OK. CHI: She's there. Very-- they put her in the middle. This was taken in 1941. Those were my two best friends. And that's how I saw them last. I never saw them again.  INT: Can you tell us their names? CHI: Yeah, Rachel and Sara.  INT: Do you know their last names? CHI: One was [? Berkowitz. ?] And one was-- I don't remember. [SIGHS] I don't remember. The [? Berkowitz ?] I remember on the right-hand side. Those were a group of my school friends. And it was taken in the backyard of my Hebrew school. When I told you the story about the truck, part of them were in the truck, in that truck. The rest of them perished, too, but later on.  INT: Is there anybody there whose name that you remember? CHI: Yes, Rebeka. She was the fourth one from my left.  INT: Do you remember her last name? CHI: No-- blank.  INT: And this gentleman? CHI: This gentleman is the Jew who-- oh, I have his name right there. Do you remember his name? I, I wrote it down. It's there someplace. I really don't remember. I'm sorry. I have a blank right now. I guess I'm tired. He saved quite a few Jews. And then he was caught in Antwerp and shot in Antwerp by the Germans. 
INT: I see. CHI: So-- in a park-- Buchalter. [SIGHS] A group of my friends.  INT: Do we have any names to go with this picture? CHI: No.  INT: And this is before the war as well? CHI: Yes--  INT: OK. CHI: --absolutely. All of those pictures are before the war. I mean, I don't remember any that I have here that are after the war.  INT: OK. CHI: This is after the war. This is a citation-- a, a slogan, not a citation, from the Belgium king to one of the resistant people who fell who helped Jews. And it says, 'In memory of all of those who fought for liberty, for righteousness.'  INT: And what was the purpose of that? What was the occasion for this? CHI: They gave that for a lot of-- a lot of Undergrounds, people who worked for the Underground. When they died-- I'm sorry. Thank you. When they died, then they, they gave it to their parents for a memory, whatever. This was one of the people that I saw maybe twice during hiding. But I remember him very well. He was caught. He was killed. His parents gave me this picture when I was once in Antwerp. I went to visit them.  INT: Was he in hiding? Or was he-- CHI: No, no, he wasn't Jewish.  INT: He was-- he was in the Resistance, or-- CHI: He was in the Resistance. And he helped. And he was also helping Belgium. I mean, he worked a lot for the Resistance. And when I went to visit his parents, they gave me this. 
INT: Do you want to say his name aloud? Bosmans? Rene Bosmans.  INT: Of our interview with Clara Heller Isaacman. [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] OK, who was this group at the party? CI: This is a-- a birthday party of one of the German soldiers. There is only one civilian there. On my right hand side you can see it-- you can see him. He is von Oster. He's the one who worked as a spy for the Belgium army and also saved over 100 Jews.  INT: And when was this taken? CI: This was taken during the war. It was given to me in Antwerp. A museum gave me a copy of it, or the original. I-- I have the original too. [PAUSES FOR 8 SECONDS] This is a memorial postcard for a soldier who gave his life for liberation of Belgium, and who also saved Jewish people. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] I knew his parents. I really don't remember seeing him, but I know what he did. And his parents gave me this after he died.  INT: The back of the memorial card reads, 'Mr. Meyer Constant Scheepers-Rampart.' And the date of death is October 2nd, 1944. CI: This picture was taken in Antwerp, a few hours after I went out from Stadionstraat after we were liberated. My sister was blond. She was able to get her hair blond with peroxide during hiding, because she wanted to go outside. I couldn't do it. I tried to, but I couldn't. Now, no trouble. [PAUSES FOR 8 SECONDS] This is a Israeli who worked with the Jewish brigade during the war. England gave the Israeli a separate army. And they-- they gave him permission to work, and liberate, and work with the Jews who survived. I worked with him in Antwerp with concentration camp Jews, who came back from concentration camps. 
INT: Do you know his name? CI: Yes, Albert. [PAUSES FOR 7 SECONDS] Hold it one minute. Holtzman. Albert Holtzman. Thank you. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] This is in the streets of Antwerp after the liberation. My mother and I. I think this was our first outfit that was ours. [PAUSES FOR 8 SECONDS] The first time Blancha met my Denny, and it's in the back, in the yard where we were hidden on Stadionstraat. As you can see it's a tall wall. The neighbors could never see us.  INT: And what was Blancha's last name? CI: O-- von Oste. [PAUSES FOR 7 SECONDS] This is after the war. [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] Michael Adams, where I was hidden, and myself. In the backyard you can see the little roof. That was the house where we were hidden.  INT: Who's this group of people? CI: This group of people are the people who worked for the American army at the depot. And I'm in the front. [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] I worked there too. I worked as a typist and translator.  INT: And the year was? CI: 1945.  INT: Is there anybody you can identify in the picture? CI: No. [INAUDIBLE]  INT: And this lady? CI: This lady is Blancha von Oster. And she's walking in the streets of Antwerp after the war. And she came and gave it to me very proudly. [PAUSES FOR 6 SECONDS] This is another soldier of the Jewish brigade who lives now in Tel Aviv and is a engineer. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] He gave me this picture not long ago, maybe five years ago. He too worked in Antwerp with the survivors. And I worked with him. 
INT: His name? CI: Michael [PAUSES FOR 8 SECONDS] Schuman. [PAUSES FOR 8 SECONDS] Those are two of my teachers from Antwerp before the war. I'm sorry I don't remember their names.  INT: Which school was this? The public school? CI: The public school. [PAUSES FOR 8 SECONDS] Excuse me. This was the pass to get into the depot. As you see it has the United States stamp, the serial number, and everything. I was a soldier for the United States, after the war of course. [PAUSES FOR 7 SECONDS] This picture was taken in Anika's [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] house [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] in 1989.  INT: What was Anika's last name during the war? [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] Her maiden name? CI: She never told me. We just knew her--  INT: And after the-- CI: We just knew her-- Noble, as in the-- after the war. And she is sitting. The young lady who has the hand on her is her daughter Sarah. Then it's Kroll, and then it's Blancha. Blanca died a year after this picture was taken. Kroll is still alive. He's in a home. [PAUSES FOR 12 SECONDS] This is my wedding picture. [PAUSES FOR 5 SECONDS] I couldn't have had a wedding without the help of the surviving Jews in Antwerp. My dress was made-- I would say each Jew had once put in the needle to put it together. And there wasn't a Jew who didn't come to my wedding. 
INT: And the date? CI: 1945, July 24th.  INT: And the gentleman in the picture? CI: Is my husband, Daniel Isaacman. [PAUSES FOR 8 SECONDS] We had to have two weddings. One was a Jewish wedding and one was-- the same day, we had to go to the Stadthaus. And this is at the Stadthaus. As you can see, the guards are Belgium guards and we're walking in to be married to officially in-- as Belgium, in the Stadthaus. And then the [INAUDIBLE], all the other things were in a different place. [PAUSES FOR 6 SECONDS] As you see, there's a picture the Stadthaus and Monument of the Unknown Soldier. And the guards were the-- my hands again-- the American-- I had an American honor guard, my husband's friends and the doctors. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] The best man-- my best man was von Oster, and here he is in uniform. [PAUSES FOR 8 SECONDS] We are being sworn in, the Americans have-- as witnesses. One-- both of them were his doctors, the doctors from the unit. [PAUSES FOR 7 SECONDS] Danny as a soldier.  INT: When was that taken? CI: In Antwerp. I think it was taken before we got married. Excuse me. [PAUSES FOR 7 SECONDS] This picture was taken after the war. And I remember very well that this was my first hairdo that a beautician worked on me after three years of never having a haircut by anybody but my mother or whatever. And I felt very good about it. Of course, also sad as you see. [PAUSES FOR 10 SECONDS] This is my first picture with Danny Isaacman. [PAUSES FOR 11 SECONDS] This picture was taken a few hours before I left to take the boat to come to the United States of America. Near me is my brother, Elie Heller, my mother, Rose Heller, Frieda Heller. [PAUSES FOR 8 SECONDS] When I met my husband, he had a good friend, Ruby Gorowitz. And this is a picture of my sister, who became my sister's husband later, and Danny and I. [PAUSES FOR 12 SECONDS] This picture [PAUSES FOR 5 SECONDS] is very dear to me because the man that's standing near my sister, Chaim, had just come back from Auschwitz, from the concentration camp. He told us about my brother. But he told it to us that my mother shouldn't hear. He died a few months later from leukemia. 
INT: When was this picture taken? CI: This was taken in 19-- end of 1945.  INT: And what did he tell you about your brother? CI: He told us that my brother could have maybe lived if he would have wanted to cooperate with the Germans, if he would have want to become a capo. My brother refused, and he didn't live too long after they brought him in to camp.  INT: And do you remember Chaim's last name? CI: No. I just know him by Chaim. [PAUSES FOR 9 SECONDS] This picture my husband sent to me after I remained in Antwerp and he came home. [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] It's his uncle that's near him. [? Chaimwitz ?] is his name and it happened to be also Chaim [? Chaimwitz. ?] And his mother, Esther Isaacman, and Ruben Isaacman. [PAUSES FOR 11 SECONDS] When my cou-- my husband became president of Gratz College [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] in 1972. [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] This picture was taken in the-- at the occasion of his becoming president.  INT: All right. Do you want to introduce the gentleman on the right to us? CI: [LAUGHS] Of course. It's my only child, my dear son, Jonathan Isaacman.  INT: And this was taken where? CI: 1972.  INT: Where? CI: At Gratz College.  INT: Which is where? CI: Philadelphia. I'm so tired. [LAUGHS] This picture means also an awful lot to me, like every picture, of course. Elie Wiesel, who encouraged me to write my first book, and who was a good friend of ours and still is. When my book was finished, he had signing books his own. But when I went over to him and I said, I brought mine, he said, of course, Clara. And he's signing my book. And this ha-- this was taken at Beth Shalom. He spoke at Beth Shalom. And my husband already was dead. 
INT: And what year was this? CI: It was 1996 we're now. 1991.  INT: And it was at Beth Shalom in-- CI: In Elkins Park.  INT: Pennsylvania? CI: Pennsylvania. Thank you.  INT: Mrs. Isaacman, who are these people? CI: This is one of the groups that I used to take to Israel every summer from Gratz College. They were students-- high school students-- who applied to study in Israel and also to travel. We were in Israel for six and a half weeks every summer with professors. And we traveled and hiked all over Israel.  INT: What year was this taken? CI: This was taken in 1980.  INT: Was this in Israel? CI: Yes. This was taken in [INAUDIBLE], near Haifa, where we were staying for four weeks. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] And then we traveled all over the Negev and we stayed one week in Jerusalem. And as a matter of fact, we had a stopover in Rome before we got to Israel, and we visited the Vatican. [PAUSES FOR 11 SECONDS] This is a window at Gratz College library. When my husband passed away, they put together what he did during a short life. As you can see, [PAUSES FOR 5 SECONDS] he had worked, of course, for Gratz a lot, but also for the rest of the Jewish people. One of the citations there are from the federation, fom the [INAUDIBLE]. The other one is a dinner with Falkenheim, one of the most renowned people in the world, who wrote And so on and so forth. I'm not going to enumerate everything, but this was my husband. [PAUSES FOR 7 SECONDS] The next one is a card that I just received from Antwerp, from the Addams family. And I was very much surprised to receive it. And it's a Merry Christmas and Happy New Year card. 
INT: And it says inside, 'Dear Clara and family. Wish you a very happy new year in 1997, and a very prosperous, long time and peace in the world. Your Richard and family.' CI: The next one is when it existed. And the date is there when I arrived to Philadelphia. And there is an article of the boat who brought us here and telling the names of the brides who came specifically to Philadelphia. And one of them was myself.  INT: And the date on that is March 15, 1946. And three liners bringing more war brides, and listed in underlined is Clara Heller Isaacman who was going to South 5th Street. CI: The next one is the [PAUSES FOR 7 SECONDS] passport that I spoke so much about, and that really saved our lives a few times. It's my mother's passport. And in each section, of course, one tells her birthday, the other one Romanian, and the date when it's valid, and so on. This piece-- it was four pieces of paper. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] It meant a lot, and still mean a lot to me. [PAUSES FOR 6 SECONDS] My Jewish star. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] In the beginning when I wore it, I was proud of it. I didn't mind. I was a Jew. And I couldn't care less if the world saw me wearing a star. A little bit later after the occupation, the Germans, the SS, the Hitler Jugend, if they passed us-- or if they passed me or my friend-- and saw the Jewish star on us, and we couldn't walk without it-- they used to spit at us, push us. And we were afraid. We got to be afraid wearing this Jewish star. So I tried to hide it with a book and with many other things. I wore it until I went into hiding. And then I put it in my photo album. And that's how I have it. [PAUSES FOR 10 SECONDS] In 1992, the summer of 1992, I was invited to the Jagiellonian University in Krakow, one of the renowned universities in Europe and in the world, to be a lecturer and guide to international students. I was the only one who didn't have professorship. They brought in fluent professors from all over the world. I spent, with international students, for four weeks in Poland. I traveled to little towns where 40, 50 Jews-- 40,000, 50,000 Jews were killed, until we ended up in Auschwitz and in Birkenau where I lectured. And then they decided to take my book and they made out of the cover, a picture that is in one of the rooms there. And the book is in the library. This is just a notice that I gave them permission to do it, and that they did it. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] One of the stories that I would like to tell is that we got into a little town [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] and-- where there were 50,000 Jews killed. And we were met by an old man who took us to his home. His home was a small little house. And when we walked in there, the 20 of us, there was no room for us even to sit on the floor. A few of us had to have the door open to have enough room. And through interpreter-- through our interpreter-- this man spoke only Polish-- he said to us, where do you come from? And we told him, from the United States, from Israel, from there, from there. He said, no, that's not what I mean. Where did you park your bus? We said, in a parking place not too far from here. He said, what did you see there? And I have to admit none of us saw anything. He said, come with me. We went back. And right near the bus was a stone carved out in memory of the 60,000 Jews who lived in this town, written in Hebrew and Yiddish and in English. And it was very dirty. And he said, see this? He said, I-- I fought for 20 years that they should let me put up a memory, a stone, for those Jews. I was here when they shot the Jews all down on this little place. He said, and there was a little child who was shouting, water, water, I want a drink of water. And I went home, where you just came from, and I brought a pitcher of water. And one of the German soldiers said, what are you doing? And I said to him, I'd like to give the child his last wish. And he said, if you give him the water, we'll shoot you too. He said, I went home. And this is my memory for all of those kids. He said, the only thing that bothers me is that it's so dirty and nobody ever comes. Making a long story short, my group and I swept and brushed and cleaned up the stone, and we said Kaddish. And the whole town came around us. This is only one little vignette of my four weeks in Poland. 
INT: Mrs. Isaacman, will you tell us about the book that's at Auschwitz, in the Auschwitz library? CI: Yes. It's called That means, years of anxiety. It's the same book that is It was translated in Belgium, and it's being used in Belgium and Holland in the school systems. They're now trying to write it and translate it in French.  INT: When was the book written? When was it first published? CI: It was published [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] in 1989. [PAUSES FOR 5 SECONDS] And they are using it a lot. It's in the second edition. is in the fifth edition. [PAUSES FOR 6 SECONDS] About whatever I spoke, it's part in the book. But it was written more for younger children, so there are many things that I did not tell in the book. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] I wrote it because I hope that I will teach with it, not just read it. And I think that people who will see the video will get to know about  INT: What was this story about-- this book, I should say? CI: This book is called What I have in this book is a story about an SS man who is telling his story and letting us judge if it was right or wrong what he did. I also have in this book a story of a Dr. Leo Bass, a black man who liberated Buchenwald. And the rest of the stories here are true stories-- not that the other two are not-- of eyewitnesses, people who were there and who are being interviewed by Shoah now. And who, their stories, they will tell themselves too, their-- with their own voice. I translated it. 
INT: --with Clara Heller Isaacman. Clara Heller Isaacman, shown here with her dog, is a well-known educated-- educator, I'm sorry-- and author and a much-sought-after public speaker. She is a Holocaust survivor and has only, in recent years, begun to speak out about her experiences during the Holocaust during World War II. She has also written a book, about it and a compilation of stories from other survivors and some of the other people who were involved in the Holocaust. Mrs. Isaacman's aim is to have her story told and to teach lessons of the past to the generations of the future. CHI: I would like to open my remarks with telling you students that I'm not here just to tell a story. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] I am here to make you aware what life can be [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] and what you can make of your life. [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] If you, our future generation, will not take care [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] and build our United States of America [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] as a free country like it should be, [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] we will have-- and we could have-- [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] in the United States, [PAUSES FOR 7 SECONDS] things happening that happened in Europe. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] And what happened in Europe was started by one man. His name was Hitler. And he started with a small group of nine people. [PAUSES FOR 5 SECONDS] He said, later on, I started as a mouse, and I became an elephant. [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] Why did he become an elephant? [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] Because he took away [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] the individual thinking of each one of his people. They became his people. He became their God. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] They didn't-- he didn't let them do, anymore, what wanted to do. They had to do what wanted to do. In the beginning, it sounded very good. He gave them food, clothing, uniforms, power. And all of this for young boys and girls-- great. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] But the most important thing that he took away from them, they didn't realize until it was too late. And that's a word that all of you are using very freely. [PAUSES FOR 5 SECONDS] The word is freedom. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] We use it, and we really don't know what it means until we lose it. Today, I'd like to give you a few examples, through pictures, what it means to be free and how great it is for all of you and for me to be an American and to be an American Jew. More than that-- to be a survivor who can tell the story to the American students, Jews and non-Jews.
And I hope that because of the few examples that I will give you, you will learn and be able to teach the rest of the generations to come. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] Look at picture 1. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] It's a little girl who is reading a book. It's one of the stories in my book. This little girl has lost her father, her mother, her brother. She has nothing else but the bed, no curtains, no beauty there, but a friend-- the book. Why did she lose her father and mother and brother? Because she was born Jewish. Because the world-- Hitler with his friends-- decided that one person is better than the other. And Hitler wanted a pure race. [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] Look at picture 2. [PAUSES FOR 10 SECONDS] If you look real good, there's a clock there-- time, people sitting around and trying very hard to gain time because they are circled around with enemies. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] They don't have-- you don't see there are too many flowers, do you? You see, here and there, a tree. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] Well, they hoped that it will grow, have fruit. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] But Hitler didn't give them the chance. The people are discussing time and how much time they have to still be free and sit together-- [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] maybe an hour, maybe a day. When I went into hiding, I didn't know how much time I will be in hiding. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] But I was hidden for two and a half years. What does that to mean to you? It means, to me, I didn't see the daylight. I didn't feel fresh air. I didn't know the difference of the four seasons. I would've loved to feel grass [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] or snow on my body or a rain drop. Time-- how much time do you have to make the world better? Don't say 'tomorrow.' Start today. [PAUSES FOR 5 SECONDS] If you go to picture 3, [PAUSES FOR 8 SECONDS] look real good and see how close those two people are. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] I am going to call them mother and child. [PAUSES FOR 5 SECONDS] They have nothing around them. There's not a roof on top [PAUSES FOR 5 SECONDS] and nothing on the bottom. Where are they? Imagine yourself in a very narrow place, in a hiding place, where you can't breathe [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] and you can't move. You are waiting for somebody to help you. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] Maybe somebody will come. And most of the people will say, no. Why? Why did they have to hide there? Because they were born Jewish.
[PAUSES FOR 5 SECONDS] Let's look at the other picture-- [PAUSES FOR 8 SECONDS] not easy to see it. But one thing that you really can see very strongly is a swastika. [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] Now, if you take that swastika and turn it around, it's a twisted cross. [PAUSES FOR 6 SECONDS] People wouldn't want to see that. They want to feel that they never had anything to do with the swastika. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] But let's all remember [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] that any twisted cross who had to do with the swastika helped Hitler. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] Let's go to the next picture. [PAUSES FOR 8 SECONDS] This young little girl [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] was taken away by her parents-- from her parents, sent to Norway to a farm, [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] didn't know the language, [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] and had to work day and night to make her worth to be able to eat a piece of bread. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] She was a lucky little girl. She at least survived the Holocaust. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] But how many little girls and boys [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] did not have food? And I mean not having food-- not for an hour or a day, but for a few days-- and not knowing that you can go into a store or home and eating. You are lucky. You leave school. Or you go someplace and you want to eat. Then you walk home, you open the refrigerator, and it's full of food. But you say, there is nothing to eat. You know why you're saying that? Because there's nothing there you like. But there is plenty to eat. This little girl had something to eat. My friends who died and perished during the war only because they were born Jews had nothing to eat. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] Let's go to the next picture. [PAUSES FOR 9 SECONDS] What do you see there? [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] Mother isn't there anymore. Father, maybe Uncle, who knows? Another man with three children. [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] They're not too happy. But they're not too sad because they still feel that they have somebody around. But Daddy knows Mommy is no more alive. The Germans took her, killed her, slaughtered her. Why? Because she was born Jewish. If you look at all those pictures and the children, they look just like you. They're not much different. They may be dressed a little bit different. But if you think hard, they were just like you. They had a home. They had parents. They had a bicycle. They were just like you. They went to school, just like you.
They wanted to play, just like you. But Hitler killed them all and took them away. Let's look at the next picture. [PAUSES FOR 12 SECONDS] This picture [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] is telling you a story [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] that is in my other book. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] This picture, I couldn't have made it. It's too much-- too beautiful. I'm not an artist. But it tells you what happened to me. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] It tells you how Hitler chased me out of my house. I went to look for refuge. And I found no place. Even the horse and the wagon, I had to give away-- my parents had to give away because we couldn't feed the horse. I will tell you more about this when I see you. [PAUSES FOR 12 SECONDS] This picture, [PAUSES FOR 5 SECONDS] if you look real good, has a peace bird. [PAUSES FOR 5 SECONDS] It's telling you-- giving you a message. But the rest of it also has a very great message. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] One message is that Hitler always started on our Sabbath. It was Friday night. The table was set. Everything was peaceful in the house. And Hitler destroyed the Friday night. How did he do it? I am going to tell you one little story [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] from the chapter of my book. [PAUSES FOR 5 SECONDS] One Friday night, [PAUSES FOR 6 SECONDS] we were sitting at our table having our Sabbath meal. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] And we heard trucks. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] They stopped with such a strength that nobody could dream or realize what's coming. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] It was blackouts outside. [PAUSES FOR 6 SECONDS] All at once, we heard shouting, [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] crying. [PAUSES FOR 5 SECONDS] My Daddy got up from the table, [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] peeked out, and said, oh my god! This is it. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] And he let us look. [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] What did we see? [PAUSES FOR 15 SECONDS] We saw German soldiers [PAUSES FOR 5 SECONDS] having flames in their hands, torches, [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] going from door to door, [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] and taking everybody out of the house. [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] My friends and children were crying, Mommy, where are you? I want to go with you in the truck. Daddy, where are you? [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] Please, don't pull her by the hair. She's paralyzed. [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] And they filled the trucks with young and old and pregnant women. [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] When they got to our house, [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] I opened the door for them.
[PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] We were lucky. [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] They asked my parents for their passport. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] And my parents gave it to them. They looked at each other and said, tonight, we are not taking Romanian Jews. [PAUSES FOR 5 SECONDS] I was hidden for two-and-a-half years. [PAUSES FOR 6 SECONDS] I did not have a home like you have. [PAUSES FOR 6 SECONDS] I did not have a bed like you have. [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] I would like you to remember that it doesn't matter how many rooms you have or how many dresses or shoes you have. The most important thing to have is freedom. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] We talk about a lot of words. [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] You have heard the word 'prejudice.' You have heard the word 'intolerance.' [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] You have heard the word 'hatred.' [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] What is really hating? [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] Do I hate you? I can't hate you or love you. I don't know you. But Hitler hated all the Jews. He hated everybody who didn't think like he did. [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] Should we hate somebody who is a different religion? [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] No. All of you should be proud, no matter what group you belong to. Feel good about it. Then, you will know that everybody can live together, even if we are not all friends. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] There are other words-- 'rescue.' [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] When should we run and help somebody? And when shouldn't we? [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] I feel that if anybody asks for help, we should help because you never know when you will need the help. [PAUSES FOR 6 SECONDS] There are words that we use so freely, and we don't understand-- 'racism,' 'bigotry.' Oh, he's a racist. He's a bigot. Should we hate all people that we don't know? Should hate them because they belong to a certain group? No. I am a survivor. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] The most important message to you is read, study, understand. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] And let's go to the next picture. [PAUSES FOR 5 SECONDS] It's not so easy to see there. But what it is, really-- a celebration of a lot of Jewish holidays. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] I didn't celebrate them for a long time. You celebrate yours. And I hope that the world will let me celebrate mine. [PAUSES FOR 8 SECONDS] This is the Belgium flag framed on a citation that I got from the Belgium King. And it says, 'In honor for Mademoiselle Heller, who fought against the Germans and participated in the resistance of liberating Belgium, 1940-1945,' signed by the Belgian King. [PAUSES FOR 6 SECONDS] I would like to finish with a picture [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] of the Holocaust that was made by an artist, very known one. Look at it. Read into it. Don't walk away from it, even if it scares you a little. This is what Hitler wanted to do to the world and to most of us who had done nothing wrong. [PAUSES FOR 10 SECONDS] This was given to me by my daddy. He bought it when I was born. He put it away for my trousseau. That's the only thing I have left that is materialistic, that I can look and say, my daddy bought this for me.