INT: Today's date is January 7th, 1997. The survivor is Morris Rubenstein. The interviewer is Deborah Miller. We are in Livonia, Michigan, United States of America, and this is being conducted in English. I'm Deborah Miller, an interviewer for the Shoah Foundation. Today's date is January 7th, 1997, and I have the pleasure of interviewing Morris Rubenstein. We are in Livonia, Michigan in the USA, and we are conducting this interview in English. [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] Can you tell me your first and last name and how you spell both. MR: Morris Rubenstein. I have to spell. M-R-E--  INT: M-- Morris is-- how do you spell Morris? MR: M-O-R-R-I-S.  INT: And Rubinstein? MR: Rubenstein, R-U-B-E-N-S-T-E-I-N.  INT: Great. And it's Rubinstein? You pronounce it Rubinstein? MR: Rubenstein, yeah.  INT: OK. And was what was your name at birth? MR: Moshe.  INT: And how do you spell Moshe? MR: [INAUDIBLE]. [LAUGHS] Moshe is [HEBREW]-- In Hebrew?  INT: However you would like. In-- MR: Yeah. In Hebrew, it's [HEBREW] shin, hey.  INT: OK. And did you have any other names or nicknames you went by? MR: No, no.  INT: And do you remember your birth date? MR: Yeah. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] My birth date?  INT: Yes. MR: Well, it's 19-- I think it's 1924, '25, [INAUDIBLE], you know. I think.  INT: But also there's another date that they go by? MR: Well, they mixed it up in the DP camp, you know, to 1928, you know? 
INT: And do you know the month or the day? MR: November 11, 1928. You know, they mixed it up, so--  INT: So what is your age right now? MR: [LAUGHS] I-- well, it's 68 or 69, I guess, you know, on the 28th. But on the 1924 would be like 72, I think.  INT: OK. And what city and country where you born in? MR: Rozyszcze. Rozyszcze, but I don't know how to spell it. We'll--  INT: OK. That starts with an R? MR: With an R, Rozyszcze.  INT: R-O-J-I-S-T maybe? MR: Yeah, it could be. R-Z-- could be, you know, Rozyszcze. You know?  INT: And what is the biggest, nearest city? MR: Luck. It's between Lutsk and Kovel.  INT: And how do you spell Lutsk? MR: Lutsk? [LAUGHS] I wish I--  INT: L-U-T-S-K? MR: S-K, yeah, Lutsk. Lutsk. Yeah.  INT: And what country? MR: It was Poland up till 1939. And then the war start, 1939, the Russians took it over. And then the Germans came in in 1941. I think June 1941.  INT: OK. And it was Poland, but it was part of the-- MR: Ukraine, you know? But it was Polish police. Everything was Polish, you know, but it was more Ukrainian, you know, than-- It was all around-- it was a city around farms, and the city was, like, in the middle, you know? And were Jewish-- it was 80% Jewish people in the city, maybe more, you know? It was mixed, but it was more Jewish people. 
INT: What was your childhood like in Rozyszcze? MR: In the beginning it was all right. But then-- then a German, you know, he burned the house. This was for Poland. I think it must have been in 19-- in 1933, you know? And-- [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] and [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] lucky, you know, I got out alive, and my mother and father. You know? And then after-- you know, my father was sleeping, you know, in the shop, you know, where there was left a little. And I guess he got sick, you know. And my mother and I slept at a neighbor, you know, for a few days. And after we-- we moved-- we-- to a place. And it was like a cellar, where we lived. You know, like in the basement. And after, it took a year or two, and we rebuilt the house. But it wasn't the same place. It was down the hill a little, you know?  INT: Now, tell me a little bit, before we get to that, about when you were a child. MR: Yeah.  INT: And you were growing up in Rozyszcze. What was it like? I mean, what was Jewish life like? Was your family observant? MR: Yeah. Yeah. They were Orthodox.  INT: Tell me your parents' first names. Your father's name was-- MR: Was Herschel.  INT: Herschel? MR: Yeah, Herschel. And my mother's name was Razel, you know. And I-- and I--  INT: What do you remember about them? MR: Well, they were-- they were nice people. You know, my father worked-- he was a blacksmith, and my mother was a housewife. And I had a good life up till the house burned down, till everything. 
INT: So before that, though, what was-- what made life good? Did you go to shul? Did you have Friday night dinners? Tell me a little bit about it. MR: Yeah, yeah. You mean before the house burned down?  INT: Yeah. What was your life like? MR: Well, before the house burned down, I was too young, I think. You know? I remember-- you know-- I remember the cousins used to come. They used to stay over, you know, from Kovel, and one from [INAUDIBLE], you know, was another-- another city. And I remember one cousin, her name was [INAUDIBLE]. She made cookies. And I went, I grabbed a cookie, and she didn't want to give it to me. She said, it's for shabbos. So when I told my father, so he said, go tell her to eat all the cookies or take the cookies and go home. You know? So I remember, you know?  INT: Do you remember shabbos dinners? MR: Yeah, shabbos dinner, you know. Used to make, you know, like chicken soup and everything. And my father used to go to shul. We used to go to shul. He used to invite, you know, like a poor person for dinner, for-- you know, for Friday night, you know? And sometimes they used to stay over, sleep over. And sometime they used to go back. They used-- in the city used to be a-- a place where the poor people used to come in. They used to stay free overnight, over shabbos, you know? So-- 
INT: Do you remember any other Jewish holidays as a little boy? MR: Yeah, I remember Rosh Hashanah, Yom Kippur, you know? It was [INAUDIBLE]-- The-- the synagogues used to be packed, you know, with-- with people, with the Jewish people and everything. And then--  INT: Do you remember the name of your synagogue? MR: They used-- they used-- there was a lot of synagogues in the city. It wasn't far from our house. They used to call it [NON-ENGLISH] [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] Synagogue. It was a little synagogue, you know?  INT: Did you go there with your father? MR: Yeah, I always went with my father to the synagogue. You know? And I used to like, you know, [NON-ENGLISH], you know. They used to drink. They used to make vodka with honey. They used to dance on the table, you know. Sukkahs, you know? My father used to make a sukkah, you know, near the-- near the house. And used to be a shamas, and he used to come and-- and [INAUDIBLE] with my mother. You know, where they shake it? You know? And it's like a-- like a lemon. You know, you hold it on the end. Yeah. And I remember, you know? And then [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] after, you know, my father died. You know? He got sick.  INT: When was that? MR: It was in-- I think it was 1937 or 1938, you know, I believe [INAUDIBLE].  INT: Do you remember-- so you were about 10 years old, maybe. Do you remember when he died? MR: No, I-- I was-- I was 13 years old. It was a night-- right after my bar mitzvah he died, you know? It could be 1938, because next year, you know, the Russian came in, in 1939. You know? 
INT: What do you remember about when your father died? MR: Well, I remember it was real, real-- it was-- it was real bad fast, because we didn't have too much, you know? And my mother, she used-- she used to take stuff, you know, and take it to some farm, and she would trade it for food, you know? And she used to bring it back, and she used to sell it. You know, like eggs. Or she used to get a chicken for the material, you know, for clothes, she used to take to the farmers. Or like a blouse or pants or shoes, or what. She used to trade. Or sometimes they used to buy it for money. You know?  INT: She would trade those clothings for food? MR: Yeah, for-- for food. Yeah, you know?  INT: Did your mom work after your dad passed away? MR: Yeah. That's what she had to do. You know? That's the way. And it was-- it was bad, you know? We didn't have too much. But we managed, you know? And I still used to go to shul, you know. I used to go to shul every morning, you know, daven, you know, pray and everything. You know? And after, you know, I didn't-- I didn't go to school. You know, I think I went to school, you know, up till I was 10, 11 years old.  INT: And where did you go to school? what was school like? MR: It was a cheder. It was-- you know, they-- they teach how to daven, our [NON-ENGLISH]. You know, I just start on one [NON-ENGLISH], two [NON-ENGLISH]. And then I stopped, you know? But they didn't teach how to read or-- I mean, read and write in Polish, you know, then it was. They just teach how to pray, you know, and everything. 
INT: So you only went to cheder school? You didn't go to any other type of school? MR: No, not-- not to, like, elementary school or anything. You know? A private-- private school. You know?  INT: What was your bar mitzvah like? MR: Well, I didn't have no bar mitzvah. I didn't have no bar mitzvah because my father was sick. And-- and he taught me how to put on the [? tefillin ?] and everything. You know? Because, you know, like a rabbi, you had to pay, you know, everything. For them we couldn't. He was sick almost for three, four years. You know? And--  INT: What did he have? MR: I think after he started spraying with blood. You know? He used to smoke a lot. And-- and when he slept outside, or from the smoke, everything, you know, he was-- he was real sick and everything. And I remember, you know, I went-- every Monday used to be a-- a bazaar. You know, the farmers, they used to bring in cows and sell, chicken, egg everything. You know, like-- so I went on the bazaar, and a guy came over to me and he said, you know, if I want to take the cow, you know, to the railroad, he'll give me 50 cents. You know, this how I used to make and buy a bread, buy something else. So I was afraid. He said, don't be afraid, you know. It's a real quiet cow. You just take it there. And I took it to the railroad, and somebody was waiting. He gave me 50 cents. So on the way home, I think I bought a bread. And then I bought some grapes. And it was, I think, a day before Yom Kippur. You know? And I brought it home to him. [SOBBING] And I give him the grape, and the next day he died. So I remember. You know? And the next day, we buried him in the night. It was Yom Kippur. You know? So I remember. And then my mother was crying and everything. [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] I got up in the morning, you now, and I said, good morning. And he didn't answer. I went up, I lift up his head. He was still warm. You know? And my mother went out. She started to yell, you know, and the neighbors came over and everything. And-- [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] and after, [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] you know, I-- I had-- I worked in a-- in a mill a little, you know, where they make oil in the mill. They make flour too. And you had to turn this thing. You know, it's like poppy seed oil, sunflower oil, other oil. You know? And they used to pay me sometime 50 cents, sometime 25 cents, sometime a dollar. I mean, it wasn't American money. It was a zloty, Polish money, you know? But a bread was $0.15, $0.20. And a dozen eggs, you know, was maybe, $0.25, you know, whatever. And that's how we lived and that's how we survived. You know? And-- and after-- you know, I used to, when the Russians-- the next year, the Russians came in. You know? 
INT: What do you remember about that? MR: About the Russians?  INT: That was in 19-- MR: '41.  INT: Well, before we get to that, though-- MR: Yeah?  INT: Do you remember Hitler's rise to power? MR: Hitler's rise to power, I remember. You know, [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] is when the house burned and everything, and the German, you know, he walked around. It-- it-- it wasn't the Germans yet, but a German lived in Poland, you know, right-- right next to our house. You know, and he always complained. He said the property, the house belonged to him. You know, before the German moved in, a Polish family lived-- lived there. And she sold the house to my father, and it was a little land too. So-- but my father didn't have the papers, you know, to show it belongs to him. And he couldn't get him out. That's because they burned the house.  INT: Who burnt your house? MR: You know-- they said, you know, the German burned it. You know? What he-- what he claimed, it belongs to him. You know?  INT: Did you see someone burn your house? MR: No. No. I didn't see it. This was at night. You know, it was maybe about 1:00 or 2:00.  INT: When was this, though? Was this in '39 or '40? Or much later? MR: No, this was before. This was in-- in 1933 or '34. You know? This happened, you know, for Poland. It happened. And-- 
INT: And who-- so this is before you moved into it? MR: Before. It was in 1933. You know?  INT: OK. But was your family living in this house at the time? MR: Yeah. Yeah, all the time, we lived in the house.  INT: And then you were not in the house when it burned down? MR: No, we were in the house when it burned. You know? And our rabbi, you know-- it was after he was my rabbi in school, and-- and he went with another one. You know, they used to go a night to learn. So I guess he went home, and he saw the fire. So he run in and he woke us up. He carried me out from the house. You know? And [INAUDIBLE] my mother and father went out. You know? And everything burned. The only thing was left was the shop, you know?  INT: The blacksmith shop? MR: The blacksmith shop was left. And this, I think, how he got sick. You know, to sleep there in-- and it was raining. It was cold. You know, it was around November. And it was-- that is what I think it happened.  INT: Did you rebuild the house? Or did you move to another house? MR: No, not right away. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] They-- they stayed in there, you know, so nobody would steal the whatever was left. But I-- I went to a neighbor. You know, I stayed there, I don't know, a few days, a week, until we got a place, what we moved in, in a-- in a basement. And we stayed there till another house was built. You know, we built another house. You know? 
INT: What was the relationship between your family and non-Jewish families in the community? MR: Well, it wasn't too many Jewish families. You know, it was a Jewish city. It was-- most was Jewish people. And the relations with the non-Jewish families, they used to come into the shop, you know, non-Jewish families. They were all right. They were not rude. But a lot of times they used to call you, you damn Jew, whatever. You know, in Polish, [POLISH]. And the Ukrainians, you know, they used to call [POLISH]. They didn't like the Jewish people. And we used to go sometime, to the village, wherever they used to throw stones, you know, if they know you were Jewish. Whatever. You know?  INT: Did they throw stones at you? MR: Sometimes, yeah. Yeah, I used to throw stones back on them. You know? And it used to be fights, a lot of times, between some Jewish and some Polish or Ukrainians. You know? But it was more Jewish people. And it was some Polish and Ukrainian living, but not around-- but not too many. It was a Jewish city. I think it was about 7,500 Jewish people there.  INT: Now, how did life begin to change for you in 1939, when the Nazis invaded Poland? MR: Well, first the Russians came in, in 1939. You know? And-- and they weren't too bad, the Russians. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] It was bad, because it was no bread. There was-- you had to stay in line for bread and everything. And then when you got to the-- sometime there was no bread. It was-- was real, real bad for us, you know? Well, then I was old already. I used to [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] work a little, go with a horse and wagon. I wish to work for people. And used to go to Lutsk. You know, we used to load flour and bring it to other cities and everything. And-- and my mother, still she used to trade, you know? And after the-- the Russians, they got-- I had a cousin. He was a blacksmith, and he came to work in our shop. When I worked with him, I remember I couldn't lift a hammer yet, you know, to-- And-- but the Russians owned it. I mean, they didn't own it, but we worked for them. We didn't work for us. You know? So every-- every two weeks, you know, they used-- they used to bring some, you know? We used to get paid so much. And my cousin used to get-- used to get paid. In this way, you'd survive. But the Russians, they were all right. 
INT: Did they restrict your access or your movement? MR: Yeah. Yeah. I mean, you couldn't go from one city to another without-- [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] you had to have a-- like a passport, you know, like, a document. You know? What are you doing in this city, whatever. You know, you couldn't go from one-- Even-- even when you used to work, a lot of time, they used to stop you. Where are you going? What are you doing? You know?  INT: Did you ever get into trouble with them, though? MR: No. I never got into trouble with them. I never got into trouble with them.  INT: And did you see any problems between the Russians and the Jews? MR: Between the Russian and the Jews? No. Well, they-- they'll-- that's all?  INT: No, you can keep talking. MR: Yeah? They left-- they-- when the Russians, when they-- when they came in, you know, they-- they took away from the rich ones. They-- they took away everything. They couldn't have no stores. They couldn't have anything. And they--  INT: Who is they? MR: The Jewish people. From the rich ones, they took away the stores. And I-- I guess they took it away from the rich to give it to the poor, you know? They took away some land from some, and they divided, you know, but-- but them. It was a-- a Jewish person. He had a lot a land, and I think they took it away from them. And a neighbor, he lived next door, and they had a big family. And they gave him so much land, where he could grow, you know, like potatoes or some other things, you know, for-- But they were nice to the Jewish people, except the rich ones, you know? But you couldn't go to synagogue. You couldn't pray. You weren't allowed to pray or do anything, you know, from-- 
INT: Did you still keep the shabbos at your family, with your mother? MR: We kept the shabbos, you know, but you had to work. You know, you weren't allowed to-- to keep holidays or anything. And Sunday was a free day, you know, for them. But if you wanted to work, you could work. You know? One day a week, so I guess they picked it Sunday, you know, whatever. But our city, it wasn't far, I think, from the border with the Germans. So there was a lot of Russians, a lot of soldiers, you know. It was going on. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] So-- but they didn't bother the Jewish people.  INT: OK. [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] Did you see any refugees coming over the border from the German side of Poland into your area, which was controlled by the Russians? MR: Yes. Yes. Some Jewish refugees did come over. Not too many. But a lot of times, you know, I think, they used to [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] take-- they used to send them to Siberia a lot of times, Jewish refugees. I remember one refugee. He came over, and he-- and he said, you know, Jewish people, run. Run away. You know? Go to Russia. Go anyplace. Don't stay. The Germans, they'll be up here soon. You know? And he said, you know, in-- [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] in Chelm-- a city-- this was on Pol-- on the German side already, in Poland-- they took some Jewish people. They told them to come, you know, to a synagogue. And the synagogue was [INAUDIBLE], you know? And after they brought, you know, some water. What do you call it? You know, a can of water? And they put so much water, you know, and the Jewish people, you know, they drown in the-- in the water, you know? I was listen when he was telling other people. You know, I was just listening. [INAUDIBLE] 
INT: You didn't see this. He was just telling you. MR: Yeah, he was telling us. You know? I didn't see it, you know?  INT: This is the end of tape one, the interview with Morris Rubenstein.  INT: This is the beginning of tape two, the interview with Morris Rubenstein. Did you want to clarify when you were born? MR: Well, 1924-- 11/15/1924 is OK.  INT: November 15th, 1924? MR: November 15, 1924.  INT: But according to the deportation camps, you were born in what year? MR: '28. You know, it's OK.  INT: OK. We started to talk a little bit about some of the refugees who came across the border-- MR: Yeah.  INT: --between the Polish and the-- excuse me, the German and Russian zones. Did you know about what was going on? MR: You mean on the German side? No, I didn't know. I didn't know at all. I-- I-- I heard what they we're talking about, but I really-- I didn't know.  INT: What did you hear them talking about? MR: What-- they-- they didn't-- they didn't talk about the ghettos or about the concentration camps, you know. I didn't even know what was going on at all, you know? And-- and I don't think it was-- I didn't pay attention. I just was too young, you know, for it, you know, to analyze it, or whatever, you know? So-- [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] but it was bad for the-- it was bad for me, for the Russians. I-- I don't even know how to explain. You know, it's hard to explain. It's hard to-- it's hard to explain it. 
INT: When did things change and get worse for you and your mother? MR: You mean for the Russians?  INT: Yes, after the Russians. MR: After the Russians-- you mean when the Germans came in?  INT: Yes. MR: Well, the Germans, came in-- you know, the war it starts-- you know, it starts Sunday, you know. They came in, you know. They start bombing. And-- and Friday the Germans came in-- Friday morning.  INT: And do you remember what year? MR: In 1941, I think-- in 1941. It was June, 1924, you know.  INT: I'm sorry, it was June-- MR: June-- it came in in June in 1941.  INT: And what do you remember about that? MR: Well, I-- I remember, you know, they-- they-- they came in. And it was a bridge. And I-- I saw them come. And I remember when the war start, when the Russians start to go back, you know, they were-- they were staying and-- and And mother and I, you know, we went, you know, to a-- a farm.  INT: Who did? You and who? MR: No, we didn't know the farmer, you know.  INT: No, no, you went where? I'm sorry, I didn't hear you. MR: To a farmer-- we went away from the city.  INT: Who? You and who? You went with who? Your mother or with someone else? MR: Mother. Just with my mother. And-- and I saw the Russians, you know. They were running, you know, with horses, with some trucks, and everything. And our neighbor, he asked me if I saw the Germans coming. But I did see did Germans come. But I thought maybe they were Russians. You know, I didn't see it. And after the next day, you know, the Germans were there already. And we start to go on-- go on back home already. So on the way, you know, my mother went home, and everybody was loading. You know, so I was loading too. So I-- they broke-- they broke in in a warehouse, and I got out eggs. I got apples. And I got some flour, you know, I brought it home. And then I brought home-- you know what you put on the horses where they pull the wagons-- I brought home. And after the Germans came in, they occupied. And the first Germans that-- that came in, they said, Juden, we are not going to bother you. But when the next Germans will come in, they're going to. Watch out. They're going to bother you. 
INT: Someone said that to you? MR: No, they said it to the Jewish people.  INT: The German soldiers said that to the Jewish people? MR: Yeah. You know, they are not going to bother us, but the next Germans, when they will come in, you know, they'll bother us. So after the front, you know, the first line went away, like, to Lutsk, you know, whatever, and I think in three or four days, the Germans, they came in, you know, with horses, artillery, with everything. And they took me and a neighbor boy. You know, we fed horses. I forgot what else we did when we were down there. And then a German-- another German came over. You're not allowed to employ Jewish-- Jewish boys, you know, Jewish help. So we-- so we left. I know they give us something to eat. And I got so charred burn. And after a few days, [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] you know, they told all the Jews to come out, you know, to the-- to the-- it was a place. It was like a [INAUDIBLE]. Magistrate, you called it. You know, everybody should-- should come-- should come out to the-- what do you call it? Where the mayor is-- what do you call this place?  INT: The city-- MR: City hall. You know, it used to be the city hall for Poland, like. So they all went out. All the-- the Jewish people from the whole city, like. And I-- 
INT: This is the city of Rozyszcze? MR: Rozyszcze-- in Rozyszcze, yeah. And I went out. I went in-- I went into the-- to the wheat, and I hid myself. I hide myself. And after they-- they picked Judenrat-- Judenrat, a Jewish council, you know-- I think they took out all the young ones. They picked-- they took out a lot of them. And they took them on to a church, not far, you know. And they killed them all out. They killed all the young people, the Jewish people out. And--  INT: How do you know that? MR: I know that after, you know, a Polish from the church, he came over and he told-- and he told us, you know, they kill them all out. But the wives, the mothers, didn't believe it. you know, because they made-- they made them sign, like, write a letter, you know, like they went to work, whatever, you know. So-- and after, like, everyday, you know, we had to go to work, like work on the roads or-- or on the ditches. You know, they found work. And I went. You know, I was loading on the railroad, you know-- rye, corn, wheat, everything, you know. And then I had-- I-- I put on two pairs of pants. And I used to take the wheat and put it in my pocket, you know. And you-- I used to-- and I used to tie the other pants, you know. And I used to bring it home. And-- [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] And my mother used to cook it, you know, and make-- that's how we survived, you know. But they didn't-- they didn't believe it. And now every day, the Ukrainian police, you know, used to go-- they used to run out the Jews, and every day they used to kill-- kill Jews. That's how they killed them out, the young ones. And I used to watch. I used hide myself every time. And one time, my cousin, he came. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] And he went into the shop, you know. He start working, you know. And I-- I heard cries, and I-- I went out to the shop, and I looked up, you know, like-- it was a little [INAUDIBLE] like-- like this. And I saw the Ukrainian police. They were taking out a Jewish guy, you know, like to take him away to kill him, whatever. And the two daughters were yelling, you know, let my father go. So I went in, and I told my cousin. I said, you know, they are taking the Jews and everything. He said, it's OK. He said, you go up on the attic. And he said they wouldn't bother him because he's a tradesman, you know. So I went up on the attic. And he told me, take the ladder up too. When they come in, they wouldn't know. I didn't even hear. You know, they came in. I guess they took him away. And I-- I heard my mother crying. You know, she really cried and cried. And I looked out, you know, through the-- through the boards from the attic. And I saw the rabbi, you know, my rabbi. You know, he went to the dead. And other people, they-- they-- they went to the dead. And I heard machine guns, you know, shooting everything. I was still in the attic. And after the shooting stopped, and it was quiet, I went. My mother was still crying and crying. And I went down. When she saw me, she didn't know what to do with me, you know, and everything. 
INT: She didn't know you were hiding? MR: She didn't know I was on the attic. You know, she thought took they took me away too, you know. So-- and this would happen every-- every day, you know. I had to go to work-- not just me, women and men. And I went to work one time, you know. See, like, there was holes, so we had to take dirt and put it on the holes, you know, when they drive through with wagons or with the whatever. So it was I and another boy. We went to ask for bread, you know, by the farmers. And a German on a coach with two horses-- see, he was sitting there. It's hard for me to explain, you know. He was sitting there, and he had a driver who drove him. So he saw us. And first, we had the-- the Star of David on, you know-- on our-- on the arm. And so he called us over. And he asked us where we are going. I forgot already. And he had a whip. And he started whipping us. And he told us to go back to work. You know, it was a little farm, maybe a half a block, not even half a block away. So we went-- we went back. And then the Ukrainian, he asked us, you know, where we went, you know. And he had a big stick. You know, a lot of times he used to hit us over the head, wherever. He hit us. And every day-- every day-- they killed Jewish people-- every day. And this is what was going on, you know? 
INT: You didn't report, though, when they asked you to come to the city hall? You mentioned this a little while ago. MR: Yeah.  INT: You didn't report, you went and hid in the wheat? MR: No, I didn't go. I hid myself.  INT: You didn't get into trouble? They didn't come looking for you? MR: No. No, they didn't come looking for me, no. And then, you know, they picked the Judenrat. Right then, they knew the names from the Judenrat. They picked them out, and they made a council-- a Jewish-- a Jewish council. And when they wanted people to go to work, they went to the Jewish council, and they said they needed 15 or 20 Jews to go to work. You know, and they had to. Some of them, they-- they came back, and some of them were killed. You know, it depends.  INT: Did the Judenrat call you to work, or you worked separately outside of the Judenrat? MR: No, no, they called me to work too, you know. And I had to go to work. And this was going on, you know, til they made the ghetto. I think it took about 4, 5, 6, or 8, maybe 10 months. I forgot already. You know, it's about 50, 52 years ago. And they-- but after-- after, I think, [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] before the ghetto-- you know, so my mother died. It was, I think, two weeks, maybe a month before, you know, because a lot of times, she didn't let me go to work. And even the Judenrat, you know, you know, sent [INAUDIBLE]. And she-- she went to the farmers, you know, like to get bread or whatever. So-- 
INT: You were supposed to work, but you didn't work. Your mother didn't let you go? MR: Didn't let me go. I was hiding. You know, I was hiding.  INT: Was your mother hiding? MR: No. No. She didn't. She didn't hide, you know. The only-- The only time, you know, they bothered a woman was when-- when she went, like, on the farm, you know, like, to ask for something, ask for bread or what. You know, so a lot of times, you know, they bothered them. But like this, they didn't. They didn't bother them. When there was a raid in the ghetto, they took women to work too.  INT: Did your Ukrainian neighbors bother you? MR: The Ukrainians?  INT: What was your relationship with the Ukrainian neighbors? MR: You mean with the Germans were-- see, we didn't have-- we didn't have too many Ukrainian neighbors.  INT: You mentioned Ukrainian police. MR: The police. It was police, you know. Ukrainian-- Ukrainian police, you know, they round up all the Jews for the Germans, the Ukrainian police. They collaborated with the Germans. All the Ukrainians collaborated, you know, with the Germans. But I want to tell you after, you know, my mother got sick-- she got sick one day, and the next day, she really got sick. She shaked. And I had a cousin. His name was Schmuel, you know, Schmelik, whatever. And I called him. And she was just yelling, Moishe, Moishe, Moishe, Moishe. And he came. And we were both sitting, you know, and she died. She died, and it-- it must have been around January, because I have to say Kaddish next Saturday, you know, the 11th. The 10th or 11th, I have to say [HEBREW], you know. 
INT: How did she die? MR: She died-- I think she got frozen, when she used to go to get food and everything, because she didn't let me go. And she died, and she was-- we couldn't bury her, because they had to get a [INAUDIBLE] from the German, from the head German. It was-- I forgot. See, I forgot a lot of things. You know, but a commandant-- they had a commandant. He was a storm trooper, or whatever you call them. And she was laying, like, seven days, you know, on the floor til we got allowed to bury her. And-- and the Judenrat sent a guy. You know, he was sitting with me, you know every day and every night. And then, after she got buried, you know, neighbors came, you know, in and out, and some were sitting with me. And I think in a week, or two weeks, a month, you know, they rounded up all the Jewish people, and they chased them into the ghetto, you know. It was all Ukrainian. I didn't see no Germans, you know. So it was like a seven mile-- it was a bridge, like what the water used to go through. You know, they threw down one guy. I don't know if he didn't work too fast or whatever. And they threw him down in the water, I don't know how you'd survive. And in the back was a way that what they could go to right in the back of our house. So the Ukrainian-- you know, man or woman, they were running. And they were hitting them with chains, with sticks, you know. One lady, a young lady, you know, they hit with a stick, and I think it was a nail in it, you know. And the blood was coming out and everything. And they closed up-- they closed up the ghetto. And every-- every-- then I started going-- going to work, you know. I couldn't hide anymore, because the house was full. You know, our house-- our house was left in the ghetto. And-- 
INT: What-- you were alone now. Your mother died. MR: Alone, yeah.  INT: So who were you with? What was that like to be by yourself? MR: Well it was a real, real bad, you know. And I used to-- when I used to go to work, I used to go out, you know, and ask the farmers for bread, you know. Some of them used to give me some bread. And then I-- I had, you know-- it was some soap I had. And I had what I took from the horses. I used to sometimes run out from the ghetto and exchange it for food with the farmers.  INT: You were living-- well, first of all, how was the ghetto set up? MR: Yeah.  INT: How was the ghetto set up? One day the Judenrat announced that they were going to be a ghetto? Or how did that come about? MR: No, no. They just-- they just chased in the Jewish people to the ghetto, and that's it. There was no announcement. And--  INT: Were there boundaries? Were there walls? MR: No, there were no walls. It was just-- it was just-- It was a cemetery-- it was up to the cemetery, the ghetto. And then it was the bridge where the water went down. And our house was-- and this was the ghetto. Now, you couldn't get out from the ghetto. After, you know, they had-- [BACKGROUND NOISE] --the Star of David, a yellow Star of David on front, and down on the back, one Star of David. And when you-- the Germans could see the yellow from far away. If you ran out of the ghetto, they caught you, you were killed. And the Ukrainian, you know, the Ukrainian police could kill-- kill too. 
INT: How many were living in the ghetto? MR: In this ghetto? I wish I knew. You know, it must be-- they must have killed out 2,000 to 3,000. There must have been about 3,000, 4,000. And our house was packed. It must have been about six or seven families in our house.  INT: So you were alone, but with those other-- MR: With those other people. You know, there I was alone.  INT: Do you remember any of those people? MR: I remember-- well, it was my cousin's, you know, wife and her two sisters. And my cousins, they had two little girls, but I forgot their names. You know, I know her name was Ruhu. And--  INT: And you talked about sometimes you did leave the ghetto? You would run away? MR: Not just to run away-- I used to go to work. You know, or get out of the ghetto-- if they would catch, they would kill. But I used to go out a lot of times.  INT: To work? MR: To work.  INT: What kind of work were you doing then, and how come you didn't get into trouble? MR: Well, when-- when-- I used to go out to the ghetto, I didn't go to work. I just-- I just went out, and I used to go house to house there, and beg for food from the farmers. And I used to come back. When I used to come back, some Jewish people, you know, they used to walk back. I walked with them back, you know. And a lot of times, when some of them walked to work, I walked to work with them. But I used to run-- run away from them, you know, and go and ask for bread, or whatever. But most of the time, I used to go to work with them. 
INT: And where did you-- what sort of work were you doing then? MR: Like loading the railroad cars, you know, or unload coal from the-- from the railroad cars, or other stuff.  INT: And you did this for whom? MR: For the Germans, you know.  INT: And who was giving you food? MR: The Germans didn't give food.  INT: You said you-- how did you get food? You said you went out to the farmers? MR: To the farmers, you know, and sometimes, even when I worked for the Germans, I used to run away, you know, because there was a lot of us. There was about, 15, 20, 30, you know. And I used to ask the farmers, you know, for food, whatever. And one time--  INT: Where they non-Jewish, the farmers? MR: Non-Jewish. No, there was no Jewish farmers. There was no Jewish farmers.  INT: They were Polish or Ukrainian? MR: Some Ukrainian, some Polish, You know, most of them, you know, were Ukrainians, you know.  INT: I'm sorry, I interrupted you. And one time-- what happened one time when you went out? MR: One time, the-- the Judenrat, you know, they took us to work. And on the-- on the ice-- you know, it was like the Canadian-- between Detroit and Windsor. It really froze. And we had to make holes in the ice, you know. So I had an ax. And we had a saw. You know, we had to saw the-- the ice. It was two Germans for a while, watching us. And one German-- he was a-- a real Gestapo. They used to call him the [? Brazilop ?] Commandant. See, what they used to take away-- they took away from the Jewish people the cows, the goats, the sheep, everything. Everything, they took away. And he-- he took care on it, you know, this commandant. He used to kill a Jewish person. And he used to come into the ghetto, and he said he just killed a dog, you know. So-- and he was there while we were working on the ice. And he-- and he took us all, and we had to lift up a tank-- a Russian tank, you know. He examined it-- you know, the machines, or the motors, and everything. And we were-- we were afraid, you know, he might shoot us, so. But he didn't. The bullets, you know, were like gold. You know, and the gun was right [INAUDIBLE], you are a tall guy. And after, the Ukrainian killed him. And when they killed him, he-- he-- the Gestapo came right away. And before he died, he said, a Jewish person didn't kill him, because they would kill all the Jews. They killed him because he took the cattle from them, he took the horses, he took everything from them. But anyway, so then we didn't have nothing to eat. We came back, you know to-- so we asked a German if we could go and buy some bread. One-- so he said, OK. One guy went, and while he brought the bread, another German came, a Gestapo. So they had to put the bread under the snow, you know, to-- to hide it. And one boy, while we were taken-- I remember his name was Bill-- he almost-- he went in, and I caught him. 
INT: This is the end the tape two. And we'll pick up with this story with Morris Rubenstein.  INT: Morris Rubenstein. You were in the middle of a story? MR: Yeah. So-- [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] so we-- and we made the little, little rows, and then made one long, long one. And they put mines onto the-- and it-- it made the fish unconscious, like. And they came up. You know, and they came with big barrels, and we had to take it out with net and put it in the barrels. You know, and they took it away. And we didn't even get to eat the bread, nothing. You know? So every-- every day, they took us-- they took us to work, the-- the Germans. And a lot of times we went to work for some Ukrainians, Ukrainian police. And one-- one time, we went-- we went to work. And it was a-- a German, a commissar. And he told-- he told-- he told us-- he took us behind a house, or behind a barn, and he told us-- the men-- to turn around. And he told the women to take out everything what they brought. You know? See, they brought a lot of stuff, you know, to trade with the farmers for food. So they took it out. You know, and everything. And he said, well, now you can put it back in. And when you come back to the ghetto, don't tell the commissar is nice-- everything. Tell them he's mean. He beats you, he yells-- everything. So when you tell he is mean, you know, he gets-- he gets-- he gets good grades, you know, from the higher Germans. You know? So we went-- we went to work. And then after, you know, I went, you know, to the farmers. I begged some bread, and everything. 
INT: And the farmers didn't turn you in? MR: No.  INT: They helped you? MR: Yeah. Some of them used to give me a piece of bread. And some of them didn't. You know? But they didn't turn me in. They didn't turn me in.  INT: And what was the role of the Judenrat, once the ghetto was formed? MR: The Judenrat?  INT: What were they like? What was the council like, once the ghetto was formed? MR: Formed? Well, they were mean. That had-- they were mean. The police were mean. And everything, you know. And there-- it was-- it was-- if one from the Judenrat, you know-- the German killed on the way someplace. And they killed a big doctor, too. When they ordered, you know, like, 10 or 15 Jews, you know, the Judenrat had to find the 10, 15 Jews and bring to the German. You know? They had responsibility, too. But one or two policemen, you know, they were real-- they were real mean. They were real-- they used to walk around with sticks in the ghetto. And a lot of times, I didn't go to work. And every time, they used to bring in dead Jews, you know, what they had to bury them and everything-- what the Germans killed, or some police.  INT: You saw them bring in? MR: I saw they bring in men. You know?  INT: Where did you see that? Inside the ghetto? Or-- MR: Inside the ghetto. You know? One time it was a real-- a cripple, a Jewish guy. I don't know how he got out from the ghetto, but, you know, they killed him. And they brought him on a sled. They brought him into the ghetto, you know, so the other Jews would see him, and everything. 
INT: At this stage, did you hear about deportations? That they were sending people to extermination camps? MR: Not from our ghetto, they didn't send them to the concentration camps. They killed them right there. You know?  INT: They had aktions-- they had actions? MR: Actions? Yeah. They had actions. They had actions, you know, where they killed them.  INT: Did you see some actions? MR: No. I didn't see no actions. If I would see the actions, I wouldn't be here. You know? So-- it was going on-- it was going on every day-- every day. You know? A lot of times, I walked around in the ghetto. I didn't have nothing to eat, nothing to eat at all. You know? And I remember, you know, was a tree in the ghetto. It had a few cherries. You know, I crawled up and I got a few cherries. And this I survived, you know. I know one time I went out. And a farmer, a Ukrainian-- and I stayed there a few days. And I slept in the attic. And he just gave me bread to eat. And then he-- he told me, I have not myself to eat, you know? So then I went back into the ghetto, you know. So it was real, real, real, bad. And this what it was-- was going on-- was going on almost five year. And-- and after, you know, they [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] they-- they took me and a few other ones. Must have been about 10 or 15, maybe 20. Maybe more. And they told us to come into the-- to the Judenrat. And they round us up. And they took us to Lutsk. To-- you know, I jump from one to-- to another. But it was still going on before this. 
INT: And who took you to Lutsk? The Germans or the-- MR: Ukrainians.  INT: Uh-huh. MR: Ukrainians. But the German, the [GERMAN]-- you know, he was a stern man. They call him [GERMAN], a commandant. So they round us up, I think, in three or two. And we were walking. And he-- he was coming over the what-- a coach with two horses. And he was sitting. And he told us to sing, you know, the-- the Jewish hymn. You know the Jewish national anthem, you know? [NON-ENGLISH]. And we start singing. And he was laughing. You know, we were walking. And he was following us a little while, till we cross the little bridge. And we were walking, you know, with the-- the Ukrainian. They were on bikes. It was three of four Ukrainians. And we walked to Lutsk.  INT: How long a walk? MR: It could take about three, four hours walk. I forgot if we stopped or we didn't stop. I forgot. You know, Lutsk, we had to walk through it the ghetto, in Lutsk. And there was a little bridge, too, you know, over the ghetto. It was [NON-ENGLISH] bridge, they called it. A little iron bridge. We walked through. And while we walked, I run out. And I run away, you know? See, in Lutsk, the farmers had to go through the ghetto, because they would have to go the other way, I don't know how many miles it was, you know, to come around there. So I run-- I ran away. And I came to a house, the house there. And I don't know if the lady, she lived alone or more people lived there. But she did let me into the house. And right you come into the house, was like a shed. You know, before, like you walk in the front door, or the side over the shed. And she let me sleep in the shed, you know, on the ground. And I-- I went out. I went out to the ghetto. And I met some-- a few boys there, Jewish boys. And a lady, you know, she was-- [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] it was like a little restaurant. It was no restaurant, but she was cooking and everything. I forgot where I got the money-- and I got a soup. It was just beans, there was no bread. And then I came back there to sleep. And I stayed there a week. 
INT: You stayed a week in the woman's shed? MR: Yeah, a week. Maybe longer than a week. I forgot already. Then I got sick. And right here, it was so swollen, you know, I couldn't chew. I couldn't eat. So she took me to a doctor. She walked with me. She was a young lady, you know, maybe 25-- you know. I think I must have been 14, 15 years old. Walked to the doctor. So the doctor said I should come the next day, And he-- they have to get milk from a-- fresh milk, and then he give me a needle. It have to be mixed with something. So I came next day. He gave me the needle. And I came back. And I think it took a day or two. It start-- I start feeling better, and everything. And then I found another guy from our city, too. And he ran away, on the way there. I don't know if he ran away when we walk together, you know, because we couldn't look back to the other guys. We had to walk straight.  INT: When you ran away, though, no one came after you? MR: No, no. I just ran away. No one. It's hard to explain, you know, how I ran, and everything.  INT: Weren't you afraid that something would happen to you when you'd run away? MR: I was afraid, yes. But you know, you don't think. You don't-- And I met the other guy. And we, the next morning, you know, we went out from the ghetto. And we walked-- and we walked home. 
INT: To [NON-ENGLISH]. MR: Back to the ghetto. Back to Rozyszcze.  INT: Rozyszcze. MR: To the ghetto. And we waited till some people walked into the ghetto, some more Jewish people. And we walked in back to the ghetto. Soon I came-- when I came into the house, and they saw me, you know, what I stayed in our house. And right after, a Jewish policeman came from the Judenrat. And he took me. And he throwed me into jail, you know. And he told me, he said-- I'm going to have to go back the next day. So it was, but two or three, maybe four of us, you know, what we came back. And he took us back. And then they watched us so we wouldn't run away. And I saw some more guys from our city. And they took us to camp. And it was a camp, you know, like a barn. And it was beds. You know? It was one and two, you know, in the-- in the camp.  INT: They took you outside of the ghetto? Or was this inside the ghetto? MR: Outside the ghetto was the camp.  INT: What kind of camp? MR: It was just a workings camp, arbeitslager.  INT: The name of it was arbeitslager? MR: Arbeitslager. You know, like a slave camp. And it was a Jewish a policeman there, one or two. I forgot already. And every morning, like about 5:30, 6 o'clock, they used to come-- up! Up! Up! And he had a stick he used to hit us to get up. And we walked to the-- we walked into the ghetto. And we walked into the Judenrat, to the Jewish council. And he gave us little, little pieces of bread, you know, And we went to work. But one morning I came, and it was a line. And he gave me a little piece of bread, the policeman. And I eat it up right away. And he asked me, did you get a piece of bread yet? I said, no. So he gave me the other piece of bread--I ate up. So the guy behind said, he got already a piece of bread. So he slapped me, you know, the policeman-- the Jewish policeman, you know? I know his name was [NON-ENGLISH]-- [NON-ENGLISH]. I think he was in our ghetto policeman, too. I don't know how he got there. And then we went to work. And there was real Gestapos-- SS. And on the way to walk in, it was fenced in. 
INT: This was the camp, now? MR: No, not at the camp.  INT: This was where? MR: To work for the Germans. Yeah? So we walked in. So we walked. I don't know if I was wearing a hat or not. And a Gestapo walked through. And he told me to take the hat off. But he said in German, [GERMAN]. I didn't know what a [GERMAN] was. And so the guy behind me said, take the hat off. I guess he knew German. So the German slapped me so hard. You know-- I-- I remember I almost went over. And then we walked in, and a Gestapo came out. And he said, Juden, you're here to work. If you can't work, we'll-- we'll kill you. And the same thing we do to the Germans. If they can fight, they fight. If not, if they start running away, we kill them. So he said, the same thing we'll do to you. We're not going to feed you. If you can work, OK. And we were working. We loaded trucks, you know, canned food and other things on the trucks. Take the work. We worked the whole day along. And then we had to sweep. And we had to move furniture up and down there. And then we came-- and then they had to give us a-- a [GERMAN]. How you say [GERMAN]? You know, a paper so we allowed to leave? So on the way back, we walked alone. They know we couldn't run away. You know? Where are we going to go? So we used to stop. And a-- and a lot of the-- the Gentiles, or the Ukrainians, Polacks-- they used to take the Jewish houses, if they didn't live there, you know, apart. And they used to look for gold, silver, you know. So some houses were already broken apart. So we used to break out the wood. And we used to make bundles. And we brought it into the ghetto. And we used to sell it, you know, for so much. And we used to buy food. I forgot how long I was in the camp. 
INT: In the work camp. MR: In the work camp.  INT: And again, what was the name of the work camp? MR: You know, I-- I-- I don't even know that. I forgot the name. You know? I know it was-- it was [NON-ENGLISH], or [NON-ENGLISH]. And you know what? I forgot even the streets in Lutsk. And I knew Lutsk good. I used to go there a lot.  INT: In Lutsk, there was a resistance movement-- and I think led by someone by the name of Joel Szczerbat. MR: You know, I didn't even know about it? When I was reading it, I didn't even know about it.  INT: So you were not familiar. MR: No. Not familiar.  INT: Was there any resistance movements in your ghetto that you were aware of? MR: No. I'm not aware of it, even. I'm not aware-- it wasn't-- if there was a resistance or not. You know. But [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] I just remember in the-- and I thought I was left-- I was the only one left. But I heard one more, another one was left. He's in Belgium, I think. And then, I came back there, to the camp. So they give us-- it was a little soup. I don't know what it was. Beets or what? But it was-- it was just like water. No bread. No nothing. You know. And I know, next was a German-- Germans were staying there. And they had a thing on top, you know, what used to be watchman. A German used to watch. 
INT: And where is this again? MR: Right near the camp, near the working camp, near the slave camp.  INT: Which is close to the ghetto? MR: Yeah. It was close to the ghetto, too, you know. And this I remember. And they said, you know, the-- the camp was-- the fences were electrocuted. You know, if you run, you get electrocuted. I don't know if it was the true or not. And then the next day, we went to work. And I worked. And it was a Ukrainian place with, where the Ukrainian police was. They had to give us a little soup. You know, and we loaded trucks. I forgot the potatoes or rye, or what we worked all day. Then we came back. Sometimes we brought a little bundle wood what we sold. And we used to buy some food in the ghetto. A lot of them, they used to bake bread and everything. And I remember one time, I think it could be some day what we didn't go to work. So a few of us, we walked into the ghetto. I don't know how we walked into the ghetto, how we went out from the camp. I forgot already. And I went there, you know, not just me-- a few other guys asking for bread from the Jewish. They bake bread. So they didn't give us no bread. But they give us the-- but they cut the hard pieces from the bread around, you know? So I saw a farmer-- he was selling cherries. So I went over to the farmer and asked him if I can have some bread. So he-- he sold, you know, by the cup. So he took a cup. And he said, here. So I couldn't put in. So then I had a shirt-- so he put it in. So I had the cherries and the little piece of bread. And I walk back into the ghetto. But I really don't know how. A lot of times, we used to go into the ghetto. And I saw a lot of guys they brought from our city-- boys, young boys my age, some of them elder-- or they saw me. And-- and the next day or two, I went out and I didn't see them. You know? I bet they killed them already. And I saw the-- And then--one time I came back to the camp. And I was real down. And they told me, you know a guy? You know, I knew the guy. I went to cheder with him. His name was Isaac. They said he ran away from the camp. So I was sleeping-- you know, I was shaken. Because they said this thing was electrocuted. How can I run away? And the door, the gate, you know, was just like this, you know, to walk out. I don't know if it was the same night, or-- And I got up in the morning. It must have been about 3 o'clock or 3:30. And I said-- [BACKGROUND NOISE] 
INT: What was that? MR: The--  INT: We are in the middle of tape three. And we had to pause because a light blew out in the middle of the interview. [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] The [GERMAN], the mass killing trucks, were in your region during this time period-- '41 to '43. Did you see any [GERMAN]? MR: No. No. You mean, where they used to kill? I didn't. If I would see them, I wouldn't be here. You know? I wouldn't be here.  INT: I think, before the light blew out, you were in the middle of a story. You were thinking about leaving. But you were afraid of the electric-- MR: Yeah. The fence.  INT: --electrocuted fence. MR: Yeah. Everything. But one time, I got up in the morning. And I-- [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] and I just looked up. And the sun was just coming out. And I just went through the fence. And I start walking. I took off the Star of David from the front, the yellow Star of David from the back. And I started walking. And I think the German, you know, he was up there. You know? I don't know if he was watching the camp or he was watching, you know? They had there, you know, the trucks. And there was some artillery, everything. And I start walking. And I walked away. And I walked by the side. And when I saw a German driving through with a truck or car, I ran and I hid. 
INT: Where'd you hide? MR: You know, it was like-- it was big trees around. And there were some houses. You know? Or I-- I-- I jumped. I lay down in the ditch. You know, they drove through. And then I came-- not far was a little city. They called [NON-ENGLISH]-- [NON-ENGLISH]. And it was-- it was a woods. It was a long woods. It wasn't wide, but long. And I walked with the wood. And then some Jewish people [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] live there. You know, I thought they were still there. But they weren't there. I guess they-- I don't know where they went, they got them into the ghetto or not. And while I went there, so I walked into a few places. It was farms. And I asked them for some food. And some of them give me some food. And I-- and I walked. It was five miles from Rozyszcze. And I walked. And I wait with some more people, walking, and I put in back the Star of David. And I walked into the ghetto. And I walked into the ghetto. I forgot. I think I slept over someplace. I think in the morning I walked into the ghetto. And I saw one from the Judenrat. He was a rabbi [NON-ENGLISH], but he belonged to the Judenrat. And I asked him what shall I do? Whatever. And he told me, I can't tell you what to do anymore. And I walked into our house-- there were just a few people still there. And a neighbor girl, you know, she walked out. She saw me. She start talking, Moishe, Moishe, how did you get away? And she gave me some soup, I remember. And I sit down. And I ate the soup. And I went into our house, to the shop. And I took a rake. And I walked up the hill. And I forgot if I took out the Star of David or not. And the ghetto was already around with Ukrainian police. [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] And when I walked up and I walked through there, through the-- the property, there, you know, it was a farm. It was a big farm. There were two, three Ukrainians. They start running to me with a rifle. Where are you going? So I said, don't you know? I'm going to work. So that Ukrainian said, don't you know? Let him go. He's our brother. I know the Ukrainians from before. I used to graze some cows with them. And-- 
INT: This is the end of tape three. And we'll continue the story with Morris Rubenstein.  INT: is tape four with Morris Rubenstein. Mr. Rubenstein, you were telling me about when you went up to a-- top of the hill-- MR: Yeah.  INT: --with your rake. MR: Well, then I-- I-- did I-- did I tell you how I walked out from the ghetto?  INT: Yes. MR: Already? You know, when I-- I got a rake and I walked out, everything? And I think then, you know, I walk-- I walked till I came to a village. I walked with other Jewish people. You know, because they went to work there.  INT: And you said three Ukrainians stopped you? MR: Yeah. Well, did I tell where the three Ukrainians stopped me?  INT: Yes. MR: Yeah.  INT: And then what happened, when they stopped you? MR: Well, when they stopped me, they let me go. And I-- I-- I walked away. And I walked with a crowd of Jewish people. They walked to work. And then I walked away from them. I came to a village. And I walked into a farm. And I ask them if they need somebody to work. And he said, yes, not for long. And a-- a Russian [? prison ?] [? of war ?] there. It was a Polish farm. And we had to unload, you know, heavy bails of straw, rye. And I lifted, but it was hard for me to lift it. And I think I've worked there just one-- I don't know this day, or if-- I forgot if I slept over there or not. But anyway, after I left there, it was in the morning. And I went farm to farm, to ask if they need somebody to work. And I stopped in one-- one farm. And it was a young girl there. An-- and I ask if they need somebody to work. So she said that her mother and father are around the field. She'll run and she'll ask them if they need somebody, if I want to wait. So I waited and waited. And she didn't come. So I start walking away. And as soon I walked-- in-- you know, it was bushes there. And I heard her calling me, you know? She said, my father wants to talk to you, you know? He might need somebody to work. And I went on the field. And he said, yes, he needs somebody to work. And I-- I start working there. And she was a nice lady, her mother. She asked me what I-- what kind of food I want, she should cook, whatever. You know? And I think she only had one girl. And I-- I-- I slept in the attic. And one time, I was working on the field. And our neighbor, a lady, you know, from Rozyszcze, from the ghetto, and she told me, you know, Moshe, they took everything away. They stole from your house, everything. I thought what do I care, you know? I wouldn't go back. But before the girl, when I start walking away, if she wouldn't have called me, I would walked back to the ghetto, you know? And-- 
INT: This was a Polish family you were working for, on the farm? MR: No, a Ukrainian.  INT: Or a Ukrainian? MR: A Ukrainian farm.  INT: And they knew you were Jewish? MR: Yeah. They-- I-- I guess they know I were Jewish.  INT: Did you have your star on then? MR: No. No star--  INT: Did they ask if you were Jewish? MR: They didn't ask me nothing, you know? I just worked there.  INT: Did you-- were you-- when you lived in the attic, were you hiding there? Did they know you were hiding? MR: No, no. I didn't hide there. I just slept there. You know, they didn't want me--  INT: And how long did you stay there? Where did you go next? MR: I really don't know how long I stayed there. It could be, I think, about two weeks, maybe three weeks. Maybe a month. I don't know. I forgot. And then one time, you know, I was on the field. And I was loading the wagon. And he came. And he told me, you know, they killed all the Jews in Luck. You know? I don't if then were-- they were fighting the Germans. I-- I really don't know. I-- I never heard about it. So it was already on my mind. And in one week, you know, I think it was on a-- I don't know if it was Sunday or Monday, whatever. She came up. I was sleeping on the-- [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] --attic, you know, and she told me to leave. I didn't even see him. He didn't even come. 
INT: Who? The-- the father didn't come? Who told you to leave? MR: The-- the wife, the lady. The farm lady told me to leave.  INT: Why? MR: But I didn't even see him. So I walked out. And they didn't even give me a piece of bread, you know? And I really worked hard there and everything. So I walked and I saw a young boy and an old guy, walking. And I ask him where they're walking, if I can walk with them. They said no. They know a farm, you know, where they are going, stay. So I walked myself. So I walked to-- I didn't walk well, the way, what people go through. I just walked through the fields, you know, so nobody will see me. So I walked, and they just took out from the-- it was the harvest. They took out the rye, everything. You know, they put the rye like this. This through--  INT: And where were you walking to? MR: I don't-- I didn't know where I was walking to. I was just walking. And I heard people talking. So then I saw girls from our city. I don't know, 4 or 5 or 6 or 10, I don't know. They were sitting. And one boy was sitting there, I knew the boy too. His name was-- his last name was [INAUDIBLE]. I forgot his first name. And I was sitting and-- and I didn't eat. So we took out from the rye, you know, you took it out like this and you put-- you put it in your mouth. And I don't know if I was in there a day or two days and nights. And then when we were sitting and talking, I saw a farm. I came out. And he cutting the-- the rye or the wheat. And I went over to him and I ask him if I can help him. He said, if you don't leave, I'll cut you. And I have like this. When he told me this, I came over, you know? And I looked on the girls. I looked on the boy and I tell-- ask the boy if he want to go with me as I walked. He said no. And the forest, it wasn't a big forest. It was a small forest. And I start walking. And when I was close to the forest, I look back. And two Ukrainians, they got him. I think he start walking already. I saw him walking, I looked. And then I saw the Ukrainians. They grabbed him, you know? And I guess they grabbed the girls, you know? I guess they killed them, you know? All the Ukrainians, they killed. You couldn't trust a Ukrainian farmer. 
INT: So this is all-- so for many years, you kept leaving the ghetto and going to work for farmers? MR: No, they killed already, in the ghetto. They killed already in the ghetto, when I left the farm. They killed already.  INT: So you knew you could not go back? MR: No, I didn't go back to the ghetto anymore.  INT: So in 1943, where were you? MR: No, this was still in 1941.  INT: OK. MR: 1941. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] And I-- I walked into the woods. And I was walking around. And a whole family was sitting there. And it could be it was Friday night and there were [NON-ENGLISH], you know? It was a father and mother and two boys. And their grandparents were sitting there. So I sit down a little with them. And then I walked away. And I walked around in the woods, I don't know how long, a month or two months or--  INT: And you were by yourself? MR: By myself.  INT: And what did you do to survive? How did you eat? MR: To-- to--  INT: What did you eat? MR: To survive, you know, it was-- you know, it was grass. And-- and it was-- and it was like, little strawberries. But it was little things I was eating. But most of that time, I used to go out and ask the farmers for bread.  INT: And how did you stay warm in the wintertime? MR: In the-- in the wintertime, is-- you know, they-- they-- well, it wasn't winter yet. And-- and-- [PAUSES FOR 5 SECONDS] I walked out there-- and-- and there was so many, you know, Jewish boys and girls and some older ones. They went out to buy bread and everything. And I don't think I could get bread there. Because there was too many of us. You know? So I walked back into the woods, to the forest. And I walked-- walked in the forest, walked in the forest. And a-- a lot of times, you know, I used to get out, you know, near the forest. It was turnips, beats, and-- and-- and some other things. And-- and it was still in the field, what I used to get out the kernels and I used to eat. But I went into a forest. And it was a big forest. And-- and I heard somebody talking. And I walked. And it was the whole family, there. They were sitting. And you know, they had lice. You know, they were-- I had lice too. So I sit down. Maybe it was in October. You know? And-- and we were talking.
And all of a sudden, you know, the-- the Ukrainians, you know, they-- they [? [UKRAINIAN], ?] [? halt. ?] And it was-- must have been three Ukrainians. And while they sat there, I start running. And I left those shoes. You know, I left the shoes. And I think I had some other stuff. And they start shooting at-- and then I thought maybe they wouldn't kill them. And I start walking back. But they start shooting. And I run. I-- I-- I run away. And I was running around in the woods. I don't know what I was eating, or what. But then it got real, real cold. Must be November. And I-- I-- I was just walking around barefooted. And I had a shirt on. And I had a-- a jacket. But it didn't have the sleeves. And I walked out-- out from the woods. And I walked. And it was a farmer, you know? He was picking up hay or-- from the-- and I asked him-- it was him and it was a Russian prisoner. He worked for-- for the farm. I ask him, where shall I go? I-- I saw houses on the right. And then I saw houses on the left hand. And he-- he told me, don't go there, in Ukrainian, but go there. And I went-- and I went there. And after I found out the farmer, he was the head of the villages. You know, the Ukrainian. And I-- I-- I walked and it was a way, you know, like seven mile. One, you couldn't go. And there was a house there. And I went into the house. I forget if I knocked on the door or not. And I asked for bread, if I can stay. He said, he doesn't have no bread, they don't have. But I can stay there. So I went out. I went to look for-- for bread. It was a Polish village. It was no-- maybe there was one Ukrainian living there. They gave me bread. And I came back. He was praying so loud. So I was afraid. I start running. [LAUGHS] But then I-- I came back. I walk back already. And I didn't hear him pray. I walked in. And a lady, I guess she showed me to walk in. So she looked through the window. And she was crying. A lady, a Polish lady. And I stayed there. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] I slept on the attic. And one time, I was so sick. I-- I must have eaten-- every time she came up, the lady, and she asked, called me Moishe, How are you feeling? How are you feeling? How are you feeling? You know, and I said, OK. Yeah, I stayed there. And after, I came-- I went to look back in the woods, to find a place where I would stay. And-- and I found a-- the place. And I-- and I saw, you know, the ground was still fresh. They killed them, I guess, and they buried them. But the two boys, you know, they were hiding in a place. I knew where, by a farmer. I-- so I stayed-- I stayed there. His name was Ciechanowiecki. He was Polish and she was a Russian. Her name was Olga. One eye was big, one eye was a little-- real, real, small. But they were real nice. He was talking, you know, about the Jews, [? this ?] [? they ?] [? called-- ?] the Jews killed Jesus, and they took him-- took Peter, and they took Jesus there, you know? They killed him. And I was just listening, you know? And-- 
INT: So you hid out for many months? MR: There, yeah. Yeah. And one time, you know, she came up there, Olga. And she told me, it's a boy. And he's asking, he wants to stay. Shall I let him in or not? I said, yeah. And-- and he came up on the attic, you know, and [? he's-- that was ?] [? Hershel. ?]  INT: [? Hershel? ?] MR: Yeah. And he was there.  INT: And you don't remember [? Hershel's ?] last name, do you? MR: I forgot. I forgot his last name, you know? So well, then in daytime, we had to go into the woods. And at night, we came back. But I-- I-- I forgot to tell yo-- this was before [? Hershel. ?] I went out one time. I-- I had to go-- in the morning, I-- I had to go into the woods. At night, I came there, always. You know? So one time, I got out from the woods. And a guy said to me, Moishe, Moishe, come here. Don't be afraid. He talked to me in Jewish. But he wasn't Jewish. He was a Polish guy. And he asked me, you know, he said this girl, you know, she is hiding in the farm. And if I know her, if I can bring her to him. What I said, I don't know nothing. This was her, you know, the picture.  INT: Mhm. MR: On this-- and--  INT: How long did you think this was going to go on for? Did you have any idea how long you had to stay in hiding and in people's homes and back in the woods? MR: Till 1944. It was going on for 3 years, 3 years or 2 and 1/2 year. 
INT: And-- and did you hear, at this point now-- if we're in 1943 or '44, did you hear about what was happening to Jews being deported? Was-- were you ever afraid of that? MR: Well, well, I didn't hear nothing. I didn't hear-- I didn't hear nothing. But it was-- it was just one-- one-- one time, you know, two sisters came there. I'm going to make it short now. Two sisters came there to this guy. He didn't have no farm. He didn't have nothing. He just had a cow and two pigs. You know? And me and the Hershel, in the wintertime, we were hiding, you know, it was-- where they used to keep potatoes in the house. And they used to cook on top. At night, we used to crawl in and down there. I don't know if it was Ukrainian or-- or whatever. You know, they came-- they came in. And the ladies, it was two-- two sisters he took in and another lady and two kids, you know, after. And and what-- well, before they come in, it's real long. It will take long, you know?  INT: But what is it-- what do you want to tell me? What is the point? About how you were hidden? MR: Yeah.  INT: And-- and these two women came? These two other girls came as well, to be hidden? MR: No, two-- two sisters. And they had a little boy with them. You know? And he took them in too, you know? 
INT: Why do you think this family hid all of you? MR: I don't know. I don't-- they knew the farmer. We didn't know the farmer. He was not farm-- he just had a house. He was like a tradesman. He used to fix shoes.  INT: OK. MR: He used to fix anything. And then--  INT: Do you remember his name? MR: Ciechanowiecki.  INT: OK. MR: Ciechanowiecki is the name. And her name was Olga. You know? So--  INT: Oh, the same family. OK. MR: Yeah. We slept in the house. You know, on-- if somebody used to walk in, we used to crawl in and hide. And--  INT: Were you afraid you'd be discovered there? MR: Yeah, I was afraid. I was afraid. And we used to walk around in the-- in the village. Just one guy, he was the head of the village. He used to walk through and look at us. I used to say hello. He used to shake with a-- you know? And some, the young boys, they knew us. They knew we were Jews. You know?  INT: And the name of this village was? MR: Ulaniki. Ulaniki was the name of the village.  INT: And how far was it from Rozyszcze? MR: From Rozyszcze, 5-- maybe about 8, 10 miles from Rozyszcze.  INT: Tell me when you found out that the war was over. MR: Well-- oh, you want to-- you want me to jump to, from there? 
INT: Do-- are there some other hiding stories you want to tell me? MR: Oh, yes, not-- yeah.  INT: Are there other stories? Go ahead. MR: Yeah. Well, after-- before the ladies came, a couple came over. And-- and it-- it would take too long.  INT: Well, what I want to know is, what happened? I mean, you were in hiding-- MR: Yeah  INT: --in this family's home for a long time. MR: OK, Go on. yeah.  INT: And you were in the woods during the day, and you were there at night. And you slept in different places in their home. MR: Yeah. Yeah.  INT: You were in hiding. What-- what happened next, in terms of-- I mean, this would go on for many months. MR: Many months. But what happened, I think this was in 1942, already. But another couple came over. And-- and this was before the ladies came. But I'm going to have to skip it, because it will take too long.  INT: I just want to know, did your life-- was your life getting worse at this time? Were you eating at this time? Were you feeling better? What was going through your mind at this point? MR: In-- in this point, just how to survive in everything. But in this-- in this point, I have to tell you, is this Ciechanowiecki had a brother. And he was bandits, Ukrainian bandits. They killed Jews. And after, they start killing Polish people. Because they made Polish police. The Germans made Polish police. See, just because it's complicated. 
INT: Did you see any of this killing? Did you see them do this killing that you're talking to me about? Did you see it? MR: You mean, the-- the bandits?  INT: Yes. MR: I saw them when I was in the-- in the forest. I saw them walking through with rifles.  INT: Mm. MR: You know? But if they would have seen me, they would have killed me, you know? [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] So they killed his brother, this Ciechanowiecki's brother, where we were staying. And a lady came and told him-- told this Ciechanowiecki they killed his brother. They should go and bury him. They just left him there, the brother and his wife. So they went to bury this brother. But I heard the other Polacks tell us is-- she-- she start yelling in the Ukrainian why they-- they-- on the bandits, why they killed their brother. So they killed them. They killed the people, what we stay there, you know?  INT: You didn't see this, though? But you know this happened. MR: Yeah. I heard that happen. You know, they didn't come back. You know, they didn't come back, no, [? none, either. ?]  INT: And the wife? Did she come back? MR: No. None of them came back.  INT: So you were in the house alone now? MR: We were in the house. We and the [? Hershel ?] and the two sisters, and the son, another-- and another lady. 
INT: And how much longer did you stay there? MR: We didn't stay. You know, the-- the Polacks, their neighbor, you know, they came right in. And they took the cow. They had two little pigs. They killed it already. It's so long. You know, like we went out. They were cooking. We were eating their food. And they-- they-- she was sitting to warm herself. She said, who's eating my food? The cat eating my food? You know, we had lice. You know, she-- she made the oven, and she put the clothes in to kill the lice, everything. I didn't take a bath. I never took a haircut. You know, my hair were almost like this. And-- and-- and before they killed them, you know, they killed this Polack, you know, what he talked Jewish. You know?  INT: But what did you do? Where did yo go next? You said you didn't stay there. MR: Well, at night-- you know, at night, when it came night, we-- we went in, you know, to bushes, me and Hershel, and the ladies, everything. And we waited till maybe one o'clock, you know? And then we started walking. They were closer to the city already. And--  INT: To which city? MR: Rozyszcze. But it was still maybe about 10 miles. But from [INAUDIBLE] and I went to-- and on the way, we decided, you know, we separated.  INT: You separated from [? Hershel? ?] MR: From [? Hershel, ?] and from all of them. And-- 
INT: Why did you decide to be on your own again? MR: Because I don't know if we could survive, you know, both. I don't know. See, it's a long story. You know, one time, I-- I hit him, I blood his nose, you know? And maybe on account of this, and we had-- we had to crawl into another house. And he could lift me to crawl in through the window. And I lifted him, you know? It's-- it's a big [? story. ?] So we divided. And--  INT: Did you think your chances of surviving were better if you were alone? MR: I think-- I think it was better. I don't know if we-- maybe we wouldn't have survived, both of us. And I--  INT: OK, this is the end of tape four. MR: Well--  INT: This is the beginning of Tape 5 with Morris Rubenstein. You have spent a couple of years hiding in the forest, in families' homes. MR: Yeah.  INT: This went on for quite a bit of time, leaving the ghetto. Take me to 1943, 1944. Where were you at this point? Were you still in the forest? MR: No. No. I went, I was sleeping under a stick of straw by myself in the morning. And I guy-- I was just fell to sleep. And he told me, he asked me if would go to work. And I worked there maybe for a week, and then I went-- I left. And I left, and I came to a village. And a Jewish girl, you know, she was working outside in the farm. It was a Czech village. And she said hello, Moshe. Boy, you're grown. You know? And I said hello to her and I left. And then I walked into another farm, and it was a Jewish guy from our city, and I said hello and I talked to him. He survived and his brother survived. And I asked-- 
INT: What's his name? Lonnie? What was his name? MR: His name, [NON-ENGLISH]. And then he told-- you know, they brought out a little soup, and I had a little soup and I left. And I walked out and I saw a farmer, a Czech farmer. This was in Poland, I mean in the Ukraine. And I went like this. I stopped him. He said, who are you? And I told him, I'm Jewish. And he start talking, and he took me to work. And I've worked there, I don't know how long I've worked there. And he didn't need me, so I left. So I left to another farm. Anyway, I'm going to tell you. I went from farm to farm, and this how I've worked. And I've worked in one farm. It was [NON-ENGLISH]. And one time he told me-- one of his daughters told me her brother's a policeman, a Polish policeman. And one time, he came. I was working on the farm. And he walked a certain walk, a tall guy. And he said in Polish I shouldn't be afraid. He wouldn't bother me. He talked to me, and then he left.  INT: Was anyone talking about the war coming to an end? MR: Yeah. Then I was in another-- in another farm I went. I've worked-- and this was-- the name was [NON-ENGLISH]. A nice guy. And there, you know, a Jewish guy one time he came. And we started talking and he said some of them they came. And he said they hear the artillery. You know? And they say the front isn't too far away. 
INT: The Russian? MR: The Russians, yeah. The Russian front isn't too far away.  INT: So where were you when you were liberated? MR: When I was liberated-- when I was liberated, I was on another farm. And his brother was a Gestapo, a Polish guy. And I was there a few days. And he said the front was coming close. It was coming real close. And they were blowing up the railroad, but it wasn't the Russians. They were the guerrilla fighters. And-- and I was there. I think his name was Vladic. I forgot. And then he came in--  INT: Who came in? A Russian? MR: No, no, no. The Polack where I stayed there. And he said, [COUGHS], you better go now, just hide in the other room, because his brother might come. And all of a sudden I hear the came and he said, [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]. Where's [NON-ENGLISH]? Where's the Jew? And he came in, a tall guy. He had the [NON-ENGLISH], you know, the swastika and everything. I just looked at him. And it didn't take too long, he left. And then I came out. And I was shaking and everything. So I decided I have to leave him. No. I stayed there. And I think he left them a rifle. And in night, you know, he was watching and then he woke me up, I should watch. They were afraid for the Ukrainians. And they give me the rifle. So I was shooting on a village, you know, with a Ukrainian there. He was running after me one time. And after I woke him, and he went out to watch to watch, I forgot to close the rifle so it wouldn't-- so when he took it, it misfired. He came and he yelled at me. And I stayed there I think a week. And he went to steal chicken. And he didn't let me go. And after I went back and I-- [NON-ENGLISH]. I stayed there. And I stayed there. The Germans came back. And the Germans stayed there a month. And they put in things. They put in false things so when the Russian airplane come, you know, they wouldn't bomb. They just bomb the first things. But the Russian airborne didn't came. And-- 
INT: Were you excited? Did you think the Russians were coming to free you? Were you hopeful that the Russians were coming? MR: Yeah. A lot of Jews, people went-- the underground was there. They went already on the Russian side. You know--  INT: Some Jews went to the Russian side? MR: To Russian side, not too many.  INT: Why didn't you go? MR: You know, I don't know why I didn't go. This was the trouble with me, you know. I could have gone. But one was blowed up. He stopped on a mine, you know. We carried him to hospital after. Anyway--  INT: So where were you when you were liberated? MR: [NON-ENGLISH]. I was right there. And the Germans start going back, the Germans. The Polish, you know, they went away from the-- from the front. And they stayed there. You know? And then a German, a Gestapo, came and he said he's going to blow up everything when they leave. And in night, I was sleeping and the Germans they came into looking for partisans, for guerrilla fighters. And finally, you know, the Russians came, two Russians. They came and they took the horse from this farm. And I went out and I tell them, why are you taking the horse, you know? He kept me alive and everything. They said, you're talking about this? He said, I'm going to kill my own brother. And you're-- they took the horse and they left. 
INT: OK. So let me clarify something. You were liberated in March of 1944. MR: I guess so.  INT: And what was the town? MR: The town was [NON-ENGLISH]. There was no town. It was a village.  INT: What do you remember about the day you were liberated? MR: The day I was liberated, it was terrible, because the German, he came over. And he told me to take a shovel to dig renches, what do you call it? Where they can hide, they can crawl in. And the farmer, he went out there, [NON-ENGLISH]. And he said, he's sick. My brother is sick. You know? He can't go. He was afraid, because the other farmers told him, you know, you should tell the Germans I'm Jewish. You know? But he was frightened then. He said, if any of you-- because, it was a lot of Polish people there. They were hiding from the Ukrainians, and a lot of them went away from the front where they were fighting. you know So-- And after in the morning, I got up. And I saw already the Germans went away. And I saw the Russians come, you know, on the horses, you know, with some tanks, with some trucks.  INT: And how did you feel when you saw them? MR: I felt real, real, real good. And I've walked with some Polacks, I walked to Rozyszcze. And on the way when I walked, I-- a coat was laying, I picked it up.  I didn't even have a coat on me. I was always barefoot. And then I came to Rozyszcze. There was nobody there. There was nobody there, so I had to go back. I worked on a farm. Then I came back, and it was already Russians there in Rozyszcze and everything. 
INT: Were you sick at this point? MR: Huh?  INT: Were you ill? Were you-- MR: Ill, but I didn't think. My mind was different. It was a different-- my personality was different. My whole life was different. I didn't have shoes. I didn't have no clothes. And then I went back. I worked for a Ukrainian. And then the Russians left, and the Ukrainian gave me some food. And he told me he is afraid I should be there, because the bandits are in the forest yet. See, the Ukrainians, they wanted their own country, so they were fighting the Russians too. you know And the Russians were-- so I came back to the city. So it was-- I came, it was two boys, and it was three ladies there with a little boy. And they were baking bread. They sold it to the Russians. And one boy, he was sick. He was undernourished. Everything. They wouldn't even give him a piece of bread.  INT: But what happened to you? MR: To me. I was there.  INT: Did you go to a DP camp? MR: No, no, no. No, no, no. It's far away. Then I worked in a-- in a mill. Then I went back to-- it was Friday night when they made us soup. So when they cooked the noodles, they didn't give us any soup. But when they cooked the noodles, and they put it through to dry out, they gave us the water from the noodles, the Jewish people. You know? Anyway, from there, I worked in a mill. 
INT: OK. Where did you go next? After you were liberated, did you ever go into a-- MR: I stayed in Rozyszcze almost about five, six months. And I worked in a mill.  INT: And then where did you go after those six months? MR: After the six months, you know, I heard they're going to Israel, you know, and everything. So I went to Lutsk and they said, you know, the people, they can go to Poland, because they're Polish citizens. So I went to Lutsk and I got papers. You know. I walked, and then a farmer drove. I caught a ride.  INT: And you got papers from whom? MR: From the Russian KB.  INT: And what were the papers for? MR: The papers were to go to Poland. And I came back, you know. And me and another guy, he lived through in Russia this guy. And I went to Poland.  INT: Now, you said some people were going to Israel. MR: Yeah. But in Poland, I came and I didn't have nothing to eat in Poland. So I met another guy and I went to [NON-ENGLISH] in Lublin. You heard Lublin? I stayed there, boy, so long. It would take another 10 hours.  INT: But no, this is interesting. So how did you get to Lublin? What did you do in Lublin? What happened in Lublin? MR: In Lublin, I didn't have nothing to eat. It was Pesach. And I didn't eat almost for eight days. I lived on bananas and then a little soup, not to eat bread. So I met a boy in this [NON-ENGLISH] guy. And he said, if I want to go to Lodz. I went to Lodz with him. He said, there you're going to see a [NON-ENGLISH], you know, a streetcar. I never saw a streetcar my life. And we went there. We didn't have nothing to eat. And it was him and another guy. They were real-- they broke in where the ghetto used to be. They got something they sold. And then I went to Danzig. And they were still fighting in Danzig, the Russians and the Germans. 
INT: So you didn't get any help from any Jewish organizations? MR: No. No. No organizations, no nothing. No nothing. Nobody helped me. And in Danzig I got some from the Germans, some clothes, or what. And I went with him to the city what he was. And then it was Polacks where they killed Jews. We were afraid. We just slept over and we came back to Lublin. And I had some clothes from the Germans they sold. Then I myself went back to Danzig. And I traded with the Germans and I brought some clothes back to Lublin and I sold. And then I met a Russian. And we went into a bar and I got drunk. And the farmers were selling things, the Polish farmers. And I went over to them. I turned over everything. I said, you killed the Jews. You killed us, everything. And the Russian, you know, he grabbed me. He said, come on, come on. And they're not KB. He said, what did you do? You know? You are soldier. You shouldn't do this thing. I had a Russian uniform on, you know, with a belt and everything. And after, I went to Breslau. And from Breslau, I went to Waldenburg. And I didn't have nothing to eat. I had to buy and sell. Nobody helped me.  INT: Did you have any plan or you just kept traveling? MR: I didn't have no plans. And then me and another boy, we wanted to cross the border to go to America, so we went to Szczecin, and we thought from there we'd cross to Berlin. So instead of crossing to the American side, we crossed to the Russian side. They put us in jail and finally we went out. And then I want back to Waldenburg. And I went into a restaurant. And it was a Russian soldier and a Polish soldier. And they see me eating, you know. I got some-- and they called me over to the table and they asked me if I'm Jewish. I said yes. They said they're going to open a kibbutz. So I was so tired and everything, so I said yes. We'll open a kibbutz. I go into the kibbutz. That was the first one they organized. And they were Zionist. I guess they were before the war Zionist. They were older guys maybe, in the 40s. 
INT: So you met these people where again? MR: In a restaurant.  INT: In which city? MR: In Waldenburg.  INT: And what year are we in now? MR: This was 1945.  INT: OK. MR: 1945. And I went into the kibbutz.  INT: And when you say a kibbutz-- MR: A kibbutz, it was just in a house, you know?  INT: And what was the plan? MR: The plan was I should go and find more boys, and they should come in. We'll go to Israel from Poland. We go to Germany or what.  INT: Now, you never made it to Israel? What happened? MR: Well, I stayed maybe six months in the kibbutz. We went to another city. And then from there, you know, we went in another city to cross the border to Czechoslovakia. We crossed, we went at night. So we were waiting in a house. And a Polack, Polish soldier, two Polish soldiers-- there must have been maybe 100, 200 Jewish people. And they asked for more money and everything. And we said, you know, we're not going to give you more money. It's not like it was before. You know? And we start fighting them. Finally, they left. And we waited another two hours. And we went, we crossed the border to Czechoslovakia, you know. It took us maybe from 12 o'clock maybe to 7 o'clock. We came into Bratislava. It was Slovakia, Czechoslovakia. And there, you know, we went in and they put some powder on us. So if it were lice we had, it should kill out the sickness. And we stayed there I don't know how long. 
INT: Where were you? You stayed where? MR: In Czechoslovakia.  INT: But in what sort of building or what you were in with these-- MR: It was some kind of building. I think it was the Joint Distribution.  INT: Oh, you hooked up with the Joint Distribution Committee? MR: I think it was the Joint. I think so. And then from there, we walked. I had to walk over a bridge. And one side was a chair, a Russian and a Jewish guy. He talked different languages. He said, come, come. He talked to the chair, talked to Russians, and he walked through.  INT: And what was the Joint Distribution trying to do with you? MR: It was nothing-- now, the Joint Distribution had nothing to do with this. This was Israeli [NON-ENGLISH]. You heard [NON-ENGLISH]? You know, it was an Israeli-- he had to do with it now.  INT: So at this point, did you still think you were going to go to Israel? MR: To Israel. Just to Israel.  INT: And you were with a bunch of other survivors? MR: Other survivors, other Jewish. Some were from Russia. Some were from-- and we were walking in [NON-ENGLISH]. It was already Czechoslovakia. Then we walked through the bridge where the Russian was Austria. And we slept over in [NON-ENGLISH]. And in the morning, we start walking to the train, to the railroad.  INT: And where were you going to? MR: Vienna.  INT: And why were you going to Vienna? MR: To Vienna, it was another kibbutz there. And we walked there, you know, and we met other people. We divided. And I went to another brigade. It was different brigades, you know? And we went in to a place there. And we had something to eat there. And we stayed there. I think we stayed in Vienna a month or two months. And we went to see Reichl-- 'Right-shull'? You know, the rich-- what do you call it? Reichl. How do you say it in English? You know, the millionaire he used to make wine and everything? 
INT: Yeah. So you went there and then what? MR: There are real, real buildings, you know like all-- and then we went over on the Russian border. And then we went back.  INT: At this point, did you still think you were going to go to Israel eventually? MR: Eventually, we went and we crossed to Germany. We had to cross the German border. And we came to a camp, Pocking. You heard Pocking? You know? And there we stayed. We didn't have nothing to eat.  INT: And who were you with at this point? You keep saying-- MR: Still with the Brigade Gordonia, a kibbutz.  INT: And how many were you at this point? MR: At this point, maybe we were about 20 or 30. And it was different. It was a [NON-ENGLISH]. You know what a [NON-ENGLISH] is? I had from the kibbutz. And from there, we stayed there a month. We were in hunger and everything. And they took us on a farm to teach us how to work on a farm, to teach us how to plow, to teach us how to-- you know, to teach how to milk a cow. Do you see on the horse? This was the kibbutz where I was.  INT: And how were you feeling at this point? MR: I felt but still I was sick, you know. I was in my stomach and everything, you know like flies fly around. Now from there, we had to go to Israel. So I was so sick and everything. Nobody know what is wrong with me. And I went to take baths and everything. And then they told me I need appendix. So I went to hospital, and there the nurses told me it was a Gestapo he operated on me. I didn't need the appendix. I didn't need nothing. I was just sick, you know, like nerves, or nervous breakdown, or whatever. And while I was sick, you know, and it was a teacher. He taught us Hebrew. So he came in to teach me while I was in bed. And a guy was there. He starts talking. So a guy told him he has relatives in United States. So I said I have relatives in the United States too. And he asked me the name and everything. And I told him. And he said he's going to send it to New York and, they put it in the Jewish news if they can find them. In the meantime, the other one left to Israel. I couldn't go, because I still-- you know, from the appendix. 
INT: So you had someone at the hospital got in touch with a relative of yours in the United States? MR: No, no, no. No. Then I went to another kibbutz. And from there, I was going to Israel. Then I came to a DP camp. And I walked through, and they know me there. They said, are you Moshe Rubenstein? I said yes. You have a letter. And I had to go back where I was in the first kibbutz. And they gave me the letter. They found me in the Jewish news. A cousin found me.  INT: A cousin found you? MR: Yeah.  INT: Your name was in the Jewish news? Who put your name in the Jewish news? MR: The teacher, but he taught Hebrew. He sent it to New York. And New York sent it to the Jewish news all over the--  INT: And who was your relative? MR: Relative here in Detroit.  INT: And what was the relative's name? MR: Her name was Lindon, Tauba Lindon.  INT: Tauba Lindon. MR: Yeah. She died. And the cousins died already too, you know. They were older people.  INT: And how were you related? From your mother's side or your father's side? MR: My father-- my father's sister.  INT: Your father's sister lived-- MR: Were living here. She died, you know, were living here.  INT: In Detroit? MR: In Detroit.  INT: And her name again was? MR: Tauba Lindon. And they asked if I want to come to United States. And I said I want to go to Israel yet. And then they start sending letters. And then I was-- then they want me to go to Israel, so a doctor, a lady doctor checked me, said, are you well? I said, I'm well, I'm all right, but they're just like flies going. So she sent me to a German hospital. And they put in here a long thing and here to check me, a lady doctor, a German. Then they sent me to a clinic and the clinic checked me, looked in the eyes, and sent me to the hospital. And I was there I don't know, a month or two months. And they sent me letters to come. And then they had a cousin here. And they sent him $5 to give it to me and everything. And after one cousin sent a letter, we are trying so hard and everything, and now you're going to go to Israel? So I decided I'll go here to the United States. 
INT: OK. That's the end of Tape 5 with Morris Rubenstein.  INT: This is the beginning of tape six with Morris Rubenstein. And what were you're just saying to me? MR: Well--  INT: Did you have plans about where to go? MR: Plans where to go? No, I didn't have no plans. I wanted to go to Israel in the beginning. I really wanted to go, but when the cousin sent the letter and she said, you know, we-- we-- we tried so hard and everything, you know, we're going to make up papers. You have to come to the United States.  INT: So where did you come to? What year? MR: 1949.  INT: To where? MR: To-- I came to Boston. And from Boston I came-- we had to go to New York, but they changed, you know, from Amberg, I came to Boston. And in Boston, I had to wait on the ship because it was Washington's birthday. So-- from then-- After, we-- I think the Joint distribution, you know, met us, met me. It was I and another man and a girl, you know? The man came to Detroit. I came to Detroit. The girl went to Flint.  INT: And what did you do when you came here? MR: I came here, [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] a cousin--  INT: What did you do for a living? MR: A living? First of all, worked in a laundry for two weeks, for a cousin. But I didn't like it. So-- because there was a guy there, he thought I will take away his job. So he told the cousin, you know, I don't do this good, I don't do this good. So and another cousin, he worked in a market, an Holbrook Market. So he asked me if I want to go to work in market. So I said, OK. So I went to work in a market, I worked. 
INT: A supermarket? MR: Fruit market, yeah. No, it was a grocery, fruit, everything, a big market-- like-- like Farmer Jack, you know? So I worked there.  INT: And when did you meet your wife? MR: I met my wife in 1944?  INT: I'm sorry, when did you meet your wife? 1954? MR: 1954, Yeah, I met my wife 1954.  INT: And what is your wife's first and what was her maiden name? MR: Shapiro, Miriam Shapiro.  INT: And [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] when did you begin to have children? MR: Oh, children in 1955.  INT: And how many children do you have now? MR: Four girls and three boys.  INT: And how many grandchildren do you have? MR: I think, 23, 23, yeah.  INT: Is there a reason why you decided to have that many children? MR: Yeah, because we were alone, you know? I didn't have nobody. No, I didn't have nobody. It was just me and my wife, you know, and I was alone since I was 13 years old, you know? I got married when I was 30, I think.  INT: Was Miriam a survivor? Is Miriam a survivor? MR: I think she is a survivor, but she came here before-- maybe a year before the war broke out with the Germans, I guess.  INT: And the two of you decided you would like to have a big family together? MR: Well, I'll tell you, we didn't even decide, it just happened, you know? In-- in-- in the beginning, we didn't have anything. When we got married, we-- we came-- we came back. We went for our honeymoon to New York for a few days. And we came back, we didn't even have a place for to stay. So we stayed with my cousin for two weeks. And after we find our apartment. And I worked in a-- when I came, I got laid off where I worked for the market. Then I was real, real-- a Jewish person, you know, I just got-- and I only had $50, you know, what, when I came, they gave me. And we didn't have where to stay, nothing, you know? And after, I found in another place, another market of work. And he played the horses. He-- he played-- he gambled, so he lost the market, so I got laid off. And he didn't pay us so after, we went to the-- what do you call it? You know what they collect the money, you know, if the employer don't pay you? And he told us it might take a little long, you know, you collect the money. So they collected the money for us. It was a few hundred dollars. 
INT: Now, eventually you started your own business though? MR: Yeah, And-- I went to work in another place, and he asked me how much I made a week. And after, he didn't even want to pay me, you know? I put in maybe 70, 80 hours for $30. So I decided to go in and-- into business. I went in-- I went into the bank. It's a long story--so I borrowed money.  INT: But tell me what your business is. What did you do? How did you support your family of seven? MR: Well, I used to pick up scrap metal, you know? First I start picking up batteries and it was real hard, real hard, real hard. And then I start, in the factories, picking up shavings, turnings. You know what it is, turnings, shavings. Then I start picking up steel.  INT: And what do you do with it? You dispose of it? MR: Yeah, I used to sell it to the scrap yards, you know, and I made a-- a profit, you know, just enough to support-- to support a family. And then the first landlord was all right, but the second landlord, he didn't give us no heat, nothing. You know, so we--  INT: You know what I want to ask you, which I think is-- which I think is interesting is, how the Holocaust affected how you have raised your children? MR: I think that it did affect me. Real, real, real affect me, you know? 
INT: How did it affect how you brought up your children or how their lives were? How? MR: I don't know what to say. I don't know. I really don't know what to say. I don't know how to put it. I know it affected me. I think it affected them, too. It did affect-- it did affect them.  INT: Did you talk with them about your experiences in the Holocaust? MR: Not too much, not too much. I talked on the end with the younger one, with Anna and Sheila, too, you know. But the boys sometime they want to listen, and sometime they didn't want to listen, you know? But the main thing is my children, you know, [CRYING] and I don't know what to say. I just don't know. I don't know. I don't know. It did affect me.  INT: How did it affect you? MR: It affect me in all my life after the war. And affect me in company, to my children, to my wife, and even to myself. My-- how I run the business, how I've worked. You know, I used to dream, you know, the Germans were running after me, the Ukrainians, you know, in the ghetto. My father, my mother, and everything, you know? It did affect me. It did affect me and I don't how to put it-- how it did affect me, I don't know.  INT: Are you afraid? Are you scared? MR: Afraid--I'm scared. I'm afraid. I'm afraid of people. I have-- I haven't got too much trust in people. Like now I have to go to court because I parked the truck in the driveway, you know, and [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] so I went-- I went to court. He asked me if I'm guilty or not guilty. So I tell him, I'm not guilty. What am I guilty for? So you're right on-- I have to come in January 30 to court. So I'm scared. I don't-- I'm scared for a policeman. If I see a uniform, I shake. You know, I'm scared for policemen or a uniform, any uniform. And when I come in company, you know, sometimes they look at me. Sometime, I don't know, hard to bring up conversation, you know, hard to talk to people even. Hard  to explain, hard to talk, you know? Like even when I go to shul for [NON-ENGLISH]-- like now, [NON-ENGLISH], it is-- I have it Shabbos [NON-ENGLISH], on Saturday and Sunday. So sometimes they'll call me in, you know, to have [NON-ENGLISH]-- you know, I wouldn't go. A few times, a guy, you know, he said, I know you're ashamed. Come in, come in. He grabbed me. He took me in one time in the morning. 
INT: Why are you ashamed? MR: I don't know.  INT: What are you ashamed of? MR: I don't know. You know, like they had like [NON-ENGLISH] and herring. So I took just a little piece. I didn't eat, you know? I don't know. I feel like it's given to me because I was begging bread. I was begging from the farmers and everything when-- when the Russians came in, I used to go into a restaurant and I just had a soup and a piece of bread. You know, and a lot of time I took two pieces of bread. I took to my mother. She didn't have nothing to eat. [SOBBING] So this would make me maybe like this. And I feel if I take it, it's like I'm begging it. You know, like, I went, you know, to ask for scrap metal. So I went out to a place, a young guy, a nice guy, so I asked him if he has metal. So I picked up some metal. I came in again. He said, Morris, what's the matter with you? You're a nice guy. You come in, it's like you're begging I should sell it to you. You know, don't be like this. He said, you know, ask if you-- you're paying for it. You're not taking it for nothing. You know, so finally, I went in, you know, and I started asking him, asking him for metal. And a lot of times I used to go into the office and the secretary used to say, we have somebody already. So then I used to go into the back and the foreman was there, or the purchase agent, or the boss himself. I asked him, so he said, here, come in. I'll show you what I have, you know, and I bought the metal. But she used to say-- but still, it's in me. It doesn't go away and this what it is going to be until I die. [CRYING] And I don't think the kids can understand me. I don't think they can understand me. 
INT: If you could say one thing to your children so they could understand you, what would you say to them? MR: I don't know what to say to them. I just don't know what to-- I love them with all my life. I don't know what to say to them. I don't know why I'm crying, but I have to thank God I'm here, you know? [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] I really don't know. See, if I would tell you the whole thing, it would-- it would take a day and a half. You know, but it's hard how I survived.  INT: Why do you think you survived? Have you thought about that? MR: I don't know how I survived. I just, like I was staying with the [NON-ENGLISH], and a farm lady invited us, all three of us, there was another Jewish guy to eat. And then I find out the Germans have to call me, called all [NON-ENGLISH], you know, to look for Jews. And I go to the farmers, collect tax, you know? So the tax was, you know, they had to bring in the rye, sometimes cows, chickens, you know, to the Germans. So the guy opened the door from the-- from the little barn to go to the-- so he said, Moishe, Herschel, come. He grabbed me, Herschel. And he said, no, I'm not going to let you go. I'm not going to let you die. And he went, this other guy went. A tall guy, he was real educated. He went and the-- their guy, the [NON-ENGLISH], he talked Jewish, and he was an interpreter for the Germans. And when the Germans had to come to this village, he used to let us know. We used to run into the woods. 
INT: Do you think it was luck? MR: It was luck or it was from God. It was something, a miracle from God. Down in-- go ahead.  INT: Are you a religious man? MR: I'm not too religious. I was religious. I was, I used to light [NON-ENGLISH] every morning, every night. My father, mother were real religious. My father used to go like Shabbos morning for [NON-ENGLISH]. You know [nON-ENGLISH]? They used to go before and after, they used to come and have something, you know, we didn't cook but it was something what they kept warm, [NON-ENGLISH]-- You know, they used to put it--  INT: But you said your family was very religious. MR: Very religious, yeah.  INT: And today, you said what is-- MR: Sometime I daven, sometime I put [NON-ENGLISH] on.  INT: Did the Holocaust change your belief in God? MR: Yes, it changed.  INT: Tell me about that. MR: Well, it changed. I don't know. I don't know, because for the three years I didn't daven, I didn't nothing. I ate pork-- what could you do? Like we were in a barn-- in a barn, and the farm lady brought out potatoes for the pigs and she put it in there. And we jumped down when she walked out, and we ate from the pigs, the potatoes. And when I was on the farm, I was working, you know? They had pork. They had mashed potatoes. And then they fried the pork. They put in the mashed potatoes. The only thing I couldn't do is that I couldn't eat meat and milk. One time I had a little milk on the farm, you know, with the meat. It was terrible for me, you know? 
INT: But when you came to this country, did you go to services and did you bring up a Jewish home? MR: We have a Jewish home, you know, I mean, I don't eat [NON-ENGLISH], like anything. But we eat in a restaurant.  INT: And your children, are they are religious? Some? MR: Three are real religious. And four, no, I think four are religious but three aren't religious.  INT: Let me ask you why you decided to tell your story? Why this is an important thing for you to tell? MR: I think it's important to tell. I think all the world should know, you know? See, the Jewish people, they couldn't fight. They couldn't run away because everybody killed them. The Ukrainians killed them, some Polish killed them. Every country killed the Jews, not just the Germans. Half the Ukrainian, or some Polish, Romania, Lithuanians, you know, it would have been left a lot more, maybe a million or maybe a million and a half would have been left. A lot of them ran away but the Ukrainian killed them all. This was in our-- in the Ukraine, you know?  INT: Is there one message you would like to leave, as part of your story, in terms of why you wanted to tell your story-- what happened to you in the Holocaust? Is there a message you would like to say? MR: Yeah, I hope they do, I hope they come out and tell the story. Some of them lived through worse than what I lived through, especially in the concentration camps. You know, and the real, real labor camps, you know? I know one, but he doesn't want to tell the story, you know? 
INT: Do you think about the Shoah, the Holocaust, often? MR: Yeah, yeah, I often think about it. It's with me. It's with me. It's in me, you know? It just doesn't go away. It just doesn't go away. It's not going to go away. You know, if something like this-- I don't know how to explain. I don't know. I don't know how to-- how to say. Like in a place, you know, I was saved-- and the [NON-ENGLISH] saved me, too. We went-- we went into a village. And it was real, real cold. We couldn't stay outside. We went house to house to ask for food so he gave us, so they give us-- they give us onions. They said when you eat the onion, you'll warm up the blood-- they'll warm you up. Some give us bread. Then we went into one farmer and he told us there is a-- a barn. Nobody is occupying the barn. We can go in there to sleep. So we went into the barn and we went onto the straw. And in the morning, two Ukrainians, older ones and two young ones with forks. You know the long forks? And they started yelling Jude, get out. And we didn't get out. They said, if you don't get out, we'll put the forks through you and they start. So we went out and they were standing with the forks. And he start yelling in Polish, you know, this boy. See, he was a refugee from Poland. You know, the parents, they run away from the Germans. So he talked good Polish and he said, he started yelling to them, don't kill Moishe, don't kill Moishe, don't kill Moishe. And while he was yelling, and I want to jump on it, but I would jump on the fork. And I had a knife here. And I just slid down, and I got the knife on one Ukrainian. And I forgot-- or I don't know, the blood start running and they start between them talking and arguing, and we run away. We run and then we start walking. What I want to tell you is what the mind-- and we didn't even look back if they're running after us or they're not run after us. And we went into the house and we asked for food and they gave us food, a lady. We finished the food and a big bread, both of us. And the lady crossed herself as we were eating, as we were finishing with food. And we walked out, we were just walking. And-- afraid-- we weren't afraid if the Ukrainian will run after us, what happen or nothing. And we walked back, you know, to another farm, you know? This was before they killed the [NON-ENGLISH], you know? So it was a miracle too. It was so many miracles. And when I was staying with this [NON-ENGLISH], and-- and they were threatening me, should give me over to the Germans and everything. And they were just, the scale was weighing, you know, on it, you know? And how I came to this country and everything. I never dreamed about America. I never dreamed like to go to Israel. And I never even dreamed I would be alive, after-- I'll survive. I never dreamed the Russians will come back. I thought that's all. It's the end, you know? 
INT: Is there anything else you would like to add or anything else you would like to say to anybody who might be watching this or to your family or to anyone about the Holocaust and what it's meant to you? MR: I hope it never happens again. You think it can happen? I hope it never, never happens. And another thing is, I'm glad our children are born in this country, you [CRYING] Because I-- I don't trust Poland, I don't trust Russia or Ukraine. I don't trust anybody. I don't even trust here. You know, I don't know what ever can happen here, just because we live like this, because I was afraid. If it wouldn't be for my wife, I wouldn't even buy the house. [CRYING] I didn't want to buy a house. You know, so she said, you know, I-- I want to live on this street but I want my, it should be my-- he didn't give us no heat, you know, another landlord.  INT: Are you saying you are afraid to put down roots? MR: Yeah, yeah I was afraid. I was real-- I was afraid I'm going to have to run again, you know? And I was afraid to move into a park even. They should make a ghetto, you know? [PAUSES FOR 5 SECONDS] Even now, we go to the Jewish Center to work sometime, you know? And I'm, real real afraid. I'm afraid to live among Jewish people because they're going to get them, [CRYING] you know? [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] This-- I'm still afraid. You know, like here, you can run, whatever, you know, but I hope it's not going to happen. Well, I'm old, I'm too old already for-- for this, everything. And sometimes I say, I don't care anymore, you know? But my life is the children. [CRYING] 
INT: Well, you have a lot of those children and grandchildren. MR: I have to thank God for it. I don't even know how we raised them, how we supported them, or everything. I don't know.  INT: Well, thank you very much. MR: Thank you.  INT: This is the beginning of tape seven with Morris Rubenstein. Who is in this photograph? MR: Me and a lady from our city.  INT: And where was this taken? MR: In Poland.  INT: And do you remember when it was taken? Or how old are you in this picture? MR: I think it was 1945, I think.  INT: I think it might have been earlier. Were you a boy-- how old were you in this picture? MR: I don't know. Maybe 18 or 19. [LAUGHS] I forgot already.  INT: And how did you get this picture? MR: Well, a-- a-- another Jewish person took it from us. [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS]  INT: Who is in this picture? MR: Me. This in Germany, I took.  INT: And how old are you here? MR: I don't know. Maybe 20, 21 years old.  INT: And where did you get this picture? MR: Huh?  INT: Where did you get this picture? MR: Was a Jewish person took it, too. [PAUSES FOR 5 SECONDS]  INT: And who is in this picture? MR: It's my father.  INT: And what is his name? MR: Hershel.  INT: And do you remember when this was taken? MR: This-- this was taken-- my aunt had it, you know, in United States. And I sent her a letter if she has a picture of my father. And she send it to me. That's the only thing I have. 
INT: What is this a picture of? MR: This is a picture which the Jewish people work. It's from a ghetto, and they're loading the-- the truck with dirt. This I found in a German house in-- in Poland.  INT: Is this-- MR: You know--  INT: I'm sorry. MR: When the Polands took out some cities from the Germans, you know? I found this.  INT: Was this in the ghetto that you were in, in Rozyszcze? MR: It looks like it. But it's not Rozyszcze. It's like Lithuania, I think. You know, or the-- how the Jews-- how he's dressed, the Jewish person, you know?  INT: OK. Who was in this photograph? MR: It's me and a friend on a farm, you know, when we were on the kibbutz.  INT: And what country are you in here? MR: Germany.  INT: And around what year is this in? MR: I think '46 or '47.  INT: And how did you get this photograph? MR: Well, the-- the guys from the-- from the kibbutz took it, the Jewish-- a Jewish person.  INT: And who is this a picture of? MR: This is me in a market. I worked here in Detroit. I think this was in 19-- 50-- 1954.  INT: OK. [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] And what is this a picture of? MR: This, the boat I came to Boston, to United States, from Germany, the  INT: And what year would this have been? MR: I think '49. It was the end of '49. 
INT: And how-- OK, and who is this a picture of? MR: This my wife.  INT: Her name? MR: Miriam. [LAUGHS]  INT: And around what year is this picture? MR: This, I think, '54.  INT: OK. MR: Well, this my family, you know?  INT: This is a picture of whom? MR: Of my family.  INT: And when was this taken? MR: This was taken-- [LAUGHS] I think it's five or six years ago.  INT: And whose wedding is this? MR: Anna's and Barry's.  INT: In which city? MR: In-- here in Detroit. But it's in-- in Bloomfield, I guess, in the Shul LA, whatever you call it.  INT: Who's in this picture, starting on the left? MR: Oh, this is [? Sheila ?] and her baby. And this is Toba and Bernie, and me. And that's our grandson, Eli, and Hannah, [? Barry, ?] Goldi, my wife, David, Nissih, Yosi, and [? Shifra ?] [? Razel ?] and her baby. [PAUSES FOR 5 SECONDS]  INT: And who is this a picture of? MR: This is of my family.  INT: And when was this taken? Who's wedding is this? MR: David's and [? Shoshana's. ?] [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS]  INT: And can you tell me who's in this picture, starting on the left? MR: Well, this is Sheila, the baby, and her husband, and Hannah and [? Barry. ?] And there's the little kids, our grandchildren. And this is Goldi, my wife, and [? Shoshana ?] and David, and Nissih, and Toba, our daughter, Eli, and [? Shifra ?] [? Razel. ?] And this is Bernie and the baby and his wife, [? Lisa. ?] 
INT: OK. And who is this a picture of? MR: This our older son, Hershel, and his wife, [? Ruha. ?]  INT: Do you remember when this picture was taken? MR: It might be about 11 years ago, I think.  INT: OK. And where was this picture taken? MR: In New York, in the wedding. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS]  INT: Mr. Rubenstein, will you please introduce your family? You can start with the row in the back. MR: OK. David and [? Shoshana ?] his wife. Hannah and [? Barry ?] her husband. Bernie and [? Lisa, ?] his wife. [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] OK. [? Mikey ?] is their son, Bernie and-- Bernie and [? Lisa's ?] son. [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] Everyone talk. [INTERPOSING VOICES] Eli, is our grandson, Toba's son. This is my wife, Toba, our daughter, Nissih, our grandson. Goldi, our granddaughter.  INT: And what's your wife's name? MR: Miriam.  INT: OK. And in the back row, which are by-- which are your children by birth? Who is your son and daughter? Can you just tell me that? MR: David and--  INT: Hannah. MR: Hannah, Bernie and Toba.  INT: Now, I don't know if any of you would like to say anything, or Miriam first, if you would like to say anything about Mr. Rubenstein doing this interview, what it means to you. You don't have to say anything, but you're more than welcome to say something if you would like. MIRIAM RUBENSTEIN: I would just like to say that, being a survivor and married to a wonderful survivor for 42 years-- we just celebrated our anniversary. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] And these are our children and grandchildren that's living in this area. Our others in California and New York. And I'm very thankful for everything. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] 
INT: And if any of the children would like to say anything about your dad, you're more than welcome to. TOBA RUBENSTEIN: I'm not a speaker. I just want to say that my parents, they did a wonderful job to raise us. And they always gave us what we needed. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS]  INT: Would anyone else like to say anything? BERNARD RUBENSTEIN: I think this is-- is a interesting situation because, as we grew up, my dad never really mentioned much of what transpired during his childhood, his upbringing. And this will be interesting for us, too. As we've gotten older, my dad's brought out more and more of what's happened. So it'll be interesting for us to see, as well. DAVID RUBENSTEIN: You know, my wife and I just went to Washington, DC. And we were at the Holocaust Memorial. And I guess it-- it makes me feel proud that, you know, my dad went through everything and made it, especially when you see so many people that didn't. [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] [? SHOSHANA ?] RUBENSTEIN: I just want to thank him very much for having the courage to talk today and to use this as a way to teach for generation after generation, not just for the family here, but for really, for all of mankind, and to share his experiences, how difficult, the most difficult experiences that a human being can suffer and willing to share that with everyone and-- and have that as a tool for-- for the future. 
INT: Would anyone else like to speak? And Morris? Is there anything else you'd like to say, Mr. Rubenstein? MR: What can I say? I said, already, enough. But I have to thank God for everything, for my children, grandchildren. And they're all my life. [SOBBING] They're what I live for. [PAUSES FOR 6 SECONDS] DAVID RUBENSTEIN: And I-- I'm sorry. Are we done?  INT: Nope. Go ahead. DAVID RUBENSTEIN: And I just, getting back to-- I think everybody should go to the Holocaust Memorial, because there was a lot of things that kind of hits home, especially being a-- a son of a survivor. But to see so many people that didn't have the will-- and not knocking them, because we weren't there to see what really happened-- but didn't have the will to live. And then seeing your father, having the will just to live and to survive, really makes him a special individual. And speaking for everybody here in the family, I know everybody feels that they're proud to have him as a father. [PAUSES FOR 5 SECONDS]  INT: Anyone else? TOBA RUBENSTEIN: I would say we are very lucky to have our-- my mother too, very proud that she's part of our life. MR: Are you gonna say something, Hannah? HANNAH RUBENSTEIN: You've said it all.  INT: OK.