INT: My name is Marie Kaufman. Today's interview is with Max Wunderman. And the interview is taking place in Beverly Hills, California, United States of America. Today's date is January 10th, 1997. Good morning. Mr. Wunderman. MW: Good morning.  INT: I would like for you to start just saying your full name, and the date of your birth, and where you were born. MW: OK. My full name is Max Joseph Wunderman. I'm born the 18th of April, 1930 in Antwerp, Belgium.  INT: And would you start by telling us about your family? Who's in your family? MW: OK. I have my father, Nathan Wunderman, my mother, Hena Wunderman, a sister, Bella Wunderman, and a brother, Sevirin Wunderman.  INT: And maybe give us a description of what it was like in your family before the war. What your father was doing-- occupation. MW: My father was working as a-- how do you call this-- a weight control. He was checking when the ship came in. He was checking what the content was. And also, he was an expert in grains. He worked for a company. He was employed by this-- the port from Antwerp. And my mother, she had a tailor shop in Brussels. And my father worked with her, too-- when he came home and he worked with her. The children-- we were all going to school. Because my sister is a couple years older than me, and my brother was a baby. So that's about all. 
INT: So do you remember your school years? Do you have some memories? MW: Yes. I didn't go too much to school because I went to school to the age of about 11 years old. But I went to primary school. And the school was in Brussels, Rue de [FRENCH]. School number four. And this I went to the age of 11. And then we couldn't go to school anymore, because the Germans took away the rights of the Jewish kids to go to school. So then we were sent away to camps with other children. We were in hiding so that nobody-- do you want me to tell you about this?  INT: Well, until you had to leave the school, what was it like for Jewish children in the school? Do you have memories of that? MW: Well, it was a difference. Because to begin with, all the Jewish kids were wearing a yellow star. So we-- me in particular-- I had a teacher that was a terrible anti-Semite. He made a big, big difference. He put the Jewish children on the side in one class not to mingle with the other kids. So that really made a difference as much as he could. Because for schooling, they couldn't stop us to go to school, because there was no law against it. But you could feel the resentment. Not between the other children so much but the teacher himself. Because this particular teacher after the war, they put him to jail anyhow. And I went to testify against him, this particular teacher. He was a member of the German group, I don't know. 
INT: Can you remember what he said, the kinds of things he said that were anti-Semitic? MW: He said that on the account of the Jews that they had so much problem in the world. And I don't remember that much. But you could feel it-- the resentment that he had. The Jews were not clean. The Jews were people that took advantage from other people. And all kinds of things. How much can I remember? You know, it's not-- but in his way, he was against us for sure. That's all.  INT: And what about the rest of the community around you? MW: Well, it's like I live here in the United States. I lived in a community with a lot of Jews around us. So we didn't really feel. Because the Belgian people themselves didn't care for the Germans at all. So there were more friends to us than they were against us. So we didn't feel really strange. Still, the Germans really got after us and started to deport the Jews. But till '41, it was more or less a normal life, except the Jews couldn't go on the streets after 8 o'clock at night. And they stopped-- arrested, harassed the people. They made them problems and all kinds of things. You know, to make their lives miserable. And then like in the other countries probably, first they start taking all the men away, the head of the families, and down the line. See? That's the way it worked. 
INT: Do you remember as a child any celebrations you had-- holidays? How did you celebrate? MW: Well, I personally-- like I said, till 1941, I lived a normal life. Because life went down as a Jewish community. And I belonged to a Jewish school. And I went to Sunday school and celebrate the holidays like the Jewish people do. But I'm not-- I was never too religious, so we celebrate Hanukkah and things like this, you see. Also, if you want to know, I was in the Jewish theater when I was a kid. And I was quite busy with that. Because before the war in '38, we had a big group going on. And we supposed to come to America to represent us. And then the war started, and the whole thing got canceled. But the school went down till '41, and then everything got fell apart. But I belonged to the Jewish theater for quite a while then.  INT: Do you remember any of your roles that  you played? MW: Yes. The main role that I had Motl the [YIDDISH] from Shalom Aleichem. And I was the little boy, a very mischief boy. The father dies in there, and he takes over the whole milk. He sells the milk to the people. And then he goes and plays. And I remember he spills the milk. So he takes soap water, he puts it in, and he goes and sells to the woman the milk with water and soap. It was very funny. But it was a nice piece of work from Shalom Aleichem mainly. It was fun. 
INT: This was in Yiddish? MW: Yiddish, yeah. I spoke good Yiddish, but I couldn't read or write. So my mother was reading to me, and I had to remember everything by memory. But I did pretty good. And then I was going to school to learn how to read. But in the beginning, I couldn't read the Yiddish. So everything by memory. But it was nice. This I remember was the good years, that's for sure.  INT: Did you have grandparents at the time? MW: No, I never met my grandparents. They were alive but in Poland. And I never went back to Poland. My mom went back once in '35, I think, and took my sister. I didn't want to go, so I stayed with my dad. But I never went to Poland.  INT: What was the first event that you remember that let you know that things were getting really bad, or that the family knew things were getting really bad? MW: Well, in '41 because the Belgian underground contacted the Jewish family and said that they're rounding up-- they're starting to round up the Jews. And they don't want that the all Jewish children should disappear. They cannot protect every adult, but at least let them protect the children. So whoever wanted to, they gave away their children. But you had to sign a paper that you couldn't see them or anything for the safety of the children. So my parents gave us away, all three of us. And this was in 1941. And from '41 to '44, I never saw them anymore, my parents. 
INT: Describe to me how it-- you know, the whole way that it happened. Who came to talk to you? How it happened. MW: The first time I went to the school. I stayed there a couple of months. And then, we didn't go back to-- we didn't go back home. We went back to a home it called-- in Brussels it was. [FRENCH], J-O-C, the Youth of Catholic Children. And they took care. The Catholic people took care of the Jewish children. They made a group of us. And we stayed there for a couple days in Brussels. And then the priest came. His name was [FRENCH] Renard. I remember very well. And he came and picked up about-- we must have been in my group there about 20 children, Jewish children. And he took us. And he took us to our first home. And the first home was Jamoigne. This was an old, old converted castle that made a home for children-- not just Jewish children, but poor children. And they integrated a lot of Jewish childrens with it in Jamoigne. And this was the director-- they know about it-- and the Holocaust survivors, because his name was Major Tacquet. I showed you the calendar. And his wife. They were the main directors from that. And it was organized like a scout-- like scout camp. They had boys and girls. The girls were separate but mainly boys. And we were like troops from Boy Scouts. And I stayed there for quite a while, for quite a while. Till-- should I go on with that? 
INT: Sure. MW: Till again-- you know how boys are. They don't always behave. So were a group of about 10 kids. The bigger ones-- because we knew that we were Jewish. The little ones were no problem. They listen. But the bigger ones-- they go and put us to go to church and stuff like this.  It just was almost impossible because we didn't believe in that. We made a mockery. So it was a friction. And again, one of the [FRENCH], you know, one of the-- how do you say this? The directors-- not the director-- but how you call this? [FRENCH]  INT: Principal? MW: No. One of the teachers, OK, that took care of us. He resented us. Again, he was against us really, because he was losing his authority. So he made us all kind of problems, even fist fights, so bad it was with this guy. Till finally, we didn't behave the way we should. We got punished one after the other and one after the other. And finally, they throw us out. The 10 kids we were. They throw us in the middle of the war in 1942, maybe '43. They took this group and they say, we don't want those troublemakers. And they kicked us out. So this poor priest, [FRENCH] Renard-- he came back, and he picked us all up and back to Brussels in this camp-- in this for the children. We stayed there a few days. And then we went away, and we went to Bastogne. This was a seminary. They didn't know what to do with us in the meantime, so they put us for two months in a seminary. That's supposed to be that we were punished. But it turned out to be a blessing in disguise, because we had all the food that we needed. For once in my lifetime, I was eating until content. Because all those years we were barely surviving. That there wasn't enough food, you know? And if you are a child that develops himself, you need food. And we just didn't have it. So in this, we did everything possible to get more. But best thing there in Bastogne was great, and we stayed there for about two months. And then back to Brussels until they decide again what to do with us. And then we went to Cul-des-Sarts. Cul-des-Sarts was again a camp for children like this, for underprivileged children. And we are mixed with Jews. But I would say, 70% of the kids there were Jewish in Cul-des-Sarts. Also an old castle that was worked over for a day camp for children. And there I stayed at least a year, a year and a half. And there we were going to school. The under-- the Belgian underground was taking care and bringing money. For-- because my parents paid for us. Every month they sent money. But whoever ran out of money-- because during the war, they didn't work-- my parents were hiding during the war. They didn't work at all. So we sold everything we had just to keep on making payments, because we were three kids in the family. And with some people that didn't have the money it didn't make a difference, because the underground was helping us. They were taking banks during the war, and robbery-- by all means, to support the children. It was a big undertaking. 
INT: Were your siblings with you in the same-- MW: No, separated. We never-- I never even knew where they were. I didn't know where my sister was. I didn't know where my brother was. I only find out after, because I wasn't even in touch with my parents. I could not write to them. They didn't want that the parents should know where the children were. So I just didn't know. Period. Except maybe-- no, I'm not telling the truth. Because I got a couple letters through somebody that knew my parents. So my parents wrote to them, and he put it in an envelope and sent it to us. Maybe one or two letters I got during the war. That's about all. And I knew-- I knew that my sister was hiding someplace else and my brother was. But a personal touch we didn't have at all.  INT: What did your parents tell you when they first-- you know, when you were first going to be taken to the homes? MW: They told us that they deport us if we stay. If they're going to catch us, to go away. At least, us, we will survive. That somebody should remain from the family. That's why they did the sacrifice, and gave away the children. They didn't have them in mind. They had the safety of us. And as a matter of fact, in account of this, most of the children in Belgium survived. The parents deported and killed but not the children. They did a big job for the children. A lot of them remained orphans. I was lucky my parents survived. But not all of them were like this. 
INT: So in this first place that you were-- in this first home where they kicked you out, can you describe some of the pranks that you pulled? Because you said you were so bad. MW: Most of it if you want to think back, it's like normal children do. We didn't do any-- we didn't do any robbery or killing or anything, but we were not disciplined the way it should be. Those guys-- the chiefs of the scout-- if they say stand up, we should stand up. Sit down, sit down. We had to do so many chores. Every time we did something wrong, we had to go-- I remember I had to peel a mountain of potatoes. I was-- I didn't see the sun in front of my eyes. I was peeling potatoes all day long. They came in with shovel coal. We had to do. Always the same group, the same bunch of guys. But we were the bigger ones. See, I was already-- I was pretty big for my age. When I was 12 years old, I was the size that I'm now-- I mean, no. Maybe not-- but when I was about 14 years old. And then I didn't grow no more. So I was a big kid in that time. So I got all those things to do. And I was following the other ones. What do you think? I wasn't by myself like this. That's the mischief we made. But we didn't do really, really bad. Except we didn't listen to what we were supposed to do and made troubles with the other kids, you know. But we didn't do it really that bad. Because the other kids still stayed there, so it could not have been that bad. For us, it was a good thing. It was a good thing that we went away. Because they got peace, and we went to a place where we liked more. It's as simple as that. But I thought it was part of my life to go in those children's camps, because I didn't know anything better. That's the way it was. 
INT: Did you have any kind-- any discussions with the children about what was going on? MW: The main problem that we had is they wanted to convert the little children to Catholicism. And by the fact that we knew that we were Jewish, we were fighting against this. We were telling who they are, and what their heritage is. This was the main conflict. Because they were against the German-- the people. But mainly, to save a Jewish soul and make a Catholic. This was an accomplishment. So not that they meant bad by that, but we resented that. Because like I said, we knew our heritage, and we tried to say this to the little kids. So what we did-- we each took in charge one or two little children that was really follow us around. And we were teaching them who you are and what to do, and that's why they resented us, you see-- mainly. That's why they had to get rid of us, because they couldn't use their influence. So they really had like a court between all the leaders from there, and then they decided to expel us. But it's already so far away. You forget. But it's part of my youth. What can I say?  INT: And in the next places that you went to, did you have to go to church? What kind of-- MW: Well, in the seminary, we had to go because everybody was going. But we didn't take the communion or anything like this. But I did go to church. I know pretty good about Catholicism, for sure. They teach me. But I took what was good for me out of it and that was it. But there I didn't stay too long. I stayed a couple of months. And then I went to Cul-des-Sarts. That's where I went like a normal child. I went to school during the day, and playing normal activities, and all kind of things that we did over there. Because the main thing was no food. Very little food. So we had to organize ourselves. What do I mean by organized? We went and we steal, period. All kind of stuff to survive. That's why the kids that came out of there they were tough cookies, I'll tell you one thing. Because most of them were without parents. And when they came back after the war, all my friends-- I was one-- maybe one out of 10 that had parents. The rest were deported. Nobody came back. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] This is past stories, that's all. 
INT: And where were your parents during this time? MW: My parents were in Brussels all this time. What they did, they-- a friend of theirs rented a house under his name. And my parents were making the payments through this man, and they were hiding there. My mom never went out, because she was with dark hair, and she looked more like a Jewish lady. My father didn't look like a Jew at all, because he had light blue eyes and curly blondish hair, brownish hair. So he went around, and he was dressed with overalls. He looked like a plumber or something with a box of tools. And he went like he would go to work and walked around. And went to do the shopping and things like this. He was very lucky, because he went to-- and he spoke good language. That's very important. Without any accent or anything like that. He spoke Flemish, my father. Because in Brussels you speak Flemish and French. But he spoke perfect Flemish. And he got caught once during the war. That they-- should I talk to you about it? There was one guy in Belgium. His name was Jacques. And in 1942, he started working for the Germans. He was fingering all the Jews. And that's the way they started picking up Jews-- through him. They were putting Jews-- because he knew a lot of people. The guy was a doorman from a big hotel in Brussels.  INT: And he was a Jew? MW: He was a Jew. I know his first name. His name was Jacques, and we used to call him Jacques the [NON-ENGLISH]. People from Belgium will know, tell you about it. They know him. 
INT: Meaning, the traitor? MW: A traitor. Yes. And the first people that he sent away to camp was his own wife and his own daughter. The very first ones-- to get rid of his wife and kid. And then he got into a lot of people. Till the end of the war, this guy. And then the last transport that went away from Belgium, the German himself took him, too. Sent him to camp. And the Jews in camp killed him. This I know for a fact, because I had a friend that was in the camp where he came in. They put him in a blanket, and they all stomped on him. They just killed him. That was it. They make a pulp out of it. He got what he deserved-- period. Maybe not enough yet. But this I remember very well. My parents, they survived. And immediately after the war, when the war was over, my father hitchhiked with the American army. And they came into the camp where we were to come and get me, because he was afraid that I'm going to hook up with the army and start going, too. So he-- in-- at the end of '44. Because the Americans came in and cooked up or something like this in Brussels. So my father came to get us. And then I went back to Brussels, and I stayed with my dad. But that was three long years, that's for sure.  INT: Did you have a false name, false papers? MW: Yes. My name was Marcel Barre, B-A-R-R-E. This was the name of this person that rented the house from my parents. I took his identity. [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] Yeah. This was my name during the war. What else would you like to know? 
INT: Did you ever feel like you'd forget your name? MW: No. Absolutely not. But between the children, we didn't even tell. Because they told us-- the underground told us-- your name is Marcel Barre. Whenever they ask, that's it. Don't reveal your name, because you may put your parents in danger. So we knew. I was already old enough to understand this, you see. So I went under this one name and stayed like this. We had identity papers, and we had false identities. And we had because we used to get stamps during the war, you know, for food stamps. So that's the way we collected it, through this false name. But I-- paperwork-- I didn't have nothing to do, because I was very well sheltered in this camp for children in Cul-des-Sarts. It still exists, you know. I went to see it when I went back to Belgium. I went to visit the old grounds. For me when I was a kid, it looked so huge and everything. And when I came back now, it looked so small. [LAUGHS] It's a different perspective, you know.  INT: Do you remember any special events that really stand out in those homes? MW: Well, when we were-- one event that really stands out for us is-- this was in the-- no, in Cul-des-Sarts. Yeah. An American plane got shot down, and he flew over the castle and crashed. So immediately, the people pulled out the pilot. They didn't-- they were not even wounded. They pulled him out, and hauled him away for safety. But then the Germans came in looking for them, you see. And they came in to the-- the came into the camp where the childrens were and started looking for the American soldiers. So I remember distinctly that they were looking in our beds to see if we didn't hide them. And the children that looked too Jewish-- right away, they took them away for the whole day in the woods that we shouldn't see each other. Because they were afraid that they will make one plus one is two. But they didn't look-- they didn't pay attention to the kids. They were really looking for the American fliers. But they got away, this I know. 
INT: And were you one of those that were taken out into the woods? MW: Yes. They put me to the woods. I had dark black hair, you know. The ones with blond hair and stuff they remained there. And the other ones, they took us away. And we went into the woods for the whole day, I remember.  INT: What were you thinking? MW: You know, a child thinks very differently. It's part of a game. Because we didn't know better. I really never suffered from the Germans, so I didn't really think it's that bad. And I didn't-- how did I-- I couldn't understand that they kill us over there if they catch us, you know. So we went along what they told us to do, you see. But we didn't mean that bad-- for us it wasn't that bad. It's part of a game. Because a child's mentality is different than another. I was maybe very mature for my age, but I still was not an adult, you know. So that's the way we survived. That's all.  INT: What about friends, girlfriends? I mean, did boys and girls get together during that time? MW: Very much so. Very much so. Because if you get mature faster for your age in one way, you get mature for another way, too. So boys and girls-- and there was plenty of girls available. And that's a normal thing. Children are like this, and that's about all. I don't have nothing to talk in particular, but I have nothing to be ashamed of either. [LAUGHS] So it doesn't make a difference. But we got along. I have good seven years from it. All kind of adventures that happened to us. 
INT: Tell me about some of them. Tell me about another adventure. MW: OK. We had a friend over there. Not a Jew, a goyem from the village. I forgot the name. But he had a factory from cigars. The father, he was making little cigars. So we went-- a bunch of guys of us. And we were wearing those golf pants, you know, that go down there. So we went there, and while they were not looking, we filled up our pants with cigars. [LAUGHS] Then with this we came back, and then we went to the peasants and we exchanged cigars for eggs, for butter, for bread. And we bought a dinner. We distributed for all the kids. I'm telling you, we organized ourselves. The bigger kids, we were very, very well organized. We used to go to the butcher, and we could buy meat without the stamps-- black market. But it used to cost maybe 10 times more than the regular way. So we came in and we said, we want to have, let's see-- for $1 a small piece of meat on the black market. But the guy didn't have the meat the same place that he had the other, so he had to go in the back to get this other meat. While he went in other the back, we went and we stole stamps. And when he came back, we say, we changed our mind. We don't want this. Maybe we're going to buy with stamps, and we bought for cheaper. [LAUGHTER] 
INT: I'm going to stop you now. We'll go to the next tape, so we're going to take a break. MW: OK.  INT: I'm just-- OK, Max, you were just telling us the story of your cigar caper. MW: Yeah. OK.  INT: Is there more to that? MW: Oh, there was all kinds of things. Mainly, we, we tried to survive. We did all kind of things that I wouldn't dare do now. But in that time, we did, and we thought it was normal. That's the way we were taught to-- that's the way we teach ourselves to do it, and that was it. I can tell you stories. All the kids had, like, [NON-ENGLISH] how do you call this? How do you say this in English? [NON-ENGLISH] They had the--  INT: The chutzpah? MW: Sores. We were full of sores, because we didn't have enough soap to wash ourselves. And there were things between the fingers, like this. I don't know the name of this thing. And you know why this happened? Because we used to take a bath once a week. A bath. A regular bath. So we used to go-- they didn't have showers. They had three bathtubs there. So we used to go two, and then the two got out. Two other ones got in, and then two other ones got in. The big-- the strong ones used to take the baths first. I was not in this category. I wasn't that strong. So I was the second shift, and after me was a smaller one yet. This was the third shift. And whatever one had, the rest of them got through that way. This was bad condition for that, but we survived. That's it. So many stories to tell that it's almost unbelievable. But that's-- it's all part, part of the past, you know? But the main thing, it was no sanitation, very little, and no food. We were starving all day long-- all day long. I think they had fruit, fruit trees there. They never had an apple because we eat them before they grew out. We used to steal the apples and eat them. The carrots, they never could hide them far enough for us because we used to dig out all the carrots in the fields and eat the carrots. Beets-- we used to go in the fields from the peasants and pull out all the beets. They were always complaining. A just reason, because we were eating them. And this was meant for the cows, not for the people. But we were as hungry as the cows, so we were eating it too. But the children, they wanted to eat. That's it. We used to eat two slices of bread a day, I remember, for breakfast. And bread-- black bread, you could take it and throw it against the wall, and it would stick against the wall. So bad, it was because they didn't have anything else. And mainly we eat cabbage because they had a lot of cabbage and herring because there was a lot of herring during the war in Belgium. Everybody was cooking herring. All kind-- I can tell you 10 different ways how to make herring. My mama, I remember, made gefilte fish with herring. Don't ask how it tastes, you know, but at that time, that's what we were eating. And fried herring, and cooked herring, and baked herring. And when I came back from the, the camp, I couldn't look at a cabbage for, I think, five years in a row because that's all we had, every day, every day, every day cabbage, cabbage, cabbage, and herring. This was really something. 
INT: You said there were like a hierarchy of strong-- the strong group, and the lesser, and the lesser. MW: That's the way it went.  INT: So was there infighting? MW: Definitely. Definitely. I was very lucky because I ran extremely fast. They couldn't catch me. So I didn't get beat too often. But when they did get me, then they let me have it because the stronger ones took from the other ones. And they wanted to-- they wanted to rule over the younger ones, you know? That's the way. It's part of life. That's it. But then the things is-- the one thing is good about it that we stayed there for two, three years. Then we grew up to their size, you know, so we could give them back after, you know? But there was really a hierarchy, like you said. But it's so far away that I forgot about it.  INT: How many of you were there? MW: I think it was at least 100 children there in this Cul-des-Sarts. At least 100 boys and girls. If not 100, not far from it. Quite a few kids. Quite a few. And then people to take care of us, and regular teacher. We used to go to school every day. And then one day, they came and got me. In the middle of from nowhere, they came and picked me. I don't know why. They took me, went back to Brussels with a woman that came and got me. Stayed a couple days in Brussels, and then they took me back a town next to the village where I was, Couvin. This was a school where you become a teacher. And they put me in there, maybe because I was good in school or something. I don't know. But they put me with the older children. I mean, not children. I was in that time already 14. And the other ones were pre-- pre-teachers, like a junior high. I mean like a junior college, it was. That was with people 17, 18 years old. And i was following the courses with them, but I didn't count. I didn't get no papers or anything like that. And I stayed there. Matter of fact, that's where-- that's where the Americans came in. And then I went back to Cul-des-Sarts with my father. And my father picked me up from over there. 
INT: So what h-- so you were in Couvin? MW: In Couvin when the Americans came in.  INT: Tell me about that. How did-- how did it happen? MW: You see, it was about-- from Couvin to Cul-des-Sarts, a tramway used to go between the two. So it wasn't very far. I used to come back for the weekends. And I remember I came back to Cul-des-Sarts when the Americans came into there because it was a-- the-- [INAUDIBLE]. The first thing I met-- an American came in. And it was a Jewish fellow. His name was Berkowitz, and he was from New York. And he was the mess officer because the soldiers were not far away from us, but some were wandering around. So he came, and he saw there was Jewish children there. He said, I'm coming back. He went there to his-- where he was, the camp, the soldiers. And he came back with an ambulance full of things for the children. Toothbrushes and soap and chocolate and chewing gum. He was so thrilled to see Jewish children. And then there was a few guys was from Poland. One was speaking Polish to me, and he said, I'm from Poland. You don't have to be afraid any more. I'm American, but from Poland. Speak Polish to me because you're Polish descendants. I said, I know, my parents, but not me. I couldn't understand him. He was so disappointed, this guy, I remember. And then my father came, and then I went back to Brussels, back to a normal activity. But the kids stayed there because they had to wait until people came and claimed them because most of them didn't have no parents no more. So then the Jewish organization got involved. They got organized, and took out all those children. And they made camps day camps in Brussels-- schools-- for those kids. And whoever wanted to go to school, they teach them trades or school. The Jewish organizations, they did this for the Jewish children after the war. They got already help from all over. And then whoever had family in Israel, or in America, because then the kids started to disperse themselves. But they had home for children for at least two years after the war in Brussels. 
INT: What was that moment like for you when your father came to get you? MW: It was out of the blue. I didn't expect that. Then all of a sudden, I see my father. Because my father, he, he went-- he did-- nothing stopped him. There was no train, no nothing, but he made it. He came. He was hitchhiking with the soldiers, you know, and he came all the way there to pick us up. So when we came in this village, the first thing we did is say, let's go back, but let's go back with something because in Brussels, they didn't have nothing. So in there, the peasants thought the war was over. So they had all this butter and the flour, and they didn't know what to do it. They were hiding it for the black market. So my father bought it for two times nothing. Whatever I had in a rucksack, we threw everything away, and we filled it with butter, I remember. Because over there, let's say you buy it for $1. We sold it for $100. So much of a difference. And then we went back to Brussels, and we bought all this stuff and we sold it because my dad didn't have nothing there no more. This was his first dollars that he made after the war. And then we went back again, and we made a few trips back and forth. Used to come back we meat, with butter. And then every time I used to go back, I used to take back a child. Another one of my friends that we made out a letter that the parents want them. It wasn't even true. But we took-- they had a sister, or things like that. Whoever had relatives, I took back at least three, four kids, back and forth like this because they didn't want to give up the children because they didn't know what's going to become of them until, until the things got more to the normal. 
INT: What was the first thing your father said to you? MW: He was happy to see me alive. I don't remember what he said. I'm sure he hugged me because my dad loved me. He was a very, very good dad, my father. He was exceptionally a good man. Didn't have much money, but he had a lot of love to give. That's for sure. I can only tell good things about him-- a very good father.  INT: And what had happened to your brother and sister at this time? MW: Well, my brother was a little tiny boy when the war started. He  was born, I think, in '38. So he was about a year and a half old when all this thing started. And they placed him in a home for blind children. This I remember. I know because they told me after. And he was the leader of the pack. He was the only seeing child with all the children blind. And he was leading the children. And he was at least two years there. And the-- it's nuns were taking care of this particular school.  INT: This was in Brussels? MW: Under Brussels somewhere. I don't remember exactly where it was. It was about 20 miles from Brussels. I know one thing. When we came-- when my father picked me up and we came back to Brussels, we went to see-- to get my brother. And they wouldn't release him. They wouldn't give him to us because they didn't know who we were. And we went-- we went with our bicycles over there, so we decided to kidnap my brother. And while they were walking with all the kids, we grabbed him, we put him on the bike, and we took off. And this kid was screaming. He didn't know who we were because he did not recognize us. And we kidnapped him. We really kidnapped him. We took him back home. And then after-- they came after and then we straightened out the whole story. But they wouldn't release him because they had-- maybe they were planned to convert him if the parents don't come back, and stuff like that. This I know from my brother. My sister, she was in a convent during the war. And my father went to get her, too. I didn't have much in common with my sister because I didn't even know at all where she was. And she was older than me. So she had her life to tell, you know? So too much, I don't know about it. But I know that she was in a convent for a long, long time. And then she came back, too. My father went to get her after, and he brought her back. He took everybody out. This I can tell you about them. And it was not easy after the war, because there was no jobs available and everything. After a while-- after a while, we start going again. But the main thing, we were free. This was important. We were afraid for a while when they had the offensive on Ostend. We were afraid the German were coming back at the end of '44 when there was the offensive. And they-- you know, they were in Bastogne where I was hiding in the seminar. That's where the Germans were-- where [INAUDIBLE] Ostend were when they came and attacked in the Ardennes in Belgium. But after a while, the Americans took over. And then they went all the way to, to finish them up. 
INT: And did your family know, at the time, what was going on-- what was happening to Jews? MW: Well, I have a little story to tell you about that. In 1943, there was one guy. His name is Willie Erkowitz. He was-- he was older than me because he was a married man when they deported him. But he ran away from Auschwitz. He's the only Jew that I know that ran away from camp. And he came-- and the reason why he ran away, he had a friend of his that had a German girlfriend. And she helped to set up the escape and bought him clothing and stuff like that. And he came all the way to Belgium from during the war on his way to Switzerland. And whoever he could see and find-- Jewish people-- he told them. They burn the Jews. Don't go in the street. Hide in a hole if you have to. But don't, don't be caught because if you're caught, 99% you're not going to come back. And that's what happened. Because out of 10 Jews in Belgium, one came back. The rest of them never made it. The children never made it for sure because they went straight to the ovens. They didn't have no-- you don't know about the Jewish children that survived-- very, very seldom that you heard of one, you know? So he-- the Jews knew, but they didn't believe it. They just wouldn't believe it, you know? I can tell you something. Right after the war when people start to come back from the camps-- so we had like a Jewish org-- a Jewish organization there for the [INAUDIBLE]. So my mom used to go every day there to talk to people that came out from camp to see she finds a relative or something. So she found-- she came home with a, a kid-- he must have been about 19, something like that-- that survived the war. And she took him home to eat and stuff. And then, while he was eating, my mom said, do you know about this one? Because he was from the same town as my mother. So he said, in the oven. My mom didn't know what it meant, you know? And whoever she asked, he said, in the oven. And so my mom said, what, what you talking, in the oven? Where is that? So he got up. He got so mad, the guy. Are you stupid or something? Don't you know what an oven is? They burn you over there. My mom couldn't believe it, you see. And that's the way we really find out because during the war, the Jews didn't believe it. But after the war, unfortunately, we found out, and fast, you know? I remember. I see the guy in front of my eyes. He's in Israel somewhere now. 
INT: Where had he been? MW: In camp, during the war, you know. I don't know which camp, you know, but he was from Poland, from the same town that my mother, and they came in. That's it. After this, this was my years that I cannot remember. There's so much things that I don't remember everything.  INT: So after the war, then, now you're, what, 14? MW: After the war, I'm 15 already.  INT: You're 15. So what happened next in your life? MW: Well, to begin with, my father wanted me to go to school. And I said, there's no way that I can go to school when there is not a dime in the house. How can I ask you to feed me and everything without me working? So I didn't want to, and I went to work. My dad wanted to, but I didn't. So I went to work, and whatever I was-- meager salary I was making, I was helping whatever I could. I was an apprentice electrician, I remember. I was working. And I joined HaShomer Hatzair, and, and there, again, I had to do a lot with the youth movement in Brussels. And I was in HaShomer Hatzair for about three years, something like that. Yeah, for about three. And then I learned a lot about Jews because on the way that the HaShomer Hatzair teaches you because a little bit on the left side, you know? But it was very good to be a Jew. You became proud to be a Jew, by you go out from HaShomer Hatzair. And I stayed there for about three years, and, and then I quit this too because they became too possessive for me, of mine opinion. You couldn't do anything you wanted anymore. You belonged to the HaShomer Hatzair. They were really indoctrine-- how you say that-- indoctrine you. And they wanted too much from me. And they wouldn't give me my freedom. And I had enough from during the war, and everything, so I said no. That's not for me. And I walked out, period. And then I went. I was older already, and then I went to the army in Belgium, stayed there a couple years, and came out and got married. And then during the meantime, my mother passed away. She died a very young woman. And I remained with my dad after the war. And then I met my wife. And my wife is also-- I met her in HaShomer Hatzair when she was a young girl. She's younger than me, so at the time I didn't pay attention to her. She was too young for me. But after I met her, we got together, and then we got married. And that's second part of my life, you know? 
INT: So what year did you get married? MW: I got married in 1952. I was not-- I was about-- how old was I? I was-- not-- I wasn't 22 years old, something like that. I got married in January, and I got 22 in April. And my wife was 18 when we got married.  INT: And her name? Your wife's name? MW: My wife's name is Hena-- Helen. That's easier, Helen. And we lived in Brussels, and we had a little store. And in that time, my sister moved to America already. And my brother lived in America too because my father was very sick. So we had a aunt in New York, and she says, why don't you send the kid over here and I take care of it. So my father sent my brother because we thought that we're all going to leave and go to America later. But then it didn't work out for my father. He got remarried in the meantime, and she had children there, so she couldn't go. And he didn't go. And then my sister came, and then the-- this aunt in New York didn't want my brother anymore. So she moved to California, and took her brother-- the brother with her and lived in Los Angeles. And then she made the papers for us, and then we came to Los Angeles in 1956. And at that time, we had already a little girl too. We had a child that was born in '54. And we came to America, and then that's another story. 
INT: So you came to America in '54? MW: In '56. My daughter was born in '54, and then we came in January of 1956. We came to Los Angeles. And we're here ever since.  INT: And what do you do in Los Angeles? Well, to begin with, I worked for Desmond's when I came to Los Angeles. I was an alteration man. I know-- I know about tailoring, so I was working in the shop there. And then I was a fitter for them. And then I got on my own, and I worked for an upholster part time. I was sewing cushions at night. And then the guy sold the business, so I bought it without any money. I didn't have any money yet. But I found a guy that wanted to go partners with me that had the money. He put up the money, and I put up the knowledge. And we were together for about seven years, and then I bought him out. He went on his own, and I went on my own. And I'm ever since, I'm in the upholstering. And I took-- I bought the shop. And all the children got born, and we stayed here. At least at that time, we were-- we were a free man and woman. We didn't have this problem we had over there. And we're in America ever since.  INT: And how many more children do you have? MW: I have-- my oldest daughter, her name is Claudine. She was born in '54. Then I have a son. His name is Brian. He's born in '58. And then I have another daughter. Her name is Natalie. And she's born-- wait a second, I have to remember-- in '63. She's born in '63. And her name is Natalie because she carries the name of my father. My father's name was Nathan, and her name is Natalie. And she's born the same day as me. The 18th of April, so I know for sure. [LAUGHS] 
INT: How about-- how about Jewish life for you? Are you involved in any? MW: Well, I am involved in a certain way because I belong to a group of people from Europe, and we call ourselves Continental 22. And those are all people from Poland, and from Belgium, and from France. It's a group of people. In our own way, you know, we, we put money together for Israel. We, we send money to an orphanage over there. And indirectly, I help the best I can, and that's about all.  INT: When did you first realize that something different did happen to you in your childhood? MW: In what way?  INT: You know, that, that something actually happened in your life that, that affected you. MW: During the war, I thought it was part of my life like this because the Germans came in in 1940, and they were not bad with the Jews. They let everybody keep on with their own life. It's in '41, '42 that start to, to become sour. But then they sent us away to those, those home for children, and that was it. See, this was part of my life. I thought that's the way it's supposed to be. So there was no transition. It was just a continuation for me. So I didn't realize it was bad. I only realized that I was a Jew when I start-- when I belonged to the HaShomer Hatzair and that I learn about my ancestry and everything that I realized what the Jew means to be, you know? But during the war, we knew that the Germans don't like the Jews. But I wasn't too much-- I wasn't a religious Jew or anything like that. I used to go, like I say, and hide it to learn Jewish. But this was part of my normal life, see. So, to me, there was no jump from one to another. Just kept on going. 
INT: And did you tell your children about your experiences? MW: Yes, I, I told everything because I'm very-- that's why I'm very happy that we're making this particular film because they always say, why don't you tell about your life, you know? So this way they will have a little bit of a chance to know what was going on, see? And they're very anxious to know. But they have their own lives, too. They're all married now. And they have their own children. My oldest daughter has two children. His name-- one is, is Jonathan. And the girl, her name is Erin. My son has a son. His name is Alex. And they're already big kids too-- nine years old and 12 years old. What else you-- what else should I say?  INT: What, what would you want them to know about-- what would you want your grandchildren to know about the experiences that you had? MW: Well, they-- the-- they keep on asking, you know? Not the smallest one, but my grandson is very much interested because he goes to, to Hebrew school. And he learn what it is-- same thing I learned in the HaShomer Hatzair, he learns in Hebrew school. And he know what went on during the war, so he's trying to know as much as possible. And I would like him to know, too, that he should know from when he comes from. So little by little, when they get older, they will get in more and more involved to it. And I hope this will help too. 
INT: What would be the most important message that you want not only your grandchildren, but all the children of the world to know or keep in mind? MW: To me, the most important thing is that people should not forget all those people that disappeared during the war. Because I am one of the survivors, and I'm very happy that I made it out. That's why I had a chance to make a family and have children of my own. But all my friends, I got nobody. And I don't want them to be forgotten. At least if people tell the story of what happened, people will remember those people that disappeared. And that's a very, very important message to me, I think. And that they should know what was going on because a lot of people don't even believe it that this-- that this thing happened. And at least I have firsthand account of it.  INT: Is there any other story that you want to tell? MW: I probably will remember when the movie's over. [LAUGHTER]  INT: Anything about any of the special friends that you lost that you would like to be remembered? MW: Well, again, the friends that I lost is all kids from school. When I was-- you know, when I went away, I was 11 years old. So I had good friends like kids that lived next door to me. They're gone. They, they never came back. You know, during the world in Belgium, we had to register. All the Jews had to go and register. So my name is Na-- my father-- my name is Nathan Wunderman, and I-- and I live there and there. And I'm married, and I have children. So everybody was registered as Jews, so they knew-- in case they wanted to get us together-- they knew where to find us, you see? Because in Belgium, you have to register where you live in the city. City hall, they have an address. They always can find you. Whenever you move, you have to a following address. You have to re-register. But during the war, they have to register all Jews. My father did not go. He says, if they have to find me, let them find me. But I'm not going to go in to tell them where I am. So the people say, hey, they're going to go, and they're going to take you. He said, so what? At least they don't know I'm Jewish. I have a chance. And don't go, either. He was telling the other people. But they went. They registered. They wouldn't listen. And my father, on account of this, had a good chance during the war because we had identity papers. And it was marked on the paper, born Poland. The other people was marked, born Poland, Jew-- a big stamp on their card. You follow me? So they didn't have no paper. They had to go false identities. But my father went on the same papers the whole war-- also Polish guy, but not a Jew. And that's the way he survived. For this, he was smart. But he went through the first war, and he was not a youngster, my father. So he had more experience what to do. He lived-- in his young years, he went to-- he lived in Israel. He went through pogroms in Israel there, and he was hunted down. He was sent back out of the country, went back to Poland. He went into the army in Poland. There he met my mother. And then from there, they went on the way to America. But they went as far as Belgium, and didn't have money to go further. 
INT: OK, we're going to stop to change the tape. MW: OK.  INT: Max, I'm wondering if you'd be willing to share any more little stories about some of the things you said that you would never dare do today when you were a kid in those years. MW: Mainly is to get food for the kids. Because like I said, we were about 10 kids, the bigger ones. And we provided for all the rest of it, mainly. We had food, but all the supplement came from what we were stealing. We had big capes, black capes, like the scout, with big pockets in there. And I remember it was a-- a grocery store. And, well, unfortunately, it was an older lady. And she lived upstairs on the second floor. So at that time when we went into the store, by the time she came down, we went two, three guys, who used to take jelly and whatever was available. And then we used to buy a pack of matches or cards. We-- we used to rob her blind [INAUDIBLE]. You know, when I think about it, it was awful, you know. This is one thing I remember. We used to go on trips. We went to the farmers. And we used to say, we are a bunch of children, and we are hungry. Could you give us something? So they-- they used to give us cheese, eggs. They-- they used to give us all kind of things, you know. So, but boys are boys. And we start to argue. One had more than the other and everything. So the poor eggs that we had, we start throwing at each other. We used to fight with the eggs, I remember. And then we were all crying because we didn't have no eggs no more. What we made over there, it's unbelievable, unbelievable. This-- this-- you know, she must have had a lot of courage, this woman, to take care of-- of those-- those children. I think they got paid, though. They got a certain amount of money from the underground for to take care of all those children. If not, they did it for a good heart, also. But they got a-- a monetary award out of it. This particular lady, from-- I forgot her name. But after the war, she got honored from the-- the Jewish federation. She got a plaque and everything, you know. That we went with-- the one from the first home lived to be a very old lady, Mrs. [INAUDIBLE]. And they honored her. And-- and I think she's in-- in Israel, Yad Vashem, over there. She has a plate over there, too. That's about all that-- that I can remember. We went-- we went to school. And we were pretty active. We played practically all day long. We used to play soccer with-- with a ball that fell apart in little tiny pieces. This ball kept on shrinking, shrinking, shrinking, you know, a-- a solid ball, not the soccer ball, but whatever we could put together. We were-- we kept busy. We kept busy. 
INT: Is there a special memory that you have of that whole time that stands out more than anything else, that you just really, really remember strongly? MW: Well, the-- the best part is it when the American soldiers came in, when they-- they freed us, you know. Because we-- the soldiers were in Couvin. And-- we were in Cul-des-sarts. Cul-des-sarts is about, like I said, about 20 miles from the other one. So we went over there to meet Americans. And we met-- we met this-- this Jewish man over there. And we went back. We took him with us to the home from the children. That's why he met all the Jewish children. This is a very strong impression for us, because he was going with his-- with his- his gun and-- we were carrying the gun for him. We were walking on the street with him. And we brought back an American soldier. I don't understand how they can get-- walk away from-- from the regiment there, you know. And then he went back. And then he came back with, like I told you, with an ambulance full of stuff. This was a good, good impression for us, when we got freed. Because we knew that, in particular, when my father came, then I knew they survived. And for sure, I was happy, yeah. Yeah. This is a good impression, that's for sure. That's about it. See, the-- the years went by, one, two, three, trying to remember. That's three years of my life that we were gone. But compared to the other countries, I think Belgium, the children didn't have that bad. Because we-- the-- the-- the people from Belgium collaborated to help the people. In other countries, they collaborated with the German to get rid of the people. It makes a big difference. Because in Belgium, the-- the people themselves didn't like the Germans. They were occupied in the First World War, and they didn't like it to be occupied the Second World War. So they were against the Germans. 
INT: Are you involved in the child survivor groups? MW: I'm a member. I'm a participant. I went-- last year, they had it in Belgium. So we specially went back to Belgium to participate there and to look up the-- the people. But it's so far away, you know, that my-- my-- it's already in my past, you know. I-- I meet people that I didn't see for 40, 50 years. And the-- the first 10 minutes, it's fine, I mean. And then, we have nothing in common. Because you met when you were a child, and all of a sudden, here's a big adult and an old man on top of it, you know, not young person. So they don't have interest in me, and I have no interest in them. And life goes on, see, except close friends that I kept in touch with all those years. Like, I have one friend of mine, I went back once to Belgium, and I walk to go to temple. And it was Rosh Hashanah. And I see a guy. And I turn around. I said, gee whiz. You look so familiar to me. And I-- I recognize him from during the war. And I went up to him, and I said, are you Henri de Smet? Because this was his name. He says, yes. How do you know? I say, you don't recognize me? And then we got together. And then we are friends till today. And he-- he organized this reunion from the people that remain from this home, him and another guy. Because there is about, I would say, about a dozen that remain in Belgium. And then a few people came. Some came from America. Some came from Canada. And that's why we had the reunion last year on the same time that there was the-- the reunion for the-- the Holocaust survivors children. That's why we got together. It was a big affair there. I went for three days, there. And I went to visit and see pictures and stuff like this. And whenever they have something, they send it. And if I can make it, I would go again. 
INT: Well, thank you for sharing your story, Max. MW: Thank you very much. And I hope that I was some help for other people that would be able to learn something from this, too, and for me, too, and my family, for sure. Thank you very much, too. This is Nathan Wunderman. And that-- that's my father. And this is Hena. Her maiden name is [INAUDIBLE]. Hannah Wunderman. This is in 1924 on their wedding. And it's in Skierniewice, Poland. This is 1942. And this is my sister, Bella to the left. I am in the center. And to the right is my brother, Severin.  INT: And where was the picture taken? MW: And it's taken in Brussels, Belgium. This is also 1942. And this is a group of children that was in the home, the very first home that I was. This was Jamoigne. And I'm the second-- the second child to the right.  INT: And where? MW: In Jamoigne, in Belgium. This is also 1942. And that's my brother, Severin. And that's a picture taken in Brussels, Belgium.  INT: In? Oh, you said the date. OK. MW: This is 1946. And that's me, Max Wunderman. And I'm in Hashomer Hatzair, in Brussels, Belgium. This is-- wait-- this is my daughter, Claudine Wunderman and-- and her husband, Kevin Lally. Her name is Claudine Lally. And should I say how old they are?  INT: Where was the picture taken? MW: The-- the picture's taken in Los Angeles. In-- I don't remember. I don't remember. 
INT: Approximately? MW: In Los Angeles. That's about it.  INT: Max, I would like for you to introduce your family to us. MW: OK. This is my wife, Helen. That's my son, Brian. That's my daughter Natalie. And that's my son-in-law Bradley.  INT: Would any of you like to say anything about the experience that you've heard your father go through and how it's affected your life, maybe, as a-- as a child of survivors? BRIAN (SON): I think hearing the stories of both my parents and the trials and tribulations that they've gone through has made all of us a little bit stronger people, that we will continue to go after what we want. And for that, I appreciate it. NATALIE (DAUGHTER): Well, I just that feel that every day of life is important. Don't take it for granted. If they weren't here, we wouldn't be here. And I appreciate that.  INT: Thank you, all. NATALIE (DAUGHTER): Thank you.