INT: Today's date is January 10, 1997. Survivor's name is Herbert Kahn. My name is Dan Danieli. The interview is conducted in Riverdale, New York, USA, in the English language. My name is Dan Danieli, that's D-A-N-I-E-L-I. And today's date is January 10, 1997. I am conducting an interview with Herbert Kahn, in Riverdale, New York, USA, in the English language. What is your name? HK: Herbert Kahn.  INT: Would you spell Kahn please? HK: K-A-H-N.  INT: What was your name at birth? HK: Herbert.  INT: And the family name was the same? HK: Kahn, K-A-H-N.  INT: Did you use any other names during the period you were in Europe? HK: No.  INT: And nicknames that friends or family used for you? HK: No.  INT: What is your date of birth? HK: February 11, 1921.  INT: Which would bring you to what age today? HK: 75. Next month, 76.  INT: Where were you born? HK: Gemünden am Main.  INT: Could you spell that, please? HK: G-E-M-U, umlaut, N-D-E-N.  INT: And the country? HK: Germany.  INT: Which part of Germany is that located in? HK: Bavaria.  INT: South? West? HK: Franconia. Of the part of Bavaria which is called Franconia.  INT: Do you remember your hometown well? HK: Very well.  INT: Can you describe it, just in major lines? HK: Small town on the River Main, M-A-I-N. Between the large city, Frankfurt, and a somewhat smaller city, Würzberg. It was called Gemünden because the [? Frankische ?] Sinn, this little river, flew into the larger river called Saale, [? Frankische ?] Saale. And together, they flowed into the Main. That's why it's called Gemünden. 
INT: How big a town was it, or a city? HK: Approximately 3,000 people.  INT: And was it industrial or commercial? What type of a town? HK: It was, how would call it, a more and more commercial city.  INT: And how big a Jewish population? HK: At my time, let's see, towards the end, we-- we had about 67 people.  INT: That's people or families? HK: 67 people. Maybe 15 families. Maybe 18. 15-- between 15 and 18 families.  INT: Where did the Jews live? Concentrated in the town or dispersed? HK: They usually lived dispersed in the town. In the town, though, in the town, proper.  INT: And where did your family live? HK: We lived in the main street, called [GERMAN] six. My father had a business. And at the same time, we lived in the same house, two flights up.  INT: What kind of business did your father have? HK: Textile. We had a textile business. He sold what they call here gray goods, printed goods, and finished goods-- the-- the town-- the store in town.  INT: Can you describe your close family members? Siblings, parents? HK: Yeah.  INT: Names, what they did? HK: My-- my father's name was Levi Kahn, L-E-V-I, Kahn. And he was born on January the 10th, 1900-- 1880, which makes it about 117 years ago. And my mother was born on February 18, 1889, in a-- a little further away, in a town called Neumarkt in der Oberpfalz. My father-- my father, by the way was born in a other small town, called Rieneck, R-I-E-N-E-C-K. 
INT: Siblings? HK: Siblings.  INT: Did you-- how many siblings did you have? HK: We were, all together, five. The oldest, my brother Arthur, born on December-- I don't have to say that. No. My brother, Arthur, my sister, Fanny, another little brother, Otto, who died very young, myself, number four, my brother who lives in Chicago, number five.  INT: Was there anybody else from your family who lived in your household? HK: Not in our-- in our household, no.  INT: Did you have any servants or maids? Nannies? HK: Yes, yes. We had a young lady who helped my mother in the kitchen, and take care of that and-- and a-- a nanny, to take care of the children.  INT: What was the language spoken at home? HK: German. Only German.  INT: Did you know anything about Yiddish? HK: Didn't.  INT: At that time? HK: German Jews did not speak Yiddish, didn't know Yiddish.  INT: And where did you go to school, the first grade school? HK: The first four years, I went to grade school in Gemünden, which was run by the nuns. Because it was a Catholic town. But we were, the Jewish children, were excused from catechism and things like that. That was from 19, I would say, '27, to 1931.  INT: Was there a Jewish school in the town? HK: There was no Jewish school in town.  INT: Synagogue? HK: There was a synagogue. Orthodox synagogue, a mikvah. and we had services, usually on Shabbat, unless somebody lost a father or mother. Then we tried to get a minyan together during the week. 
INT: Do you remember your grandparents from both sides? HK: My father's parents, I never, never knew. I don't remember. My mother's parents, I do remember.  INT: Did they live in the same town? HK: No. Mother's-- my mother comes from Neumarkt in der Oberpfalz. That's where her parents lived all the time.  INT: Did they die there too? HK: My grandfather died still before the people were deported. I think, if I remember correctly, he died in January, 1938. My grandmother came to America and died, I think, in 1941.  INT: What was the interaction between the Jewish and the non-Jewish population, in your specific town? HK: Actually, my early youth, memories of youth was-- was quite pleasant. We had no, no real, I say, open problems. We didn't-- they didn't call us any names, if you want to. The only thing I remember is that on-- around Easter time, when they-- when they reproduce the stations of the cross, one of the stations of the cross was in-- right near and right in front of our house. And you know, had a priest together with his [NON-ENGLISH], the seminarians walking with him. And I remember when they said that on what we call here Good Friday, [GERMAN], around noon, noontime, that [GERMAN]. Amen, which means, this is the hour where the Jews killed our Savior. And that, naturally, chilled us quite a bit and probably saw the undercurrent of antisemitism, which, in my opinion, was propagated, to a great extent, by the Catholic church at the time. 
INT: What about in school? Do you remember any antisemitic outbursts from school? HK: No. I do not remember in the school, in Gemünden, I don't remember any.  INT: Did you have any non-Jewish friends? HK: I wouldn't call them friends. I had a young fellow who was-- I would call him an acquaintance, who told me later, after the war, that he once, when I fainted in school, took me home to my mother. The man had a [NON-ENGLISH] in-- in Gemünden.  INT: Did non-Jewish kids from school visit you at home? HK: Hardly.  INT: And did you go to them? HK: No.  INT: So did your parents interact with non-Jewish people in the town? HK: I don't know, I wouldn't say socially. But they interact since my mother was running the business, the [NON-ENGLISH], she knew everybody, any-- of consequence. And she was very friendly to them. But no, we didn't go to their home. They didn't come to our home.  INT: You mentioned that you were orthodox at home. HK: Yes.  INT: What was the measure of orthodoxy? HK: Oh, I'd say, the orthodoxy, like most people had in the small towns in Southern Germany, which means they-- they kept all the laws which they knew. But they were not very learned. Because we didn't have-- we didn't have a teacher in Gemünden on Main. The people were not so much exposed to what they called [NON-ENGLISH] or to any kind of talks by a rabbi. My Jewish education was, the first years, a teacher who came with horse and buggy from another town. And he-- he gave lessons to the children on Sunday, and on Tuesday. We were all in one room. We were, at my time, about nine children. And they divided that into three different groups. And while one taught one, the other one wrote and the other one read. But that-- that was the basic education, from six until 10 years old. 
INT: Did your parents keep kosher at home? HK: Kosher. We kept Shabbat. The store was closed on Shabbat. People knew that-- on Jewish holidays, yes.  INT: Did you travel on-- on the Shabbat? HK: Didn't travel on the Shabbat. My father had a car. Didn't travel on the Shabbat.  INT: Was there any problem keeping a kosher household at that time? HK: None whatsoever.  INT: How did your parents obtain kosher food? HK: Oh, they got it either-- they either got it from Würzberg-- mostly from Würzberg, which was 38 kilometers and easily accessible. They had-- they had sufficient. Well, we had a lot of food and vegetables and bread and all that kind of stuff. It's just the meat which really was most--  INT: Did you keep kosher out of home too? HK: Yes.  INT: You, yourself? HK: Yes, we did. Oh, we all did.  INT: Did you run into any problem concerning that, with the-- HK: No. Well, we just didn't eat meat outside, you know, food and vegetables and whatever you--  INT: What kind of a synagogue did you have in Gemünden? HK: It's--  INT: Was it a real synagogue with a rabbi? HK: A real-- real-- no rabbi. We had no rabbi, a real Ashkenazi synagogue. Later, for a short while, we had a teacher who happened to be my brother-in-law, who married then, my sister. But only a very short while, because there was not enough for him, the town. So he went to another town, smaller town with a much larger Jewish population. 
INT: As you remember back, Friday night, Erev Shabbat, was there any difference, both at home and in the street in your town? HK: Totally different. Sure, Friday--  INT: How? Can you describe it? HK: Oh, Friday evening we came home from synagogue. My father made kiddush. And we had a nice Shabbat meal. And the family really got together very well in the evening. We sang a lot of zemirot, songs. I-- yeah, I still sing, sing them the same [INAUDIBLE] today.  INT: And in the street, was there any visual difference in the town? HK: But it was another weekday. It's another weekday in the town. Don't forget, we're only 67 Jews. So we didn't, in the street-- I mean, we-- we dressed with Shabbat clothing. We dressed different on Shabbat. But the-- the street didn't affect us at all.  INT: Do you remember if there was something like, for instance, taking cholent to the baker? HK: Didn't-- didn't exist in Germany, cholent. It's not a German [NON-ENGLISH], not a German food. [LAUGHS]  INT: You-- you said something about your primary education. What was your further education? HK: After Gemünden, since Gemünden had only a-- a public school, I could have stayed another four years. But my parents wanted me to get a little-- all my siblings, our education. So I went to another town, a little larger. Lohr am Main, L-O-H-R. Populate-- it was about 10,000 people, which had a gymnasium. A gymnasium's where, in addition to everything else, you learn Greek and Latin. So I knew a little bit, Greek and Latin. And had what would call here maybe junior high school or something like that. 
INT: Now, was this a place where you slept in school? Or did you have to stay with a family? HK: No. No-- we-- I--  INT: How was it organized? HK: I traveled with a train every day, left very early in the morning, walked from our house to the railroad station, went in a train for about maybe 45 minutes, came in time to school. And in the evening, I went home with the train again.  INT: Did you have enough time to study at home after all this traveling? HK: Yeah. Yeah, I didn't have too tough a time, enough, enough to study. I studied on the train. And I always liked to study anyhow. It's-- no, it was no problem for me.  INT: Did you join any youth organizations, clubs? HK: Not in-- not in Gemünden, nothing. No, I did not.  INT: And the next stage of your education was where? HK: The next stage of my education, I went to Würzberg, which is a larger town, population about 100,000. By the way, these towns are all much larger today. Gemünden is 10,000. All these little villages which I knew all incorporated. I-- anyhow, Würzberg, I went to a [NON-ENGLISH] seminar, preparatory school for a teachers' seminary. I was there one year. That makes it 1935, '36. And then I was a year in Frankfurt, in the yeshiva, '36 to '37. Now, by that time--  INT: Where did you live during those periods of time? HK: In Würzberg, I lived in the-- they had a special home for out-of-towners. And in Frankfurt, also, I lived in a home which-- for out-of-town boys. 
INT: And in those larger cities, was there any antisemitism that you can-- you could perceive? HK: I could perceive already, antisemitism in-- in Lohr. Lohr, I was the only Jew in the gymnasium for about 1,000 kids, the only one who went to the gymnasium. There already, '34, '35, I-- I did notice they-- they called us names. And they did-- don't forget, I already lost a-- I had lost , brother in '33.  INT: Can you amplify on that? on losing your brother? When did it happen and how did it happen? HK: My-- my oldest brother, his name was Arthur, A-R-T-H-U-R, born on the December the 11th, 1911. He's born before the First World War. He went to all the schooling. He was a brilliant young man and ended up in the university in Würzberg. Famous for his medical research, Dr. Rontgen, who invented the x-rays, is from Würzberg. And he wanted to become a-- a doctor. He was very-- he wanted to help the world. He wanted to do the best. He studied Esperanto. And he-- and he was active in the campus, anti-Nazi, active. Activity, he was an activist, you would call him today-- and especially in '32. And he was quite known, quite known all over the area. In fact, in Bavaria, he was known. And he had been-- my mother's uncle, one brother of my mother, was a big business man, both in Germany-- he had already a business in England at the time. He was visiting him for a vacation in '32. And if he would have known what happened later, he would have never have come back. He had a passport. He could have left. He had-- he had a-- a German passport. The-- it seems that he-- he was earmarked by the Nazis for-- as a person to get rid of. And Hitler took power, I think, on January the 30th. And most towns-- 
INT: Which year was this? HK: 1933. And most towns, the-- the burgermeister, the [? lord ?] mayor, they were not-- not Nazis yet. Nevertheless, they looked for him with an outfit called Gestapo-- we didn't even know who they were-- looked for him in Nuremberg, where he had gone on Easter vacation. And somehow, they got his address, also unfortunate. But he got his address. And there these two men arrested him and sent him to Dachau. We didn't know what that was either. That was the beginning of the Dachau concentration camp. He was together with another three Jews. And on April the 12th-- I think he got to Dachau on April 11. On April the 12th, he was killed. According to the records at the time, of the German records, was [GERMAN], which means, shot while trying to escape. My father, who had good connections with Nuremberg, through my uncle, who knew the oberburgermeister, went right after Passover to him. And they said, you have no case against his son. It was anti-Nazi activist. That's not a-- anything you can get. And we have good condition in Dachau. And I think that we can get him out. When he came back from the railroad station to the house, we knew already. My mother had already gotten the call from [NON-ENGLISH] [? Shacht, ?] who was not a Catholic. He was a Protestant. And he said, Frau Kahn, [GERMAN]. And I remember, I was 12 years old. I remember very well, I was sitting outside on the stoop, looking for-- I don't know, around the town. I heard my mother cry, yell, like-- like somebody, I would say like an animal was brought to the [HEBREW] to be killed. I couldn't believe that, that she had yelled. I said-- went to my mother, what-- what is it, mother? She was still hanging on the telephone. You know, these old telephone sets, you know? [GERMAN], My my brother was killed there. Couldn't believe it either. We couldn't believe it. I remember there was a man visiting us from-- also from Rieneck. I still remember that. And I remember it so distinctly. And so when my father came back from the railroad station, we already knew that my brother had been killed. He was very happy. He says, all the way back in the delegation of the-- I don't know, half of the community, there were maybe, I would say 18 men. About half of them, 10 of them, went to the railroad station to tell my father. He says, when I saw the people, I knew [NON-ENGLISH] is coming. He knew then. He knew, so-- but-- 
INT: Was the body released by the Germans? HK: Yeah. At that time, since they had just started, they were asked to release the body. My brother's body was released. However, it was established that the shots were not in the back, like when somebody wants to escape, but in the front. He had a number of shots in the front. So he was just put against the wall and shot. And there was not a-- there was a trial later. And they claimed they-- they-- that's what they said. And-- and I have archives here, a tremendous amount of archives. But one of the judges who was there, he says, they gave him all that information. Didn't believe it himself. But he had no proof. There were no other witnesses but these-- the people who-- who shot him. And they couldn't properly take care of that case. It came to a case. But well, he's buried-- he's buried in Nuremberg, in the Jewish cemetery. And I have a picture of his matzevah, of his-- [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] which-- which I have here, if you want to have a look at it. I can show it to you.  INT: Was there anybody present at his execution who later gave the story who-- rather could-- later could relate the story? HK: There were some-- there were some non-Jewish communists who were there at the time, who-- who told the story, to some degree. But the fourth man, a man by the name of Irving Kahn, wasn't killed right away. And he lived a number of days. And he gave, more or less, the description that they gave him. They told him, you Jewish swine. You Jewish sow, you should be killed. You shouldn't live. And terrible words, And and at first, they tortured them all. And he says, you'll get your due. Your due is coming, and terrible, terrible things. I-- and I have things like that in my archives, I have a whole big archive of my brother. And I became so upset about 10 years ago, that I made my own investigation, with the help of a-- of a Jewish convert, or a German who became a Jew. And we found information which is unbelievable, from-- through the archives, through Dachau, through the Munich archives, and through ways, other ways, where we see that-- that the people who killed him, and I wanted to get them after the war. But they were all killed. They were killed, all killed in the war. The first one, Epsonmueller, the worst of them, was killed in what they called the-- the War Against France, in May, 1940, the others later-- one on the Russian front, and one, I think, in Yugoslavia. 
INT: Your knowledge of Dachau, did it start with this incident? HK: Basically. Yeah, basically this was-- Martin Gilbert, who wrote the book on the Holocaust, I have it here, in page 36, describes information which the-- which a German gave to an Englishman and which was-- Lord Rumbold, I think, later published it.  INT: And what was the information you received? Was Dachau-- what was Dachau? HK: Dachau was a--  INT: Extermination camp? Or-- HK: No, Dachau was, at the time, a concentration camp, which means the people who-- who were supposed to-- supposedly enemies of the state, was to be collected. And depending on what they did, they either tortured them, killed them. Or later, or-- or some of them they let go. And most-- in fact, most of the non-Jews, were-- at the beginning anyhow, were let go. And it's a funny thing. On April, April the 1st was the boycott [NON-ENGLISH] in 1933. My-- my father's business was closed. Nevertheless, we had a man in SA uniform standing guard, no-- nobody should go into the store. And that man was an important functionary of the Communist Party before the-- the German-- [GERMAN] of Hitler, before Hitler took over.  INT: Now, this SA man, was he basically friendly and guarded the store? Or was he-- HK: No, he guarded the store. But he had nothing to do. Because nobody came in. He was standing there. No, we were-- he was not particularly friendly or unfriendly. He just stood there. But we all knew him. We all knew him from before. In a town like this you know most people, right, of any consequence. 
INT: Did you talk at home with your parents about Nazis taking over and what could happen in the future? HK: You see, I tell you, my father, [NON-ENGLISH] had the [NON-ENGLISH] from the First World War, the Iron Cross. He was a great German patriot. He could not believe it. He couldn't-- my father just could not, for the-- and he thought my brother shouldn't have been active against the Nazis. He says, we don't do that. You know, nice Jewish boys don't do that. You know? He didn't completely grasp it. Because we should have left right after that. You should have left. What we did is my-- my parents sent my sister, who was a wonderful person, to England, through that uncle. And she was a governess in Harrogate, by the [? reverend ?] Khan. That I still remember. And unfortunately, I had-- I mean, I had bar mitzvah. I must say unfortunately, because they should have never gone back. For my bar mitzvah, in February, 1934, she came back.  INT: Where was your bar mitzvah? In Gemünden? HK: In Gemünden am Main.  INT: Can you-- HK: Was a rather sad bar mitzvah. The kids always ask me.  INT: Can you remember the-- the bar mitzvah? HK: Oh, very well. Very well. I said-- I said the first [NON-ENGLISH]. You know? Here in America, people say the whole set, everything, first [NON-ENGLISH]. And you know, my-- my-- my sister, my brother-in-law, some of his family, my father's family, well, they're a small group together, maybe 20 people, 25. And-- but I remember, it was not a happy occasion. They all got together. But they're still in the [INAUDIBLE]. You know, this-- his year wasn't even up yet. 
INT: Do you remember other bar mitzvahs of your friends, in Gemünden? HK: No, I don't really. No. They-- very few were-- since they were younger, then, no, I-- I wasn't there. My brother's bar mitzvah, Lothar, was already in Frankfurt.  INT: So you said that your father couldn't really grasp the situation. Was there any talk at home about leaving? About possibility going to Palestine? HK: We were talking about-- my father's brother was a year younger than my father. Samuel had decided, in 1934, to emigrate to Palestine. And [? capital ?] affidavit. You know what there was? The certificate, if you had a lot of money, you could put the money in. And you are building a [NON-ENGLISH] for a moshav in Israel. He attached himself to the congregation Rexingen, who started the town which still exist today, Shavei Tzion. You've probably heard of it. And he went. But my father, no, didn't feel like going and so on. And anyhow, he was not-- the-- the-- the time when he really wanted to go was after Kristallnacht, you know, when he himself went to-- was sent to Buchenwald.  INT: Did your brothers who stayed who were still there, after one of your brother was killed-- HK: I don't--  INT: Did they think about leaving? HK: No, only-- only my-- myself and my younger brother. Otto, the-- the-- the third child, died in the First World War of whooping cough as a small child. He was not there. 
INT: And other members of the family, did anybody leave Germany? HK: None of my immediate family.  INT: What was your mother's opinion about staying? HK: My ma-- my mother, you know, like most people, ladies at the time, she came with my father. When he-- he felt it-- father was an extremely strong individual. And so she didn't make any-- any fuss about it, those either. However, however, when Kristallnacht came, we clamoured for American affidavits. Then-- then we knew. Kristallnacht, everybody knew. It's-- it's all over.  INT: When you get-- you went to school in the larger city, like Würzberg, for instance. Was there any more antisemitism there than you had-- HK: See, I didn't notice it too much. Because I went to a Jewish school there. [? Don't forget, ?] that's the first time I went to a Jewish school. I was happy in the environment. In fact, I'm still a member of ILBA, Israeli [NON-ENGLISH]. They still have reunions and I get together, even though I was a junior member. No, I didn't. No-- there was in the street there, yeah. The Nazis marched in there, you know? There was a big congress in 1935, in Nuremberg. It affected everybody.  INT: Did you wear a kippah at that time? HK: No cap, cap. We didn't wear kippahs, caps. Wear caps like I wear a cap now.  INT: Oh, regular caps. HK: Caps, yeah.  INT: Those were student caps that you wore? HK: Well, student caps. Well, yeah, yeah, we wore. 
INT: So there was no outside sign of the fact that you were Jewish? HK: Nobody wore, outside, a kippah. Nobody wore a kippah outside.  INT: And any street accidents with antisemitic students? HK: I do not remember, no. I don't think so. I would remember. No.  INT: And did you go back from your-- Würzberg, to Gemünden? HK: From Würzberg, went to Frankfurt, went to the yeshiva, in Frankfurt, yeshiva.  INT: Was it a large yeshiva? Or was it a small one? What kind-- HK: Oh, well, I would say the yeshiva had about, maybe 150 boys. I don't know what to call that.  INT: What was the language of study in the yeshiva? HK: German.  INT: There was no Yiddish whatsoever? HK: Deutsch. Yiddish I learned later, but not in-- not in Germany. The only who spoke Yiddish in-- in Germany were Polish Jews, mostly Polish Jews, who came from-- they had a small congregation in Frankfurt. And I think in the [NON-ENGLISH]. And I went there a few times. Didn't-- was totally-- sound-- sounded alien to us.  INT: We will stop now and go to the next tape.  INT: This is tape number two. I am interviewing Mr. Herbert Kahn. Was there any inkling that something like Kristallnacht is coming up, is going to happen? HK: We had no idea. In fact, after I left the Yeshiva in '37, I-- my father wanted me to learn and do something-- I went to a store which was being Aryan-ized by the name of Gustaf-- no, I'm sorry-- a wholesale firm, called [NON-ENGLISH], where I was a, a [NON-ENGLISH]-- what do you call that-- a apprentice. I was an apprentice, there-- and where I learned a few things about business. And the business was being transferred to the [NON-ENGLISH]. They made, mainly, dolls, but they wanted to get into that business, which was arranging toileting article, which is combs and, and scissors, and, and into, into, into it, [? too. ?] And so in-- on November the 9th, when I came home from work-- the, the office was on 38 [NON-ENGLISH]. And we lived on 38 [NON-ENGLISH]. It's about a walk of about 15 minutes. About after 10 minutes, I saw tremendous crowds-- mobs on the street-- calling-- kill the Jews, you know-- [NON-ENGLISH]. And I got frightened. And I saw they were going towards the house where my parents lived. So I said, that's not a good place for me to go. So I knew, I knew another family by the name of Heilbronn we were friendly with. I figured I'd go in there and see what's happening. So I went in there.
And at first, they didn't let me in, because they thought it was Nazis coming. But then they let me in. And the lady was very excited-- asked, what, what, what do I do, Herbert? I says, can I come in a minute? And they said, ah, we'll let you in. I said, I see your husband is here with these mobs around. Oh, they were here three times already in this house, and but he has a bum leg. He can't walk. And they showed from the doctor a certificate that he can't walk. They left him. They left him. The man there was not picked up. Oh, I said, that's very good that they, they were so nice. It could have been very dangerous. They said, oh, you can stay here. But I don't want to be seen, so I thought, what can I do-- under the bed, under the bed. Ooh, went under the bed. Really, 10 minutes later, they came, again, and said-- anybody else here, is there anybody else here? No, nobody here. They left again. It happened another two times. And I'm still under the, under that bed-- and I was pretty excited. And don't forget, I was already 17 years old. So after a while, it got very dark. We had a little meeting. I decided I can't do that to the people. I wasn't-- my mother, my parents were very upset where, whether I didn't come home. They'd think, maybe, I was arrested. They were arresting people. The order was to arrest every Jew they could find from the age of 16 and up. That was the order in Frankfurt. I don't know what it was in other towns. We had lived in Frankfurt at the time. And so here, I came in the house. And but before I went into the house, I was a little careful. The, the super of the building-- we were, they were friendly-- had a girl. The girl may have been 11, 12 years old, and she had a bicycle. I said-- would you do me a favor, go with the bicycle to my parents at 38 [NON-ENGLISH] and see what's happened. So she went and came back and reported that my mother was crying and yelling, upset that Herbert has disappeared, too, he never came back. And, and my-- and my father was taken-- didn't know where to-- was taken to the [NON-ENGLISH]. That's where they collected the Jews before sending them to a concentration camp. So I figured, it's high time for me. So I went. I walked. It wasn't too far. I walked there. The streets were deserted. And I came in-- oh, my mother was so happy to see me. My sister was happy. The little boy-- was born in '35-- he must have been 3 years old-- the little boy only said one word-- [NON-ENGLISH] was here, [NON-ENGLISH] was here. It turned out-- [NON-ENGLISH] was here-- I, I'm not going with you. He says, you riffraff, he told them-- I want police. I'm a a [NON-ENGLISH]-- showed him the Iron Cross, Iron Cross. They produced the policeman. They produced-- but it won't be a Nazi-- was a policeman. And he went with the [NON-ENGLISH]. My father ended up in Buchenwald, being a [NON-ENGLISH] in the Second World War with the Iron Cross, which had an inscription, there-- 
INT: In the First World War? HK: First World War. [NON-ENGLISH], which means thanks of the Fatherland is yours forever-- ends up in Buchenwald. I think, I think, if I remember correctly, my father and a number of people left there earlier, because they produced that. Later, nothing helped [? for it. ?] But they told him-- this Iron Cross document-- they told him, anyhow, we better leave, you better leave Germany, your days are numbered. So my mother, who had relatives-- two brothers and cousins in America-- they sent affidavits. The affidavits, the affidavits came in no time. We had affidavits. But in order to go to America, there was a German quota, [? yeah. ?] German, we have German citizens-- 25,000, though maybe 75,000 people had affidavits. The people got-- many German Jews had relatives in America. And so only 25,000 could go. We were not-- they had numbers. They give out numbers. We had a high number-- maybe 50,000 or so. So they said, if you can wait for your number in another country, you can go from there. Question is, how do we get to another country? So I was the first of the family to go, because the Yeshiva in Frankfurt, which-- where I was in close contact with-- had gotten a letter from the Yeshiva-- Talmudical College, right-- in, in England, called Gateshead. And they would take any boy who wants to learn and study-- would give him free board and-- bed and board. So I applied for that, right away, there, in-- after the November the 10th, maybe on the 15th. And I got a letter back at the, at the end of December, end of December, that I was accepted. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] I was accepted. Now, I had to get a visa-- all right, you can't just go away. So it was very hard to get an English visa. And you had just a letter, you know. It wasn't more than a letter. I was not documented. It was nothing. So they didn't want to give it to us. My mother, who was a very beautiful lady, went to the Consulate and talked to the Consul. Somehow, she [LAUGHS] succeeded in getting me a visa. So I got a visa and a German passport, which is-- had Herbert Israel Kahn, because my name was German, so they added Israel-- and with a swastika on it and Jude in it. I don't have it. I looked for it. I don't have it, anymore. But I got a passport. So I went to the British Consulate in Frankfurt. They put in a visa, and I left for England on January the 9th, 1939-- the first of our family to leave. And we decided we'd first get the men, because they were in great danger. My father was already in-- and my brother-in-law was still in Dachau. They had caught him later-- not that day, but later. And he was sent to Dachau. I think he was three months in Dachau. And through the help of the people where my sister was, they got a-- he got a, a visa, yeah. He had, he had a higher, much higher number than we had. But he had a visa to go to England. And he ended up, in March, I think, in Leeds, and stayed in England till the end of the war and until the English deported the enemy aliens-- the Jews-- to-- he, I think, ended up in Australia, somewhere-- was sent to Canada, and someday, arrested and put on the Isle of, Isle of Man. We-- my father, brother and myself-- left just about the time the Germans invaded France. 
INT: Anybody else from your family was arrested after Kristallnacht? HK: No. My brother-- they wanted to arrest my brother. That's interesting, because very tall. You know, he was born in 1921-- 1924, I'm born '21. So he was 14 years old. He looked like 18 or 19-- tall fellow, strong fellow. And they wanted to take him. So he showed them-- from a youth, Jewish youth organization-- I have mine, here-- but his-- and showed him that he's born. My mother, right away, went over and showed them-- we don't touch anyone who was 14, we have orders-- that's how they were at that time-- orders, it's orders-- 16, but we, we know you have another son. So what do we do, now? We-- it was decided we'd go up in the attic. We had, also, friendly relations with the super. And I stayed there for two weeks in the attic, where-- with all the trunks and bicycles, you know. And my brother bought me the food twice a day. And, and until they, finally, decided it's all off-- the [NON-ENGLISH] over.  INT: And they never came up to the attic to search [? for the children? ?] HK: No, they, they didn't. They didn't look in the attic. They looked in the apartments. They didn't. Now, maybe, in another place, they did. In that house, they didn't.  INT: Did you yourself see any burning synagogues-- HK: Yes.  INT: --or Jewish businesses? HK: Then, in the evening, they burned the synagogue, the big synagogue-- [NON-ENGLISH], where we used to go, where Beuer and his grandfather, [NON-ENGLISH] were the pillars of this community in Frankfurt-- it was absolutely the most beautiful synagogue I ever saw. They burned it down. But they didn't-- they, on the inside, basically, because they didn't want to burn too much, because the houses next to it would be affected. And but they did-- burned-- the inside was totally burned out. And we saw that. We lived in [NON-ENGLISH]. And the [NON-ENGLISH] was back to back. We saw it burning the whole night. Yes, in fact, my, my tallit and tefillin that my father and my-- everything was destroyed. 
INT: Did you see, in the street, any abusers, personal abusers, against Jews? HK: I didn't see it. I didn't. I didn't go out much, though. I must tell you, after Kristallnacht, I, I didn't dare to go out until I left Germany.  INT: At that time, was a visa to leave Germany sufficient to have somebody released from Buchenwald and from Dachau? HK: Yeah. Yes, they did that. They, they said, at the time, we will give you a lesson, now. You know, everybody knows why Kristallnacht started. You know? Do I have to repeat that, or everybody knows? The reason of Kristallnacht was-- given by the Nazis-- as follows-- there was a Jewish fellow Herschel Grynszpan, Herschel Grynszpan, who, whose parents were Polish Jews. And the Germans decided, earlier in the year-- I think it must have been March, [? 1930-- ?] to deport all the Polish Jews. They didn't, really-- they're not Germans, and they're not citizens. And they have no right to be. And they deported them into a town called [NON-ENGLISH] on the border. Now, the Germans got into [NON-ENGLISH] and the Polish wouldn't let them in-- why do we need these Jews, we have enough, we have 3 and 1/2 million Jews, we don't need any more Jews. So they were in a no man's land for a while. But some people, somehow, came back. Some people had connections in, in Poland or in other places. And some people went to other places. And some perished there. Herschel Grynszpan was a Polish Jew. His parents were deported to, to [NON-ENGLISH]. And he hadn't heard any more from them. So he made up his mind, in November, he's going to kill the German ambassador in, in France. So he left, and he was in Paris. He was a student, I believe. He went to the thing. And the ambassador wasn't there. So he killed the first German he saw-- it was a minor employee-- vom Rath was his name. After he killed him, the Nazis says-- see the Jews are, are-- they want to make a revolution, we've got to teach them a lesson. Every Jew, every Jew is responsible, yeah? And so they arrested all the German Jews from 16 up they could hold, they could get a hold of. 
INT: What happened to your two grandparents after Kristallnacht? HK: I think my-- I think my grandfather had already died. And the grandmother, I don't know if she-- she lived still in [NON-ENGLISH], and I think a, a, a cousin of mine-- Inge, took care of her. And they didn't do anything to her, but she came to, to England with us, also, and went to America, later. She's buried in America. I think she died in the '40s. I'm not sure exactly when-- '41 or '42.  INT: Anybody from your family, from your close family who stayed in Germany, were, were they deported? HK: Yeah, my, my, my father's youngest brother, Leopold, he was deported from Nuremberg-- lived in Nuremberg, also, with his wife and two sons. And his parents and a lot of other-- [NON-ENGLISH]. The only one who survived was Arnot, the one son, who lives in Tulsa, Oklahoma, now. And they were deported and were killed in, if I remember correctly, in Riga.  INT: What was the reason that your family left from, moved from Gemunden to Frankfurt am Main? HK: Yeah, it was very, very difficult. It became very difficult. My-- they pressured my father to sell his business. He had a very good business. He found a man by the name of Kunrad-- not, not, actually, a bad guy-- but he gave it to-- He sold it to him for next to nothing-- the business, you know, that we lived on, till we left Germany. And, and after the war, my father, you know, started again. And he, they lived-- my mother and he-- lived on restitution from that business after the war. But at the time, we left, penniless, Germany. My father was-- how shall I say-- [NON-ENGLISH]. In America, this-- he made a good living, right-- and was a pauper-- come to America with nothing. 
INT: When you left Germany for England, what did you take with you? How, how did you leave? HK: No, I left with just my clothing and, and some books and some-- nothing. Very little-- one satchel I took with me.  INT: Was there any problem crossing the borders with your documentation? HK: No, from, from Holland I went-- from, from Holland I went with the boat to, to England. And no. I had to show my passport in, in the train that we crossed the border. It was-- everything was in order. I had a passport, and I had a visa.  INT: When did you arrive in England? HK: January 9th, 1939. And the next day was my father's birthday, like today, January 10th. It was the evening. I, I-- we wrote him and said, we're here, now. And I think on the 10th, we notified them-- [? that was me. ?]  INT: Did you any, did you know any English when you arrived in England? HK: Very little.  INT: How did you pick it up? What was the-- HK: We, we had to-- we had some lessons. We had some lessons. I think my sister taught us a little, because she had been. And the governess, there in England, she knew, knew English. In fact, there's a lady in Riverdale who says, when she was in [NON-ENGLISH], later, she got English lessons from my sister. She speaks about my sister, today.  INT: Where did you stay in, in England after your arrival? HK: The older-- the one brother of my mother who was an international businessman had already established, also, a business in England. And but he was not a citizen, you know. He couldn't-- he's an alien, resident alien. He-- yeah, I think he picked me up. And we stayed a few days with him. And then I went to Gateshead. He was a bachelor. He wasn't married. So I went to Gateshead from there. He, maybe, have given me some, some money, probably. 
INT: And that was a dormitory-style Yeshiva? HK: Dormitory-style-- very, very poor. I've never, in my life, seen such a poor establishment. They were, these were Russian, Lithuanian Jews who wanted to continue Torah in England the way they knew. And they didn't see eye to eye with the chief rabbi, who, at the time, was [NON-ENGLISH]. And they didn't get any money from them. He says-- we don't need you, we don't want you. So they, they-- the little money they had was gone. So we ate-- potatoes we ate most of the time. Bread, water, and-- Shabbat, they didn't have enough money to make Shabbat. So I was one of the boys who was sent to Sunderland, another town. Somebody picked me up before to a religious family. And Shabbat I spent there most of the, most, most of the time, there. And then we came back to Gateshead. Today, the Yeshiva has over 400 boys. It's the biggest Jewish institution of its nature in Europe. And I, about four weeks ago, attended a reunion of the Yeshiva, but I was the-- I was a very old guy, there, the old one. [LAUGHS]  INT: What was the language of instruction in the Yeshiva? HK: Yiddish. They didn't speak German. So in three months, I had to learn Yiddish. And I speak [NON-ENGLISH] Yiddish, today. And I never forgot it.  INT: Was there any problem-- you being a German Jew, and Yeshiva being Eastern European? HK: Actually, most of the boys at the Yeshiva were German Jews, I must tell you. There were a few English, maybe two or three. And there were some Polish and some Hungarian and some Russian. But the bulk of the persons, at the time, were German Jewish boys, who I met there. One is a very important man in Israel, there-- Ze'ev Lev. His name was [NON-ENGLISH]. I still remember when he came. He was the head the Jerusalem College of Technology and all kinds of enterprises. He is, now, attached to the Hebrew University. People like that-- he, he came with the, the short pants. I still remember when he came-- in a Kindertransport, which I didn't come. And he, within a year, he was in the top [? tier. ?] He was in the top class-- a brilliant young man. 
INT: Did you talk in the Yeshiva about the possibility of war coming? HK: No.  INT: What was the-- what, what did you hear about it? HK: It was a possibility that they can't, you can't live-- after, after first, came the Anschluss with Austria. Then it came Sudetenland. Then they took over, they took over Czechoslovakia, right? They're not satisfied with that. And they're very-- how it's going to come, how it's going to work, you know, it's-- they, they've worked out some kind of a-- they, also-- some fake thing in, in Danzig. And then they took over Poland. And that--  INT: But was there full realization in the Yeshiva what is happening out, outside in the secular world? HK: They knew what was happening in the secular world. But the, the [NON-ENGLISH]-- was a brilliant man, otherwise-- he didn't, didn't interest himself, himself so much in that. And I remember he once made a remark to me, he said-- [NON-ENGLISH]. English, he called it [NON-ENGLISH]. And I told him, you're making a mistake. I told him-- you make a mistake, you live in a country, you have to learn the language. And he later came to America. He had a son, a hemophiliac. And I helped him a little bit. He said, [NON-ENGLISH]. He said, you were right, I should have learned English. Anyhow, they-- the, the teachers, you know, spoke only Yiddish.  INT: And did you intend to stay in England? HK: No. We wanted to go. As soon as our number was up for America, we wanted to go to America. We didn't-- we had only, had a little-- that visa had to be renewed every six months, I think. There, really, was not a way for us to stay. 
INT: How did your parents make a living in England? What-- how did they manage? HK: They'd make a living. The uncle-- you know, that uncle, there, who had a factory, actually, and had my father and my brother-- I think my mother, also. He let them work-- some illegal, totally illegal-- because you were not supposed to work in England or take away the jobs from the English. But I'll tell you why I, personally, have no use for the English. This uncle, who employed, maybe, 150 people and did everything for the-- for the population-- was deported, believe it or not, in May, after May, 1940-- after the invasion of France-- as an enemy alien to Australia. Once they found out that the man-- they, they told him, I, I give-- give a livelihood to English people-- they sent him back on a boat. That boat was torpedoed. They, obviously, went in a convoy. I think 700 Jews were-- the boat sank. The boat sank. The, the lifeboats, however, where the English sailors went on, and one Jew, who was in the bathroom-- this torpedo hit him, hit this fellow, and he was ejected out, in, into one of the-- they took him along. And he told the story. He, this uncle, was killed in, in 1941. My grandmother never knew. We never told her that, that-- [? Moritz ?] was [NON-ENGLISH], was [NON-ENGLISH].  INT: So he was killed, actually, on his way to Australia? HK: Back from Australia. 
INT: Back from Australia? HK: They had picked out 700 people who they felt-- they, after they investigated, interrogated. I don't know-- this is not, really, in-- this is-- with us, the guy who was there, they let him go. And he had a factory. Somebody took over, in the meantime-- back.  INT: And when did your visa number or affidavit number came, come up? HK: So in, in March, 1940, our affidavit, the number-- I can't remember the number-- was up. And we could go to America.  INT: Before you leave, did you see any bombing? Did you go through any of the Blitzkrieg? HK: Just before. The [? came in-- ?] it was before. It was before our time.  INT: So while you were in England, there was no-- HK: Comparatively. There was [NON-ENGLISH]. You remember that-- [NON-ENGLISH], quiet.  INT: How did you leave England for, for the United States? HK: We left in a boat, called the SS And we arrived in the middle of April. The [NON-ENGLISH] of Pesach, we arrived in New York, in the harbor. And we got off the boat. And the HIAS, who took care of refugees, at the time, who arrived with boats, put us up in a hotel. I don't think the hotel exists, anymore. And we stayed there the first two days. But I was very unhappy with the set-up, there, because they took pictures of us all the time and all kinds of-- you know, the newspapers were full with these refugees arriving, and-- And at that time, we had no, we had no yontif really, there. So after-- the first day [? there, ?] my brother and I went-- and with our little English-- went in the subway and went to Williamsburg, which was not what Williamsburg is today. And there, we had a letter from Mr. Rosenheim, who was the head of the [NON-ENGLISH] Movement to a Mr. Mike Tress. And I have his book, here, a book about him. He was an unusual individual. He-- all he wanted to do is help Jews-- bring them here, help them. So he said-- there is a man, because my, my [NON-ENGLISH] was not religious-- he said, this is a man you can see. So we found him-- the man who [NON-ENGLISH] us I had known from Germany. He was there before. I said, I says-- Mr. Mike Tress, I have a letter to you from Mr. Rosen. He says, do you know Mr. Rosen? He couldn't believe we knew the man. I says, yeah. And from that time on, we didn't have to worry. He-- I got a job with a person who was a friend of his. It was close to [? Shabbat. ?] And my brother found himself another job as a tool and die maker, which he had learned in Germany. He was very good at it. And first, you know, [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] when, when he, when he did the work, he had difficulties. He went-- they didn't want to let him go, on Friday, early-- you know, like, now, on Friday, early. So my mother said to him-- listen, it's the one way-- we, too, we, we can do it. He, he-- but he like the way he worked-- he was very good. I said, I'll make up for these few hours. I remembered his name a long time-- he was a very bright guy-- says, no. And I was there and worked with him until the army, till I got in the army. 
INT: And what did you work? You said you got a job, immediately. HK: I got a job. I got a job with a man-- Sife, Abraham Sife. [? US ?] [? Style ?] Stitching and Pleating Company. What they did is-- he, he, he took garments, you know, and pleated them. And it was quite primitive to-- for big, for big places. And I had to do-- I would take the thing, put in, your pleat put it into such a roll and put it into the oven-- whatever you call that. And this was my job.  INT: Where did you live, at the time? HK: We, we lived in-- my parents got an apartment in Inwood. That's higher from, from Washington Heights in 103 [INAUDIBLE] Avenue. I don't know if you know the area. But it was quite a distance to-- we wanted to go to the Beuer shul [INAUDIBLE] Yeshiva. But Beuer said, why don't you come here, we have so many people. So we walked [NON-ENGLISH]. My brother and I walked from there. It's about 40 minutes to [? Bennett ?] Avenue from there. But my parents, also, wanted to move closer. So when we were in the army, when we were in the army, they moved to Wadsworth Avenue. That's where we lived afterwards. That's already Washington Heights-- 187th Street and Wadsworth Avenue.  INT: While you were working, did you do-- did you have any education? Did you further your education here in the United States? HK: My education, I, basically, must tell you, is I went to night school. And I went to a, a continued learning Talmud on a regular basis. In night school, I learned certain English better. And even though when I came to the army, my English was still quite poor. It was not so good yet. 
INT: Did you volunteer for the army? Or were you induced? HK: No, What they did is the, the Americans inducted, also, aliens. But there were various ways to get out of it, because we were not citizens. I could have, for example, gotten out very easily, if I wanted to, because I was a student, Talmud student, as a rabbinical student. But both my brother and I felt this is a war-- if there ever was a war for the Jews to participate, this is the war. There were 1/2 million Jews in the American Army-- much larger than the percentage of the regular population, probably almost 10% of the population. So we didn't feel like that. And my father who lost already two children was very upset. Nevertheless, he encouraged us, also, to go to the army. I was inducted on December 31, 1942.  INT: Was your brother inducted at the same time? HK: No, later, later. My brother was younger. He was inducted later.  INT: Where was your induction? HK: Induction-- you mean, I was, actually, taken into the army in Grand Central Plaza. They, they, they told me, there, that I was being accepted. But the induction, actually, was in Fort Dix, New Jersey. It was a week later, because they gave us a week off after that-- the 7th of January, 1943.  INT: And from Fort Dix? HK: Fort Dix-- I went to basic training in Fort McClellan, Alabama-- different world. 
INT: In what respect? HK: You know, well, I'll just, I'll tell you what, what, what, what really made me feel terrible. I was an American soldier in an American soldier's uniform. And when you walked on the, on the pavement, on the, on the street. And where the pavement-- yeah-- and, and, and what they called, at the time, colored-- you know, today, we call them black person-- came, they had to go in the gutter. And this, that shook me up, really shook me up. I couldn't believe that it was all changed like that, you know. No, no colored people were taken into the regular army-- only, not in the infantry or artillery-- not in the fighting army-- only into, into other units, you know. And all that, it-- that shook, shook me a lot. It shook, shook me up. I couldn't believe it. Anyhow, that could pass-- that it would-- eh-- yeah, I was still glad to be in America, right? After that, we went to Fort-- I went to Fort Custer, Michigan. I saw a bit of the United States while I was in the army. Fort Custer, Michigan-- and I have, actually, a picture, here. I went to an infiltration course, there. From Fort Custer, Michigan, I went to Camp Breckinridge, Kentucky-- another, another additional service. And we went-- finally, we ended up-- oh, yeah, and they told us-- since I was limited service-- I was taken with very poor eyesight, very poor. And the gas mask didn't fit properly. They-- I thought-- they, they told me you will have a big red LS on your papers. You, you are not accepted. But I found LS meant limited service, limited service. 
INT: We will break now and move to the next tape. HK: Was it clear?  INT: This is tape number three. I'm interviewing Mr. Herbert Kahn. During your basic training, did you see any antisemitism? Did you meet any antisemitism personally? HK: No.  INT: As a Jewish boy from New York at that time, what was the attitude of the, of the rest of the inductees? HK: I always felt they were very happy that people like myself are in the Army. And they, they-- I told them about my experiences there, in Germany.  INT: And how did you find, personally, people that you got now for the first time in contact with? HK: I think I found it very good. I had a little problem. And that is I, I was a religious Jew, wanting to put on tefillin every day, you know, the phylacteries. And while they didn't object to it, the man comes over to me once-- and I did that very early in the morning for about 10 minutes-- he says, Herbert, tell me something, I have also problems, could you take my blood pressure? So, [LAUGHS] so I told him, it's not blood pressure, it's this. I had absolutely no problem with it. And while I ate in the Army what you had to eat in the Army, I never ate any meat for three years. I had no meat. And I had, you know, vegetables and fruits and everything like that. But meat I did not eat. 
INT: After basic training, what kind of special areas did you get into in the Army? HK: Well, in Camp, Camp Ritchie, Maryland-- that was a training camp for intelligence service, intelligence service-- they felt that this-- before I went overseas-- I forgot to tell you that-- they thought I, I probably have not such a bad IQ and I speak German. That could be used successfully, and they suggested that I become a person who interrogates prisoners of war.  INT: Was there a special training for that? HK: There was a training for that, yeah.  INT: What kind of training? What, what did they teach you? HK: Oh, they told you how the-- how, how to behave, how to ask, how to, how to interrogate a person, how to-- like you're doing it today-- [LAUGHS] interview people. That actually sounds better-- interview people. And you know, what I have to watch out for, what you have to discard, what you, what you think is correct, and so on.  INT: That intelligence training-- were there Americans too, or mostly refugees? HK: There were Americans. There were also Americans. I'll tell you, the Americans were intelligent Americans, but I always found that the German they spoke-- always found that it wasn't the real German, you know. It was the German you learned in school, but it's not the same as someone who grew up with the language. And I found that later, again and again. We were together mostly, mostly, mostly German Jews, but we had a number of Americans. And one man, a very intelligent man, a very-- not a Jewish fellow-- from Madison, Wisconsin, and he, when he tried his interrogation on prisoners, they didn't understand him. So he comes to me and says, Herbert, these Krauts don't speak German. [LAUGHS] You know Krauts? They called the Germans Krauts-- you heard that expression? He says, many of the Krauts don't speak German. I says-- you, you think you speak German, but it is not such a good German, because you speak High German. For example, in Germany-- in Hamburg and Hanover, the very educated say [SPEAKING GERMAN]. The regular in Germany, usually-- the rest of Germany say not SP, but shpit-- [GERMAN] And you speak to them like that the-- many words. And then some of them with grammatically wrong [? with that. ?] He says, Herbert, I was a professor already-- he was older than we were, he was about 10 years older-- University of Wisconsin, and I wanted to be in that war so badly. And you tell me I don't speak-- I say, I didn't say you don't speak German, but you don't speak a German which these prisoners understand, they're mostly farmers, plain workers, they, they don't speak any High German. So I tell you, the, the Americans who learned German-- unfortunately, one thing America made a big mistake-- not enough people learned foreign languages. That goes both for German and Japanese. And unless we were around, the German Jews, we had Germans sometimes interpreting and telling them totally different things. I once heard it, you know-- things which were good for them, but not, but not for the Americans. They'd tell them stories which were not true. So we, naturally, could, could tell them, this is not-- that's not really what the guy said. 
INT: When were you shipped over to Europe? HK: So I was here in America in 1943. It-- in the beginning of 1944. I was only in American Army 19-- beginning of 1944 to England.  INT: Which unit were you attached to at that time? HK: The number was 440, unit 440. And it-- we arrived, I think, near Evesham, southern England. There were already a lot of Americans there when we came. Some people we were training for the invasion, yeah, including my brother, younger brother. And there were a lot of black people there, a lot in these small towns. They were Supply Corps. They were getting the boats over with the supplies for the Army, you know-- were not, they were not combat units. And you know, as in the Army, the girls in these towns, you know, they're-- don't forget, the, the British were in the war since 1939. We are talking about '44. And their-- some of the husbands hadn't come home in years, you know. So they'd get friendly with the black people. Some of them had babies, also, with the black people. So when the white soldiers came, they-- the girls in these little towns, you know, little town-- so I-- once, a guy-- I asked him, I says why, tell me something, why, why are are you-- Oh, he says, you are not the real Americans, these are the real Americans. So they told them they are the American Indians, you know. After a while, you know, the Southerners cleared them up, you know. They did. But anyhow, this was the first impression I had of American soldiers in England. And from Evesham, I was transferred then to, to the north, and I end up in a camp near Ayr-- A-Y-R. This is a-- there was the Air Force very dominant. And interesting enough, I, I visited-- my yeshiva in Gateshead was right near there. And they gave me a hero's welcome, because at that time, naturally, there was the Blitz on for a while already. And they, they are afraid the Germans are coming to England, still, still at that time in '44. 
INT: That unit, 440, was it an infantry unit? HK: It was attached to the infantry, but not-- it was in the back, you know.  INT: And from England, when did you get to the mainland? HK: So in England, the invasion started on the 6th of June, 1944. I would say I got to England about end of August. I was not with the, where the [? front ?] camp was. I was not with the, with the-- I was not with the infantry. [INAUDIBLE] a mistake. Were groups in the back, you know, interrogating prisoners after they had been taken. In Germany, we were closer to the front, later. But in, in France, we were-- we disembarked in Cherbourg, which was taken at that time. Invasion started in June, July, over-- yeah, three days. It took about three months, the, the Cherbourg Harbor was taken. I think it was in August. Maybe it was in September. And there was a tremendous prison camp there-- the, the Germans from the Normandy invasion and from the areas around it, which the Americans had captured. And we had a-- quite a job. We had to, at the same time, do guard duty also, because there were not so-- there were a lot of Germans, and we were not so many. In fact, there was a while where we were very upset, because, you know, the Germans made one more counter attack. They-- read it from the history books. It's called the Rundstedt Offensive. When Rundstedt started to go-- to, to push the Americans back, especially in Belgium. Belgium was a front-- Malmedy you know, that famous story of [? McAuliffe, ?] who said-- when he said, give up, you are surrounded on all sides, he said, nuts. And they somehow got him out. And then-- and then out. They said the rumor was that the Germans are sending paratroopers into the prison camp. And they get back, I don't know, 100,000 prisoners. And they have more-- but that never, never materialized. It never went so far. 
INT: And though, where was the first place that you actually interrogated German PWOs? HK: In, in, in-- actually, in England. In England-- flyers, Air Force flyers who were shot-- been shot down. And then in Germany some.  INT: What was the thrust of the interrogation-- to find war criminals or to get military information? HK: For-- to get as much information as you can. But the one interview which I'd like to tell you is towards the end of the war. At that time, we were in Germany. I was in-- stationed in Mannheim, Germany. You heard of Mannheim-- on one side of the river? And the other side is Ludwigshafen. And incidentally, this, this-- the towns were almost totally destroyed by the American Air Force. And there was hardly anything standing with the exception of one big building. A tremendous building was standing. It was the IG Farben headquarters-- you know, the big chemical combine headquarters. And the rumor was that Eisenhower gave strict orders not to destroy that building, because he wants the Supreme Headquarters-- Allied Expedition will go there-- [NON-ENGLISH], it was called. And that's what happened. This, this was standing. Everything else was basically destroyed. Now, the modern Mannheim was, was built like Manhattan. They say it was-- it was an American architect who built it, which means it's the easiest town to find your-- there's no town in the world easier to find your way than Manhattan, yeah? Numbers and streets and avenues? I-- we are living on 246th Street. That still goes from number 1 Street in New York. And, and then you have to remember a few avenues, a few numbers. And others, you have to remember a few presidents. They had something similar in, in Mannheim. So I, I tell you that, because we could look down Mannheim, about 40 blocks, and there wasn't a house standing. However, a week after the war was over, the Germans had already put the rubbish to the side. You could look already through. Again, this American friend of mine, this non-Jewish fellow, said to me, Herbert, you can see? In France, we were there for six months in France, right? There's still the garbage all over the place, in Saint-Lo, in [FRENCH], all these towns. Even in Cherbourg, what did they do, what did they, what did they-- so he said to me, see, the Germans are going to-- says, they're going to-- after the war, they're going to-- he said that, at the time. He said, well, how do you feel about it? So I said, I'll tell you something-- my opinion on the matter. To be orderly, and to be strict and punctual, and all this, it's all fine.
It always depends what you do with it. You know, this is a very famous memory-- in my [INAUDIBLE] saying, it's not the item in service, it's what you do with it. If you use that to find every Jew, like they found me, they found my-- found my, my brother-in-law, they find my father-- you know, every number, every address, and everything is down-- and you kill the people, that's the worst thing you could do, right? That's what they did. If you use that to, to help people, to organize welfare, to do-- this is a wonderful thing. And that's what, what I told him. I said, at the time, that's what they do. Now, we have to find these war criminals. So coming to the story-- in Mannheim, everything was destroyed. And the German prisoners in Mannheim, we got them by the thousands. They came from the Russian front. They all wanted to go to the-- call the [? amis-- ?] our friends, there, in [NON-ENGLISH] There was a-- we, we got-- in order to formally interrogate a prisoner, we tried to get his Soldbuch. Soldbuch is a book like American passport. You know, American passport? This looked like an American passport. And in that passport, or Soldbuch-- I mean, this was a book which showed-- to, that you should get your, your pay every week. You had to show your whole army history from the time you were-- joined the army, either volunteer or inducted, until today. The Germans had strict orders-- I saw the order-- if you are in danger of becoming a prisoner, you destroyed, you buried, you, you're not supposed to be taken-- they can get all the information from you. Comes March or April, 1945, nobody anymore destroyed it. I once asked a German, why didn't you do it? Earlier already, they didn't do it-- last six months before the war was over, I think. So the war is over. The guy told me-- one fellow told me, listen, [NON-ENGLISH]-- I was a Sergeant, he saluted me-- the war is over, we have lost the war. However, after the war-- like after the First World War-- there comes again a new government, and they want to know how long you were in the army, and you get a pension. And so it happened. They had-- they had their record with them, because, maybe, maybe, the headquarters are destroyed, maybe-- they have it with them. So the-- everybody from, from, from private to the general, they had-- A man was brought in front of me who looked very bedraggled. I think he must have been maybe 65. He looked like 90, because it had rained for two weeks, and they slept in pup tents, and he wasn't used to that, right? Comes in front of me, and I-- first thing I says to the, said to the guy-- the [NON-ENGLISH], this guard-- said, give me the Soldbuch.
I look in his Soldbuch. It says-- Buchenwald, Dachau-- agh, I don't remember all the names-- terrible, terrible. And joined the party in 1930, I believe, and the [? Waffen-SS ?] in 19-- I don't know, early '35. And he was an obersturmbannfuhrer in the Waffen-SS. The Waffen-SS was the elite corps. And they are very cruel, also. They had their own nomenclature, you know. The rest of the armies of Europe-- you will go by the Napoleonic Order of Battle. In England, you call it a Lieutenant General. In German, you call it [? General ?] [? Orden. ?] It's the same. You know, we call it General, Brigadier General, General Brigadier. The nomenclature-- just this one thing, I will tell you-- Obersturmbannfuhrer, well, this was the equivalent of a Lieutenant General. I mean, this was not just a little guy. Now, he looked-- he looked like a [INAUDIBLE], you know, but he wasn't. So I got really mad at the way, when he-- when he started coming in then. And then that-- in the German Army, you have to salute from corporal up. In the American Army, you only have to salute from Second Lieutenant up. And you have your thing from Washington. But the German Army, you know, where it was [NON-ENGLISH], the thing. So attention in English is achtung in German. Achtung, right? And at ease in English is [GERMAN] in German. So first of all, I, I let him stand at attention. He stood there the whole time like this, you know-- He, he couldn't-- but he-- then he made like this, with the hand. I said, what, what, [GERMAN] what, what do you want, what do you-- Then he says-- [SPEAKING GERMAN]. Before you interrogate me, I want to tell you something. I said-- I know this is stupid, probably-- I said to myself, maybe-- my sister, we knew, was deported to Lodz, but we haven't heard of her. And I thought, let's see-- maybe, the man-- he wasn't in Lodz, but-- So he said the following-- I tell you, I remember it in my ears, here-- I forgot the name of the man, but I remember that-- [SPEAKING GERMAN]. I come from Berlin, which is true, it was in his thing where he was born, Berlin. [SPEAKING GERMAN]. His best friends were Jewish-- I mean, all the time, yeah? When I heard that, you know, I got so sick, I couldn't-- I couldn't see him anymore, I couldn't listen to him anymore. I said, up, up, up. And the people who brought him in-- we used Germans to bring in these guys. There was a, was a German [GERMAN], you know, who couldn't stand the SS.
You must understand-- there was a big-- how shall I say-- the SS was hated by the Army. And the army [? vice versa. ?] And when he-- when he had his thing-- [NON-ENGLISH]-- called him all kinds of names-- [GERMAN]-- I was finished for the rest of day. I couldn't-- I couldn't function, anymore. But, but we, we recommended him-- we made a whole dossier on that. I think nothing happened with him. He maybe died afterwards. He looked sick to me, also. Anyhow, this was an encounter I will never forget. Then, then, in my Army days, you know-- on May the 8th, the war was over. Shortly afterwards, the war was over. And they said-- they said that the people who have been at the front, like my brother, younger brother, [NON-ENGLISH]-- he was put into military government in Bamberg. But I, I was, was-- they said whoever didn't see any kind of fights or anything of consequence goes to Japan now. And the-- and the slogan was 'Golden Gate by '48.' Now, as the Americans figured, of course, it takes us another three years to finish off the Japanese. We didn't know about the atom bomb, right? And so I was very upset, you know-- Japan. I was already in the Army 2 and 1/2 years. So my brother said, why don't you come to Bamberg. I'm in a military government. Actually, from-- I was back in France again, at [NON-ENGLISH] and another camp near [? Le Havre. ?] The first transport of German prisoners were released-- Social Democrats, Communists, whatever they were. And they're going in a convoy, and the-- in charge of the convoy was a Protestant Chaplain-- a very nice man by the [? name of Adams. ?] I remember his name. So I volunteered. They didn't speak German, you know-- I know some, as a-- as a German interpreter. So I went to Bamberg. It must have been-- what was it, May, June, probably July-- a few months later. And I come to Bamberg. And my brother introduced me to the military governor. And he said, this is my brother, he speaks-- an interrogator, he speaks well. Ah, it's very nice-- he was a southerner, the guy. He says, Mr. Kahn, you know, your brother is good enough where we don't need any other, any other interpreters, I don't-- can't use you, I'm sorry, I have no-- if he would have requested me, I could have gone. But I-- you know, you didn't, I didn't. So anyhow, we're upset. We're waiting to get ready for Japan. And in August, I think August 8th, or-- they dropped the atomic bomb, first on Hiroshima, then Nagasaki. And the war was over. And then we had to just wait for boats to come back. I came back, finally, in December, 1945. 
INT: Did you have any encounters with prisoners based the concentration camps? HK: I did not personally.  INT: Did you visit any after the liberation? HK: I did not. I did not. I didn't, couldn't stomach it. I didn't do it.  INT: Did you meet any people who came out of the concentration camps? HK: Yeah, yeah. Yeah, I did meet people, especially my cousin. I had forgotten before-- my mother also lost a sister. My mother lost a sister in-- also, killed in Riga. These people were transported to Riga. And they had a daughter and a son. The son got out of Germany earlier, went-- was fighting with the Jewish Brigade in Dunkirk, came back after the war to Israel and, and was killed in an accident in Israel. His name was Walter, Walter. And Oppenheimer was was the name. And Inge went to the camps. And I met her a bit later. But my brother Lothar, who was in Bamberg with the military government, got a letter from my mother. She read in the is a German Jewish paper. It was very well read. Today, not too many people read it. And it said in there-- they always gave names of people who came out from concentration camps. She says, Betta Oppenheimer arrived in Wurzburg in old age home. That's where they collected the Jews. My mother sent it to him immediately. And the next week, my brother takes a Jeep. He has a Jeep there. And he goes to-- he goes to Wurzburg in the old age home and asked for a Miss Betta Oppenheimer. There was no Betta Oppenheimer there. They look. She's not there. Oh-- so, so we was ready to leave. He says-- and a young woman calls him from up-- from upstairs and says, [? Kahn, ?] [? Kahn-- ?] [GERMAN] [? Kahn, ?] you're looking for a Betta Oppenheimer, Betta Oppenheimer did not get out. This is not-- we went to Cologne, this was not-- but her daughter is here, Inge Oppenheimer. My brother couldn't believe it. He produced Inge Oppenheimer. [INAUDIBLE]. She tells the story. She didn't believe it. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] [DRINKS] Then she said, this cannot-- this cannot be my cousin. My brother was 6 foot 2. [? Imagine ?] a soldier. In '45, he was how old? He was 21-years-old, you know. And anyhow, he found her there. And she had just come before from, from the camps, you know. They're coming with truckloads from camps. And she said she still had the, the [? schmattas ?] on and so. Put her up immediately in Bamberg. So took, took her out. And then another-- and then her friend, who later lived in Riverdale-- she just passed away a while ago. And, and that's the beginning of Inge. Inge lives, today in, in Tel Aviv. And thank God, she's doing all right. I mean, her husband died a number of years ago. But she is-- we're very close with her. 
INT: Did you have any contact in Germany, while as an American soldier, with the German civilian population? HK: No. I did not have any contact. My brother had.  INT: Was it not allowed to have a contact, or-- HK: Well, there wasn't this thing that's called fraternization. You were not supposed to fraternize-- that first, the first month, first six months or so-- unless you were going after Nazis, you know, like my brother did. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] My brother ferreted out the Secretary of the military government who was-- he spoke German. You know, as I say, [INAUDIBLE]-- that she was the head of the [? Bund Deutscher Madel ?] of the Nazi Party in Bamberg-- the woman. And he told the Governor. And he [? says to him-- ?] oh, Kahn, you are crazy, she is not, she's a nice person. I says, if you don't-- if you don't do it, I'll have to report you. You know, he, he finally got rid of my brother, and he let, had her, let her go. I don't know what they did with her, but she was big in the Nazi Party. [? Bund Deutscher Madel ?] was the organization, like Hitler Youth, you know. Anyhow-- but I didn't, personally, did not have anything to do with that. It was-- I was strictly in the Army. I was-- never got into military government. And we were-- finally, we got our first vacation after that. Didn't-- no vacation for almost three years [? then. ?] And went to France, took a vacation on the Riviera. And when my number was up-- because again, you had to wait, like, almost like for an affidavit, you did. The boats-- they all came by boats, you know. People didn't go-- they had only so many boats. It took them a year to collect the people in England before the invasions, or-- I got out in-- in December I got out. 
INT: While in Europe, did you visit your hometown after the war? HK: I didn't visit the town at the time. My brother did. My brother did, because I-- officially, I was not in the area. My brother was not far from there. And I didn't, somehow, make a special case of it. However, after the war, I did visit the town. After the war I did. In fact, my wife went with me.  INT: When were you shipped back from the United States to-- from Europe to the United States? HK: In, in-- it was in, probably, in the beginning of December. I arrived in America December 20, and was discharged maybe end of November. They took a few weeks, you know. It-- we came in big convoys. You could--  INT: That's '46, 1946? HK: 1945.  INT: '45. And did they demobilize you immediately? HK: Right away, right away, they did. Well, they had too many people in the Army. They had millions of people and they didn't know what to do with them. The war was over.  INT: What did you do after being demobilized? HK: What did I do? I first got a job, a job in another textile firm in '46. And when I got engaged in '47, I joined my father-in-law. He had a big textile firm, my wife's father, in-- and where I was, then, for eight years, until I went in the wine business from '47 till '55. 
INT: Where did you meet your wife? HK: In the synagogue. We, we were, were religious Jews. We went to the [NON-ENGLISH] Synagogue. And I was still active in, in a shul. And so after shul and after synagogue, you meet-- boy meets girl. And also, I was in a youth organization, [NON-ENGLISH] Youth Organization. In German, [NON-ENGLISH] was different from the Williamsburg [NON-ENGLISH], for example, you know. So we had affairs-- boys sits on one side, girls on the other side. But we had affairs together. I remember that I somehow ended up once-- we were collecting for [NON-ENGLISH], which was the organization which, which collected funds for Israel, you know-- those [? pushkes ?] with-- we went in the street, there in New York. It was fun, you know. And Ellen, Ellen collected the most, I remember. And there, we had-- walked together. You know, not hand in hand, but we walked together. And in the synagogue, we met afterwards. And somehow, I liked my wife better than all-- any of the other girls who were much older. My wife was much younger than the others. So we, we got engaged in, in February, 1947, and married on June 1, 1947, which makes us 50 years married on the 1st of June.  INT: Is your wife a survivor, too? HK: No. My wife is a story by herself. The parents were vacationing in Switzerland, where the [NON-ENGLISH] was. And my mother-in-law-- one of the very few who had gone back to Germany. She is not-- my father-in-law went back, finished the business-- did this, did that. But they were all saved through her. They went from there to Holland, from Holland-- from Alsace-Lorraine to-- from, from Switzerland, they couldn't get a thing. Alsace-Lorraine, then to Holland, and then to England. 
INT: And-- HK: England to America-- they, they were safe.  INT: Their-- and her family? Any of her family was-- HK: Her brother-- she had one brother who, who was put in a concentration camp in Bergen-Belsen and was exchanged. It was the, the German Templers, of all people, to come to what was then Palestine. And they get-- they got these papers-- these papers they had, because they had a [NON-ENGLISH], Remember before, before the [NON-ENGLISH] Mandate, the Turks were running the country, right. And if you could prove you had such a [NON-ENGLISH], which, which was-- which they had bought a piece of property. At that time, they could produce that. They, they made you like a, at that time, a British citizen. And you, you could-- if you could prove with this paper-- and the Germans wanted to exchange against Templers, who were interned in there. That's how they got through. Her, her family-- uncle's family, also, was safe. They mostly live in Jerusalem, today.  INT: And any of her family perished in-- during the Holocaust in Germany? HK: I think-- oh, not from the close family, not from her close family. But her uncles and the aunts, no. They did get out.  INT: We will stop now and go to the next tape.  INT: This is tape number 4. I'm interviewing Mr. Herbert Kahn. In view of your experiences in Europe during the war, and before the war, do you have any special message for today's generation-- the second generation, already-- or the generations that come after that? HK: I tell you, I-- I'd like to give the following message to both my children-- that's my daughter, Felice, and her husband Nissan, who live in Jerusalem-- and to my son, Tobi Aaron, and my-- and my daughter-in-law Nessa, who live in New York, and their children, in Israel, Amichai, who is 19 years now with the Israeli Defense Forces, Talya, who is 17, Michael, who's 15, and Ariel, who is 13, who was just bar mitzvah. And also to my grandchildren here-- Joshua, who's named after my father-in-law, Joshua Shapiro-- a very fine man-- who is 8 and 1/2, and my granddaughter Mattie, who is-- I must say it right-- she says 4 years and 10 months old-- who live in New York. I want to tell him the following-- that, first of all, I'm glad that we have children and grandchildren. And, there, Hitler did not succeed. I want to say, never-- to never give up. Never lose hope. I never lost-- even though we went through terrible things-- lost hope. And my faith as a-- as a religious Jew, Orthodox Jew, has never wavered. And-- and, while I say-- I must tell you, I do not understand the Holocaust. It's beyond comprehension. And I don't-- anybody tries to give me an explanation or-- or tries to-- to rationalize it, I-- I get very upset. Nevertheless, we have to continue, and we have the attempt to recreate the Jewish state after 2,000 years, which I think is a fabulous thing-- which happened afterwards-- and also to continue Jewish life here. And I think it's worthwhile. And I think we should-- we should do that. And I try to impress on both children-- and, especially lately, on the grandchildren-- that. And I think it's-- it's a-- it's a wonderful thing, that we are able to tell these stories, and they should be told, that, generations from now, people 50 years or 100 years from now should know what happened, and also how we lived and-- and what we felt and how we-- and how things went. 
INT: Thank you very much for the effort that you put into this interview and for the time you spent with us. We will stop the tape now and set up for the pictures that you would like to show. And you will explain for each picture, separately, who they are, what they are, and what the significance of the picture is for you. Thanks again. HK: Thank you very much. This is a picture taken in Bad Kissingen, Germany, where-- where the-- where we children were sent for the summer. And this is myself, on the left-hand side. And next to the lady, the girl is my cousin Fanny, who now lives in [NON-ENGLISH], in Israel. In front of her is Arnot Kahn, who was an-- was a survivor-- in Tucson, Arizona. And the two others were distant cousins, Lowenstein, who lived in Israel, later. This picture was probably taken in January 1939, just before I left Germany for England. To the left is my brother Lothar, my younger brother. In the middle is my sister, Fanny-- [? alav ?] hashalom. Next is-- I come. In front is, to the left, my mother and, to the right, my father. And on the little chair is my nephew Nathan-- alav hashalom-- who also perished in the Holocaust. That was a picture taken before I went to England. This is an old matzevah of [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] an ancestor of mine who lived in [? Rynek. ?] And it dates to the year 1771. The family lived in that area for between 400 and 500 years. And we have this-- we could-- we could get this particular matzevah with the assistance of a-- of a-- a German who became Jewish who was very interested in that. He took lots of pictures from-- of this type. And this is the oldest one which I could locate. His name was Yehezkel Kahn. The top picture is the matzevah of my father, Levi Kahn, here in New York. He is naturally the oldest member of my immediate family. And it shows where he comes from and when-- when he was buried. And it's there in the [INAUDIBLE] cemetery in Oradell, New Jersey. My mother's matzevah I have, also, but I don't know whether we can put this on. [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] Passed away in 1962, on January 13. Below is the matzevah of my brother Arthur-- [NON-ENGLISH]-- who, as I told you before, was killed in Dachau-- on April the 12th, I believe-- and who came to burial in the Jewish cemetery in Nuremberg. And it shows the hands of the [? Kohen, ?] if you look closely. And it shows also that he died. They couldn't say he was [LAUGHS] killed. But-- This picture is a-- shows a dedication to my sister, Fanny Weinberg, née Kahn, and her son, my nephew, Nathan Kahn, which you will find attached to a seder plate in [NON-ENGLISH] at the Jewish Museum, which my brother-in-law, Harry Weinberg, gave to them. This is the only memory we have of my sister, anything where we can look at. And it says there that she was deported and finally died in Minsk, in-- I think-- they think it was November 11, 1941. My sister was deported from Frankfurt, I think, in October, ended up in Lódz, in the ghetto. The ghetto was overcrowded-- went from there to Minsk. And the information which I got is, when they got to Minsk, is it right or left? They put the grown-ups to one side and the children to the other side. My sister did not want to be separated from her child, and she knew that was the end of it. And that is the only thing you can see, today, of my sister memory. This is a-- again, the matzevah of my brother Arthur, but this time it's easier visible. And it shows that he-- he died on-- on, I think, the second day of Pesach. And he was brought there to [NON-ENGLISH] Jewish burial place. And it shows the-- as you know, the hands of the [? Kohen. ?] And underneath, it says [NON-ENGLISH]. 'Here is buried the-- the holy soul of the person.' And we are glad we have that and we can go there, in Nuremberg, at the Jewish cemetery. I wanted to show that again because it's a little clearer than what we saw before. While I do my research on my brother-- which I have a big dossier on him-- I-- a-- a lady in Erlangen, Germany, came across this picture. And must be-- it must have happened before he went to the university, when he probably still in the gymnasium. And you can see, here, the way people acted and lived. It was obviously before the Nazis came to power. And I think he was also the only Jew in this group. 
INT: Was this a youth camp, or some kind of an organization? HK: Yeah, it was-- I am not quite sure what it was. Nobody knows. But it must have been some youth activity. Probably they were going on a hike or something. That's what I think. But it's interesting to see him-- how he-- how he looked at that time. This is a picture taken in-- while I was doing basic training in Fort McClellan, Alabama. I'm the fellow to the right. To the left is a friend of mine. Tutti Eisner was with me a long time, from New York. And, underneath, a fellow, Al Schon, who I also quite friendly with and who played a big role, here, in Riverdale and now lives in Israel. I thought it was interesting to show how I looked as an early soldier. And this is this famous Fort McClellan, Alabama, I told you about. I remember the barrack. That's why I know it's from there. This picture was taken in July 1943, when we were on a two-day forced march. And I was in full-- full equipment, naturally. And I thought it was interesting to show that how I, at one time, looked as a soldier-- and with equipment, with all equipment. This is again taken Fort Custer, Michigan, after infiltration course. I am the second person standing on the right. And, as you could see, we were pretty tired and knocked out. But if the fellas wanted to take a picture, we took a picture. And here I have it, to show you, also, again, how I looked after an infiltration course-- if you know what that means. This picture, I took after-- at the end of the war, in Frankfurt, in May 1945. I thought it was interesting to see that they had written down, at the very end, 'Sieg oder Sibirien,' which means, in English, 'Victory or Siberia'-- not 'Sieg oder Tod,' which means 'Victory or Death.' Because the Germans were most afraid of freezing to death, because hundreds of thousands had frozen to death in-- in Russia, and they were more afraid of that even than being killed any other way. So they told them, if you don't-- we don't win, do you know what's going to happen to you? They're going to send you to Siberia. This is one of the earliest pictures of my wife and myself. It was taken sometime in 1947. I'm-- I'm to the right. My wife, Ellen-- née Shapiro-- is to the left. And it was at a family affair, because I think, faintly, I-- I recollect an aunt of Ellen's in the back. But I don't really remember anymore when.
I thought it was interesting to see how we looked some 50 years ago. This is January 1961, a picture taken at the golden wedding anniversary of my parents. To the right, standing, is myself. To the left, standing, is my brother. Sitting to the right is my wife Ellen, then my father, Levi Kahn, my mother, Martha Kahn, and, to her left, my sister-in-law Susan Kahn, née [? Wexler. ?] I think it was taken in Lakewood, New Jersey, at the Brunswick Hotel. This picture was taken in Chicago, probably in 1979, a year and a half before my mother-- mother passed away. To the right is me, Herbert Kahn, then my mother, and, to the left, my brother Lothar Kahn, with whom she lived the last two years of her life. I think this picture was taken probably last year, at the occasion of my youngest Israeli grandson's bar mitzvah. And it shows my wife, to the right-- my-- Ellen, to the right; my daughter Felice, in the middle; myself, Herbert Kahn, to the left; and, underneath me, my son Tobi [? Aaron ?] Kahn, underneath. This is our nuclear family-- parents and the two children. This is a picture taken at a reunion, in 1943, with my cousins and my brother, in Tel Aviv. At the-- to the right is myself, Herbert Kahn; then my cousin Inge, a survivor of many camps, who lives in Tel Aviv; then my cousin Fanny, who lives in Shavei Tzion, the early-- the party who went early to Israel with her father and mother; then my brother, who lives in Chicago. And then, underneath, is my brother-in-law Harry [? Weinberg, ?] with his second wife-- who, in the the meantime, passed away. And we try to-- my brother, [? Israeli, ?] the one who wants us to get together whenever we are in Israel-- he and I, together with the other cousins. And, at that time, we always take pictures. This is a picture taken in 1992. And it shows my daughter Felice and her family. Her husband is to-- to her right-- Nissan Zisken. Then comes my daughter, Felice Zisken. The older-- oldest-- boy, presently in the army, [? Amichai ?] Zisken, to-- further down, to the right, Talya, the-- the daughter. Next is the boy [? Michael. ?] And the youngest is Ariel, who was bar mitzvah just in August. They live in [NON-ENGLISH]. This is-- the picture is taking in 1995. It shows my son, my only son, Tobi [? Aaron ?] Kahn, to the right; to the left, his wife, Nessa [? Rappaport; ?] my grandson Joshua-- call him also Joshie-- and my granddaughter, being held by her mother, Mattie. They live here, on the West Side, and-- with their children. And we are very proud of them-- as-- as we are of our other children, who live in Israel. This is a picture of [? Amichai, ?] the oldest of our grandchildren, just taken, who is with the Israeli Defense Forces and-- with the artillery. And, the last we know, he was standing guard in Shechem, also called Nablus, Israel. We wish him well.