INT: December 17, 1996. Interview with the survivor Maria Glickman nee Kuricki. MG: 'Ku-risky.'  INT: 'Ku-rit-ski.' The interviewer is Leslie Troper. We are in Springfield, New Jersey, in the United States of America. And the interview will be conducted in English. Today is December 17, 1996. This is Maria Glickman. I am Leslie Bennett-Troper, T-R-O-P-E-R, the interviewer. We are in Springfield, New Jersey, in the United States of America. And this interview will be conducted in English. Good morning, Mrs. Glickman. MG: Good morning to you.  INT: Please state and spell your name. MG: Maria Glickman, G-L-I-C-K-M-A-N, M-E-R-A.  INT: And your maiden name? MG: Kuricki, Q-- K-U-R-I-C-K-I.  INT: And when and where were you born? MG: 1924, in Vilna, Poland.  INT: OK. Can you begin by telling me about your childhood? MG: What I remember? The first that I remember is when my grandpa died. I was three years and eight months old. This was the first thing. And then I remember when my sister was born.  INT: Describe those events. MG: She was born in 1932. Her name was Asya Kuricki.  INT: And what do you remember about those incidents? MG: Nothing special, because we were too small to take us where. What I remember is my father got sick. He was 11 months in a hospital. He came out. And we lost everything in the bank. And he was a painter, artist painter. And you couldn't make a living. So he went on to work with the theater. He was an impresario. He took small children, bigger children, and he made them for dancers, singers. And he did go all of Poland. To every city that he came, he had a theater, and so he made a living. Not a bad one. 
INT: What was his name? MG: Szymon Kuricki. I have to spell it? No.  INT: Tell me more about him. MG: More about him. He was a person who liked to help people. He was-- in English, I don't know-- he was in the Jewish organizations, like [NON-ENGLISH], Beit Lehem, Hachnosas Orchim, Hachnosas Kallah. For the children who didn't have parents, he was one of the people who helped them out by getting money from the rich people for the poor.  INT: Those other groups that you mention, what kinds of groups were they? MG: They're Jewish-- they were Jewish groups to-- Hachnosas Orchim, that means that somebody comes to the city, and he doesn't have where to sleep or what to eat, they put him in a place where he gets where to sleep and where to eat. [NON-ENGLISH] was a place, at Friday and the whole Saturday, the whole families will come, five, six, eight people. And they would get food Friday night, Saturday in the morning, Saturday in the middle of the day, and Saturday at night. And Hachnosas Kallah, this was for helping young people to get married, to get them work, to get them where to live. Then he was the vice president of a-- a hospital called-- [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] [SIGHS] [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] not the Jewish-- I forgot the name.  INT: In what city was the hospital? MG: Vilna. We had two Jewish hospitals, the Jewish Hospital. And the other one, I don't remember the name. There were he was vice president. So he helped out for the poor people, through the Kehillah. Kehillah was the place where all the rich people sit together and think how to help the people who don't have nothing. So my father belonged to them. [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] And my mother helped out, too. When it was a concert, in the city, she would sit and sell the tickets. That's all. 
INT: What was her name? MG: Sonia Kuricki.  INT: Tell me a little bit about her. MG: When she was younger, she was the director of all homes for the children who don't have parents, after the First War. And then she got married. And she didn't work anymore. She came from a very rich family. 99% of the family were doctors. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] That's all.  INT: Describe your home growing up. MG: We had actors, painters, writers, poets. I don't know. We had everybody. And everybody would come to see my father's pictures. Not what he did for people, just what he did for people to sell.  INT: He sold his paintings? MG: He sold. But not too-- very much, because Vilna was a very poor city. We didn't have an industrial city. We had a couple of factories. That-- they had over 600,000 people, from them, 86,000 Jewish people. I know we had a couple of leather factories. We had boot factories. We had glass, too, glass factories. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] Nothing else. So the people had to live how they can. So everybody did what they could. It was a very hard life. I can't say that we had a hard life, but I can't say that we were millionaires. We weren't. Because my mother's father lost everything before he died. He had people working for him, 1,400 people. He had-- we call it [NON-ENGLISH]. That means old stuff is-- they bought-- they bought it, and then they sold it to factories, like in Bialystok, in Poland, in Lodz. In-- there were a couple of cities where they sold it. But he was old and sick, and he lost everything, just the house and that. That's all. And my father's father went terribly, in a terrible death, in 1918. Arath Kuricki Zalman got burned in his own house. My grandma did go to the market with the lady. And they came. No, my-- not my grandpapa, not-- not the house, nothing. When he-- he had burned alive when he was asleep. 
INT: By whom? MG: By himself. He-- he smoked a pipe. Nobody touched him. [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS]  INT: You mentioned a sister. Did you have any other siblings? MG: I had a brother, Natan Kuricki, and a sister, Asya Kuricki. My brother got killed by the Germans. I don't know where. I don't know when. My sister and my mother runned, and they came to Siberia. They were there up to '45. I didn't know that they are alive up to '50-- '49. I haven't seen my mother, my sister, up to '58, 17 1/2 years.  INT: Before we move to that part of the story, can you describe your childhood? Growing up with your brother and sister, what do you remember about it? MG: It's not nice, could be, to say. I was the love of my father and mother. Because when I was four and a half years old, my father took me to a ballet school. The boss of the ballet school was a Russian lady, around from Petersburg, Sabina Dol'skaia. And I was learning the ballet. I finished in '39, two and a half months before the war. I danced in the theater. I sang in the theater in Jewish. And they called me the wunderkind. And everybody did know me, because of my pictures. They were all over. I was very happy. But I didn't know-- this was June-- that in September 1, 19-- --20-- --39 will come out the war. 
INT: Tell me about going to school. What was that like? MG: I loved school. Not because I loved to learn. I'm telling. I loved the school because I was between children. I loved very much children.  INT: Did you go to public school or a Jewish school? MG: I did go to Esther Rubinstein School. It was our minister, the Jewish minister, Rubinstein. That was in his wife's name, this school. It was a wonderful school. We had to-- every morning, we had to sing the 'Hatikvah.' And that was just for girls not with boys together. And I loved it. What can I say? I finished school in '39. And the war break out. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] And the Russian came in. The first three days was terrible. They opened doors. They cut the pillows. They cut the blankets. They beat up people. They had the riot, the first three days. And then it got quiet. And for who it got good? It was for the communist people, who were communists by the Russian-- by the Polish people. So we lived a year and a half like this. And then the Russian came back.  INT: Describe the Jewish community before 1939. MG: The Jewish community? You see, we have five Jewish communities, one in the middle of the city and three-- four in all four sides of the-- of the city. And everybody spoke another Jewish language, had another intelligent. And it was-- we didn't know for sure how the people from the other side live. But what I know, through my father, is that most of the people were very poor but very intelligent. We are the people who gave out the first university, Jewish university in the world. We are the people who gave-- make from a jargon called, from a language that is taken from many languages. And we make one language, with grammar, to learn and to know what you learn about. 
INT: And what language was that? MG: In Jewish. And this is the only university. We have it now in the 92nd Street and Fifth Avenue and Jewish. Everything was in Jewish. And then they were in Hebrew and Polish. We had 38 Jewish schools. This is the only city in the world. And because of this, we were called Jerusalem of Litha. And that's-- and we had wonderful doctors, engineers, professors. And they were wonderful, not just like doctors, like people. They always helped the poor. But because-- because there were many poor people. And I, myself, helped my girlfriend. [LAUGHS] She isn't here. I ought not talk about it. My mother teached me to always be good to people who don't have nothing. Can't remember everything, but I think this is the most that I did. When I-- when I got money for dancing, I didn't get the money. My father get it. So my father would give me 10 zlotas and-- and 50 grozy. And I would take my poor girlfriend, and I would buy her food. And I bought her a coat once. [LAUGHS] I can't remember all of it anymore.  INT: What was the relationship between the Jews in your city and the non-Jews? MG: I will tell you. Me, I had friends not Jewish people. I loved the Polish people. And they loved me. And they helped me in wartime. If not them, I wouldn't be alive to go to the concentration camp. And in wartime, they helped the Jewish people more, because the Lithuanian people, when they came to Vilna-- they got it from Stalin-- they said, we are the bosses. And you will do what you want. So because of this, I think, the Polish people understood and helped the Jewish people. That's the-- 
INT: What was their attitude toward the Jews, in general, though, before the war started? MG: Before the war, we had the student-- we had one university in Vilna. And the students, they called them Endecja. They would stay by the Jewish stores and not allow not Jewish people to go in, in a store, and buy by Jewish people.  INT: Was this a mandated law? MG: No. They did it by themselves. Nobody told them not to, because Pilsudski was dead. And his son-in-law was drunk, Marshal Rydz-Smigly. He was married to Pilsudski's daughter. And he didn't have time to look for his country. He had time to drink vodka. And this made very much trouble for the Polish people. This was the problem in Vilna. I can't say that somebody came and killed Jewish people or beat up Jewish people. There was one fall in '39. I did go from the movies with a friend of mine. I was 14 1/2 years old. And three students gave him a knife, here, in the right side.  INT: To you? MG: No, my friend. They didn't touch me. I runned. And I runned to my father. And he came out with--  INT: Do you think-- MG: He's alive. He is in Israel.  INT: Do you think that was an antisemitic action? MG: Yes, of course. They were the Endecja. The Endecja were anti-Semite. They were-- they worked for like with Hitler, not together but for Hitler. 
INT: What language is Endecja? MG: Endecja in Polish.  INT: And what does it mean? MG: That means fascist students.  INT: Were there any other actions that you witnessed-- MG: No. --on the part of these people? MG: No. Never. Never.  INT: When did your life begin to change? MG: When the German came in. It was in '41, July 22. The war breaked out. And they came, 23, early in the morning, Monday. So three days, they came to look what we have. And they did go away. Then they came, and they took radios, like my father's pictures. And we had a-- a child in our house. And she was a child. She said, I'm not going to say that, in the attic, we have every radio and everything. So they went upstairs, and they brought down everything. And six weeks later, we were in the ghetto. Before the ghetto, I had to pay for electricity-- my father didn't go out-- me and my girlfriend, and they catched us. They didn't touch us. They just asked us to clean the offices, the places where they sleep. And they let us go, twice. That's all. And then they took us to the ghetto. Street by street, every street had police on horses, so nobody can run away. They took people to the ghetto and to the jail. My street and the second street of mine, did go to the ghetto, because it was straight.  INT: What street did you live on? MG: Pilsudskiego. This is the name of our general, who got the city back from-- from the Russian. 
INT: Before the Germans came in, did you have any inclination-- did you know that there was anything-- did you know about the rise of Nazism outside? MG: My father said that it will be war. And Hitler will kill every Jew that he can. But everybody would say, no, Kuricki, he's a special person, so he says so. But it came like he said.  INT: How had your father known about it? Was it-- MG: He was in the First War. And he was two years in a camp by the Germans. He spoke, perfectly, German. And he did know what they thinked. But before, the First War, the German soldiers were the best friends of the Jewish people. You know why? Because they couldn't speak to nobody, just to the Jewish people, because the German language is very, very easily understood by the Jewish people and the opposite. So they spoke with the Jewish people. And they were friends. And they would help us. And not me, I wasn't alive. But they were good to them. But after this, when the fang an, with the propaganda, that Hitler would come to, and he will be. He wasn't a German. He was an Austrian man. And he lived in Austria. But people think that he will give-- he said that there was 600,000 Jewish people in whole Germany. And he said that all of them are rich. And they have all the factories and all the money. And the German people believed him. So with this, he had to organize Gestapo, SD, Toten-battalion, and SS. And he organized them. And he came to Germany. And they make the Kristallnacht. They burned everything, the books, everything. And then they fang an to threw them to the concentration camps. Some run away. It was all kind of doing of his. 
INT: Did your family know about these goings on in Germany? MG: No. That-- my-- you see, my mother-- we runned everybody to Russia. But the Russian didn't allow us to get through.  INT: When was this? MG: In '41. So the-- my sister, with my mother-- she was a little one-- my mother hold her by the hand. And I don't know how they got through. They got through. And they catched them there. And they sent them straight to Siberia.  INT: And what happened to you? MG: And me? We came back home. We had to sleep somewhere. We came back home. And six weeks later, they took us to the ghetto. And then we faengt an to work.  INT: You started to describe the process by which they put the Jews into the ghetto. Could you continue that? MG: Yes. Street by street-- one, two streets to the ghetto, two streets to the jail, Lukiszki, on a street [NON-ENGLISH]. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] And we came in the ghetto 52,000 people.  INT: What did you take with you into the ghetto? MG: I didn't take nothing, because I was by my friend. And my father was alone. So what he did? He took two luggages, you know, with the girdle, and that's all. But something did get wrong, because one policeman couldn't stand that my father was, in 20 second, the prettiest man in Vilna. So he gave him with the-- the gun. No, not the gun, the flint. And my father was wearing pince-nez. You know what it means? No? 
INT: Please tell me. MG: Pince-nez is not glasses. It's glasses with no frames and, here, a golden chain. But he had three of them. So two stayed there, and this was broken. So he gave him a cup of beaten up. And he walked in, in the ghetto. And I didn't know where he is. And he didn't know where I am. Then we find each other. And then we-- I had a girlfriend. She was living in the same place where the ghetto was. She is dead. She died in the-- Nobody killed her. She got tuberculosis, and she died. So we had a place in her apartment. This was two rooms and a kitchen. We were 38 people.  INT: Who were the other people? MG: Jewish people.  INT: Did you know them? MG: No, I didn't. I did get to know them, when I was with them. But before, no. How could I? It's a big city and there are 86,000 people. You can't know everybody.  INT: Who determined who was going to live in that apartment? MG: Nobody. We came. And we sit. And nobody said a word. Then, my girlfriend's sister was taken away and her mother-in-law. And then we were-- we were the bosses. And I stayed there [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] up to '42, February 15 or 14. They catched me with five kilo potatoes. That means nine and a half pounds potatoes. And my girlfriend with five kilo of flowers. And they took me to Gestapo. And I was in Gestapo 11 days. 
INT: Where did you get the potatoes? MG: I bought them by the Polish people. I sell a dress of mine. And they gave me the potatoes. We didn't have money, not one penny. And then they send me, from the-- from the Gestapo, to the jail in Lukiszki. And there I was from the end of-- of February up to the beginning of May. I was between the 19 ladies, girls, and 19 men that officially were allowed, from the commandant of the SS, Weiss, to go out from the jail. The first one. All of the people who got took-- taken there, all of them got killed in Ponary.  INT: Who was in charge of the jail? MG: Of the jail? [LAUGHS] Every-- first of all, the Germans. They said-- they looked like doctors. Everybody wearing a-- in a weiss-- a white shirt. And then it was the SS was around. [POINTING] And inside, food would give us the people who sit themselves, but they were not Jewish. And they helped us. They selled us bread.  INT: They were in the ghetto? MG: No. In the jail. In the jail.  INT: So the jail was outside of the ghetto? MG: Of course. We had a jail in ghetto, too, but this was so big. And this was a-- a-- a jail before the-- the war breaked out, I think 10, 15 years before the war. So they-- they selled us the bread. And they put it in the toilet where you put the papers. [POINTING] But we took that, because we were hungry. They gave us, twice a day, hot water, once a day, soup, , and 200 gram, big like this, bread. And the days were long. And we were hungry. And they allowed us to walk, every day, 20 minutes outside. Not outside the jail, outside the house. 
INT: OK. We're going to stop here and go onto the next tape. MG: OK.  INT: This is tape number two in the interview with Maria Glickman. You were talking about the jail and your experience there. MG: It was very hard, for sure. We couldn't sit. We shouldn't. We didn't work. We had to stay by the walls. We could sit then, when they brought us the food. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] And this is it.  INT: How old were you when you were in the jail? MG: 16 and 3 months. And [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] nothing special was happen. Just in the time that we were there, we had four ladies more. They took out two-- three ladies, two sisters and a-- and she was, I think, the wife of the brother. I don't know for sure. They took them out. They say they take them to the ghetto. Three days later, they brought their coats back to us. So we understood that they got shot. And then they took out one. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] And they said they took her to the ghetto. And they did. Ola Kusznier, she was alive. When I came, I found her in the ghetto.  INT: Who was running this jail? Who was in charge? MG: The Germans, who were-- in everything that did go on, when the Germans were, the Germans. There could be-- they called them kalfaktors, the people who clean, who-- who help to give food. So they don't have to pay for the work that people have to do. So the people who think like we-- us, they were the kalfaktors. They were the people who did everything in sight-- and dig graves. One Sunday, in the beginning of-- of April, we heard, in the middle of the night, yelling. We had three backyards. This was the third back yard. They killed 250 nuns. They had to make their own graves, because they were nun and Polish. And 250 chrzescijanin. Chrzescijanin is like here a-- not a preacher, a-- a-- like, [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] you know, who is-- oh God. Failed me, the word. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] Who preaches in-- in-- in-- in a-- in a temple in a-- in a church? 
INT: Like a minister? MG: A minister? Is more than a minister. Is the person who doesn't wear, here, a piece of white. He wears all around white and a black man-dress. He can't have a wife. He doesn't have to do with ladies.  INT: Priests. MG: Yes.  INT: The priests. MG: They Christians. And they were killed, 500 people in one night.  INT: Did you see this? MG: We heard this. And then we have seen the graves. And later on, what they did, they send the Jewish people to take them out, burn the-- the bones, and put it back, and straighten it out so nobody will know. Then, by the end of the ghetto, they did it with the Jewish people in Ponary. They took 38 people. They let them stay in Ponary. And they had to kill-- to take out-- this is somebody working-- to take out the bones, burn them. And they put it like this, like it's-- it's sugar. And they put it back. And they straighten it out, so people will not find the bones. This was when I was in ghetto.  INT: When-- MG: And I worked for a-- for the soldiers-- not the SS, plain soldiers. We cleaned their-- we washed the toilets, the-- the-- the steps, everything. They didn't pay us. And we had to work.  INT: This was after you were released from jail and went back. MG: After I was released from jail, I came back to the ghetto. I was, from the 19, first girls who came back, officially, through Officer Weiss. He allowed us to go back. 
INT: He was an SS? MG: SS. SS, yes. He was SS. And--  INT: So when did you return to the ghetto? MG: In the end-- half May.  INT: Of 19-- MG: 1942. And--  INT: Where did you go back to live? MG: In the same place. I couldn't go back, because I didn't know no nobody. I had to go where I was. My father was then in ghetto. He was working, painting for the ghetto. They need for the-- we had a Jewish theater. They need [NON-ENGLISH], all kind of stuff. He make them.  INT: Tell me about the cultural life in the ghetto. MG: We had a-- first of all, we had a library, Strashun's Library. We had a theater. We had a cafe. We had, by us, was Advocat Muszkat. He maked a special school for children, who the-- were alive and their parents were killed. He took them in, with sleeping, with everything. He teach them like in school. And they-- and he makes so that he get the food.  INT: What was his name? MG: Advocat Muszkat. Then, what did we have more? We had partisan, too. Yeah. And our ghetto Jewish commandant, inside, helped them to go out. In--  INT: What was his name? MG: Jacob Gens. He helped them every night. He would let out, through a second door, 200 people.  INT: What was his official title? Was he chief of police? MG: No, no, no, no. No, we had the police, too. No. He wasn't chief of police. He was, in Jewish, they called him the Ghettovorsteher. He was the person who talked for every Jew in the ghetto. But he couldn't do nothing. 
INT: Was he part of the Judenrat? MG: No. The Judenrat-- the Judenrat were separate. Where my father worked, there was the Judenrat. And in the other side, it was the police. The first station police. We had four stations police. He was-- he was like a-- well, we say here, is in-- in-- in-- in this town, it's a small town, they have a-- a-- how do you call them?  INT: A mayor? MG: A mayor of the town. He was the mayor of the-- of the ghetto. But he had to talk to the SS and tell them what he thinks, how it goes. No, he didn't tell them the truth, that's for sure.  INT: But why did they listen to him? MG: He was very intelligent. He was a maior. A maior is a major in the army. And everybody loved him. So they believed him. And this was very much for the Jewish people.  INT: So how was able to save people. MG: He didn't save nobody. He just sent the people who belong to the-- to the partisans, he sent them out, so they can save themselves. He didn't take money for it, the opposite. He for them-- for some-- he got guns, with-- because he-- I could go. I couldn't, because I didn't have a gun. You had to have a gun, because the partisan couldn't give you a gun. Three of my girlfriends, they did go.  INT: How did they get their weapons? MG: Through Christian people. You know, when you work, you are working for Christian people or for the Germans. And you-- everybody asks, do you have what to sell? They give you bread. You give them a coat. It's-- so through the people. 
INT: Were the people taken out of the ghetto to work? MG: Oh yes. We worked. I-- I worked for the luftpark. Luftpark is like here-- [PAUSES FOR 5 SECONDS] like Newark Airport, like-- like Kennedy Airport.  INT: So it was an airport? MG: It was the first soldier's airport. We didn't have before an airport special for soldiers.  INT: And that was in Vilna. MG: In Vilna. But it was, from the city, 15 kilometers. We had to walk back and forth. I worked. And we worked. All-- all of us worked. We rake the-- the-- the ground. We took-- put the wood. They make the places in case somebody will bomb, they will have where to be-- not us, them. So this was what I did in ghetto. Then, they sent me to Christian farmers to work. So the Christian farmers at least gave me to eat-- not me, everybody. We worked, 150 people.  INT: What kind of work did you do there? MG: Everything. Not their thing-- I-- I mean, not to clean houses-- outside, outside. Put potatoes, take out potatoes, clean between-- you know, there is a grass that's very terrible for your feet when you-- you get it. And then--  INT: But they would feed you? MG: Oh, yeah. Yeah, very good soup.  INT: Were these Polish farmers? MG: Polish farmers, they feed us. And--  INT: Did they ever ask about the ghetto? MG: Of course they asked. They asked, and we tell them the truth. And they helped. They-- the Polish peopled helped. They took away-- when they tooked people to Ponary to shot them, and people-- ladies had small children, they tooked away the children from them. They can get-- they couldn't get shot the same way that us. 
INT: Who took them away? MG: The Polish people, and they hold them by them.  INT: And they kept the children? MG: Yes. That's the--  INT: Did the people-- Did these people know about Ponary? MG: Of course. But there was-- and Ponary was written, for Jewish people, for Polish people, and plain soldiers, not to go inside.  INT: Tell me about Ponary. MG: Ponary was a place where they took people, 10 in one side, 10 in the other, with machine guns, and they would shot them, and they will fall in. But before they took them, you had to get completely naked. In the beginning-- oy, I have to tell him, too. In the beginning, they closed their eyes. But people didn't want to. They didn't want to. They said, we want to get through that and see what's going on. How do I know for sure? I know for sure, because one of the girls, from the first 20,000, 28,000 people, came back.  INT: One girl came back? MG: Yeah. She was the last 10. Her mother, her sister, the sister's children, I don't know how many. They were 10 people. They had to stay like this, with each other. And she was the last one. And she waked up. And she got out. I don't know how. And a Christian, in the morning, 4 o'clock in the morning, found her, and he took her to his house. And he hold her there two weeks. Her name was [NON-ENGLISH]. Her second name, I don't know. But she was-- 
INT: Had she been shot? MG: Yes. She was-- she had been shot here, [POINTING] here, through here. But she was [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] not full with her mind. But she told us what happened to her. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] This was Ponary.  INT: How-- who made the decisions about who would go to Ponary? Describe the roundups. MG: They didn't make the decision who would go. They took like-- like herrings. One, they came in the ghetto. They made a action. They called it aktion. They took three days. The first one was two days before Yom Kippur, the first one.  INT: What year is this, now? MG: '30-- '41. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] And they took 6,000 people, not more. The second one was at least 15,000 people, 2 days.  INT: Who did they select? MG: They didn't select. They select in concentration camp, to send in concentration camp. But they didn't select when they took the people from ghetto. They took them. They come in, in a-- in a house, in an apartment. People, everybody out. Downstairs, everybody. So the people did go. And then they took them, with the-- with the trucks, to-- to Ponary.  INT: Where did the people think they were going? MG: They did know where they were going.  INT: They did know? MG: But they didn't do-- what could they do? They didn't have guns. They didn't have to-- where to go. They didn't have money. They didn't have nothing. So they go where they took them. 
INT: Do you know of any incidents of anybody who tried to resist or run or hide? MG: Oh, yes. Oh, yes. They took 4,000 young people one day in '30-- in '43, in the beginning of May. The young people weren't from our city. They bought them from another city. And they took them to Ponary to get shot. And some of them, with their feet, took out wood from the train, and ran and came back to the ghetto. And they telled us what they did. They shot them in the trains. And then they put them, like-- like junk, in the graves. [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS]  INT: Was there ever a time that where you were living was to be included in the aktion? MG: Always. Every street-- we had 14 streets. That's all. Every street could, any time, go to the aktion, go to the-- to Ponary. They took away around-- almost 50,000 people. They left 24,000 people. But they didn't know that we are 40-- 24,000. They did think 10, 12, because the people who didn't work, they didn't walk in the streets. 7 o'clock was dead. You couldn't walk out the street, because you would be-- get shot from the SS around the ghetto. So they sit home. And we brought them food.  INT: Those that worked, did they have special working papers? MG: Some had, some didn't. My father had a working paper. So I had a girlfriend-- there were three sisters and a mother. And I asked my father to take them on his papers. 
INT: How many people could they take on a paper? MG: Not more than five. They are not stupid, you know? And they know that the Vilna people didn't have many children, because there was not money. So my father took them. There was Selah, Zhenya, and Hoda, three sisters. They died in concentration camp, in Struthof.  INT: So if you had a working paper, your family was protected? MG: If-- if you take them on your paper, yes, as long as there wasn't a second aktion. By the set-- second action, you had to have new papers. You had white papers, rosa papers, yellow papers, and passports. The last was the passport. So by the passport, they took the last-- Kittel, General Kittel closed the ghetto, taking 24,000 people. From the 24,000, he took 2,000 to the concentration camp and 22,000 to Majdanek. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] I was between the 2,000.  INT: Before we get to that, tell me a little bit more about the ghetto. When there was an aktion, and it involved your street, what did you do? MG: [LAUGHS] Well, I got-- got upstairs, in the attic, in a cellar, where it was a store, once, but it wasn't anymore. I was in a-- we had a house. The house was three-- three stories. In the kitchen, we opened a hole. And we were there, 18 people, 3 days and nights.  INT: In a hole? MG: In a hole. But this was under the-- under the ceiling-- under the-- oh, God. [LAUGHS] It was closed, but not so closed that the water didn't get through. And these three days, it was raining. So we had the water on our heads, everybody. In between us was a man, who they brought him just from the hospital. He had amputate the right foot. And the-- the SS was looking where they can find people, because when they walked in, nobody was there. He faengt an to cry from pain. So somebody closed his mouth with a coat. So [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] the hole where we were was a small-- a small closet. And they didn't think that under the closet are people. So they left us be. 
INT: But the Germans would come into the apartment? MG: To every apartment.  INT: And you heard them come in? MG: Yes, of course. We heard them talking. We heard them saying what they said, everything. And then they go out, away. 5 o'clock, they-- they-- they had 3 days, up to 5 o'clock. From 7:00 in the morning, people who had the-- the scheins, the-- the paper, did go to the-- to the people, to the SS. And they said, you out, you stay. You out. You stay.  INT: The schein was the paper. MG: Schein was the paper.  INT: The work paper? MG: Yes, yes. And--  INT: So you would-- you stayed 3 days, 18 of you in this hole? MG: Yeah.  INT: Did you have food, or-- MG: No, no, no. No food. We didn't, because we runned. We didn't think about it. And I-- I-- I think there wasn't where to put the food. What I remember is we had a lady called Berta. She was a very tall lady. I've never seen as a-- So your feet would come to the other wall. And here, it would be up. And the sick man would say, [LAUGHS] do something to your feet. Because I can't stand. I have to sleep, she said. What should I do? Eat half of them? [LAUGHS] And then, where I was lying, all the time I had, on my right side, water. This is-- this is a terrible feeling to have. When you hear that the water triff, you feel terrible. But then when it goes on your head? So-- 
INT: And you couldn't move? MG: No. If we had to move, we had to move everybody, because one couldn't. And there wasn't enough place.  INT: Were there children in hiding? MG: In this hiding, no. We had, in another hiding, was a child, Szymon, five years old, and a child, nine months old. This was two days aktion. And the child faengt an to cry. So Szymon said to his mother, mother, why don't you close the child's mouth? She says, he will die. He said, OK, he's 1 and we are 85. And they put a pillow over him, and he died.  INT: There were 85 of you? MG: Yes, in the--  INT: Where were-- where was this? MG: This was in the ghetto, on the street called Strashuna, 16-- 15, on the 2nd floor. We were in two rooms, in a small hall. And there was a china. And they had to open the china in last moment. And the china opened, but there was vodka. [LAUGHS] So they fang an to drink the vodka. They got drunk. They forgot about us. And they had to go out.  INT: You mean they came looking? MG: For-- of course! They came in every apartment, in every place where there was a possibility that there are people, to take them to kill them.  INT: And they found the vodka first? MG: Yeah. Not first, by the end. By the last, third day, they open-- they want to-- to take away the-- the closet, the china, and see what's inside. So they opened, and one said, 'Wir haben Schnapps,' they had vodka. So they fang an to drink the vodka. And thank to this, we stayed alive. And what I remember is that my friend's mother, came the first one, with her two daughters and son by the hand, and she said, [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] my child, where is Maria, where am I? He said, she's behind me. She said, God should help you, you should always have light, that you have taken the child with you. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] I will never forget it. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] This was the ghetto. 
INT: Were there any other aktions that you had to hide from? MG: No. The last action, we couldn't hide, because they said, this is-- this is the liquidation from the ghetto. This was September 22, in '43.  INT: So there were two large aktions? MG: Well three, but one-- the largest was the third one.  INT: How many people did they take to Ponary? MG: At all? [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] 62, 63, something like that.  INT: Thousand? MG: Yeah. Yeah. And the last one, it was 86,000 Jewish people. But they brought people from around the city, from little towns, from little, I don't know, places. Because they couldn't do it there. So they brought them to the ghetto and, from the ghetto, to Ponary, and they shot them there. Everybody who came got shot. And then-- [SIGHS] then they said that we are closing the ghetto. We're sending you to concentration camp Kaiserwald.  INT: Where was your father all of this time? MG: [MOAN] My father was taken, two months before, from the Germans. They send him to Estonia. This is in the Baltic, too. It's the first-- the third Baltic state. To Estonia, to a-- a small town called Klooga. There were 6,000 people. And four hours before the Russians came in to free the-- the concentration camp, my father and the rest-- just 103 people, run away, because they didn't have time to run after them-- were burned in the street by the concentration camp. The pictures is in every Jewish museum. How is it, when they-- when they run away, the Germans? My cousin's husband did go to the post in a coat, and he asked for the International Red Cross. And they make the pictures. In between the people, there is my father. 
INT: So he was killed as part of a mass group? MG: Burned, yes.  INT: When did you find out about that? MG: I find out a little bit later than my girlfriends, because I was-- I-- it's too-- [LAUGHS] We didn't talk yet about the concentration camp. This was after the concentration camp.  INT: All right, so we can come back to it. MG: Yeah.  INT: So now they were making the final aktion. MG: They're making the final aktion. They took us to where there was nuns, a place where the nuns had the biggest place in Vilna, in-- in the backyard. We sat there, 24,000 people, 400 children. And they took us for selection. The young people, left-- right, and the older people, left. So I didn't want to go. I couldn't take it anymore. So the Kittel, the general, said to me, you are young. You go to work. And he sent me left-- right.  INT: You had tried to go to the left? MG: I-- yes. I couldn't. I was finished with my nerves. But he sent me. And I did go. What could I do? I have see a terrible-- two terrible tragedies when they-- they tooked us. First of all, a Polish Christian lady came to the people who stood there, and she did go straight to a man. And she said, here, you have the package. And I'm going with you. So the Kittel come and said, who are you? She said, I am his wife. He said, go away. He is going to be shot. She said, OK, so I'm going to be shot. He said, you don't have to wait long. He took them both to the wall, everybody of us have seen, and shot them both. This was the one. And now you have here the picture I showed you, from my girlfriend, who passed away this year. 
INT: OK, we're going to break here. And you'll tell me on the next tape. MG: OK.  INT: This is tape number three in the interview with Maria Glickman. Please continue. MG: So after they killed the wife and husband, we were already to the right side. My girlfriend came out with her daughter, three and 1/2 years old. So three-- two Ukrainian SS-- because our ghetto [? closed ?] the Ukrainian SS, not the German-- took the child for both legs, in half, and up the wall. She was three and 1/2 years old.  INT: What became of the mother? MG: The mother stayed alive. And we were in [? chimney ?] together. We will get free together. She just passed away this year. And I didn't say about my father. First of all, my father has written 500 [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH], a Torah. It means not the Torah that we have now, but in the same, in the same style in Hebrew, about what's going on from the beginning up to the end before we left the ghetto, what's going on in the ghetto, what the Germans did, what the Jewish people did not [? right, ?] who got killed, why they got killed, everything. And they close it up. And they took it to the [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH] in the, in the cellar. When I was in '56, the [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH] was there. And I came in '93, no more [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH], a new house. And I don't know. I think this must be under the ground. Doesn't matter. I hope somebody will find, because there is written the date and his name and his family and the date when he finished. So when he finished it, two or three days later, I took them to the [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH], to go out from the ghetto. They wait for-- not for him, for many people-- to take him to [INAUDIBLE]. 
INT: Why was he picked? MG: I don't know. But he was Jewish, not another thing. And he was 40-- when they took them, he was 42 and 1/2 years old. When they killed him, he was almost 44. They took them. And he got typhus. This I know from [? Advocat ?] Muszkat, the, the teacher. He was with him together. And he tell me this. Otherwise, I wouldn't. He came to our concentration camp. And he said your father had typhus. He's very weak. I hope everything will go all right, but we-- you never know.  INT: Do you remember what you said to your father when he left? MG: Yes, I remember. I said that I think that this is the last time I see him.  INT: And what did he say? MG: Nothing. He just did say nothing. But I saw his eyes were full. He want to cry, but he hold himself.  INT: Did your father have any other jobs or responsibilities in the ghetto? MG: He had the job to paint for the ghetto. He got food for it, a quarter of a pound food a week, like butter. Otherwise, you hadn't seen it-- like six eggs, bread, warm bread, some stuff. So we ate it together.  INT: Did he do anything for the rabbis? Did he have anything to do with-- MG: No, no, no. This he did for main rabbi from ghetto.  INT: What, the book that he wrote? MG: The book, yes. That wasn't a book. It did go like this, around. 
INT: Like a Torah. MG: Yeah, like a Torah. And the rabbi called it Torah.  INT: He called it a Torah? Were there-- was there any religious activity in the ghetto? MG: Oh, yes. We had a yeshiva. We had synagogue. People were-- most of the people were kosher. We didn't get kosher food. But they hold it kosher. Kosher They took not the kosher and make it kosher, because we didn't have other one. We didn't get meat. We get meat the last year-- horse meat. We did get margarine, frozen potatoes. Bread was like a stone.  INT: Was there any holiday celebrations? MG: Every holiday, they came to kill people. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] And this is-- the yellow, this is from a song against the Germans [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] when you wear it. And the end in the song is I help that I will live free. Because not me are wearing it, you will wear it later. And then it was five Germans in the theater when this was sung.  INT: And what was their reaction? MG: They didn't say a word. We were scared. But they didn't say a word, nothing.  INT: But the song was sang, even though there were Germans there? MG: Yeah. They ca-- they had to come. Always when it was a concert, they came to see what's going on. They are themselves were not nice people. So how can they believe people who they too thinked we are not nice. We are terrible people. Nobody did nothing. And then I forgot to tell you, I worked before they took me to the concentration camp. I think I telled you. I worked for [INAUDIBLE] We maked the trains to go from Vilno to Berlin. When I came out from jail,. A couple of-- two months later, a month [INAUDIBLE], they took me there. And I worked up to the end of September. I worked in three cities-- [INAUDIBLE] When you finished in one place, they took [? like to the work. ?] It was terrible. We sleeped where the horses sleep. The food, all over the same. If we stood and we worked and it was raining, we got to sleep in the wet stuff. If we stand up, we would have to go again with the wet stuff. The only thing that I had better than oth-- some other people is because I sp-- I was the only one in this working place who speak German. So the-- how was his name? I don't remember, but the main person from the place was German. And he couldn't speak another language. So you need me. So you didn't beat me up. 
INT: And this was the [INAUDIBLE]. MG: [INAUDIBLE]  INT: What does [INAUDIBLE] mean? MG: [INAUDIBLE] Oh, god. This is a organization for an older people who can't go to the army and help-- have to help out the German army. So they worked with people who, who are not worth nothing. And where they send them, they have to work. This was [INAUDIBLE].  INT: And then the third round up came, the third [INAUDIBLE]. MG: The third [INAUDIBLE]-- I didn't go to work two weeks after-- I was in a, in a cellar, I told you, in a cellar. There was a store. And, and they had a bookstore. And there wasn't books. But the cellar had some old books. And we were there-- two woman with a child, and another woman with  a man, and me-- six people, six week. Yeah. We were scared to go out. And--  INT: This was before the third [INAUDIBLE]? MG: This was in the time from third [INAUDIBLE]. And we didn't walk out, because we were scared. But one night I said, I have to go to see my father. And I walked out. And it was very quiet. And I got to know that the [INAUDIBLE] had already finished long ago. So we came home. We did go to our home. And the lady-- two ladies with the child did go to their home. And then it was the [INAUDIBLE] that they took us to the concentration camp-- the, the 24,000 people and 400 children, 22,000 people to Majdanek, and 2,000 people to Kaiserwald, Riga. Between the people was 400 children. They tooked out the children from the mothers' hand. They put them in one place. And everybody had to walk through the children alive. Because you couldn't go back. So you go near to the [INAUDIBLE], you know, to a route. And, and the children were dumped. It-- this was terrible, to walk over children alive. And in that moment, I heard somebody called my name and said, goodbye. I saw my girlfriend hanging. They-- she want to run away. And they catched her and three, three men. They catched them all. And they hanged them. And she could say goodbye. 
INT: This was all as the people were exiting? MG: Wa-- walking to the exit out. Yeah.  INT: And the children? People just trampled over them? MG: They trampled. The children were dead. Not one child was alive. How do I know? Because when, when I was in '46 in Vilno, I did go to the place. And there was a lady who was in the time that they tooked us. And she telled me that not one child was alive.  INT: So you were part of the 2,000 [INAUDIBLE]-- MG: Of the 2,000. To the concentration camp, we came just 1,700. 300 run through the windows. The windows were closed where they took away all the, the, the wood and everything. And they threw themselves out to the running train. And 300 didn't go on with us. We were just 1,700 people.  INT: So they took you by train? MG: By train, but they took us so that it took them three and 1/2 days and three nights. They didn't want people to see, so-- because one thing, you have to go out. You are alive. You must go. So where they-- early, early in the morning when everybody was asleep, they would take us out and put us back. But what I have seen is in one train where I was, there was a mother with a daughter. And Ukrainian SS came in. I didn't tell you how they cau-- how terrible they close the ghetto. I don't know. 
INT: Could you describe that? MG: Yes, I can. Should I?  INT: Please. MG: They came. They closed it in two days. They came [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] like-- what can I tell you-- Back to back, two soldiers. And then one here and one the other. And from all four places, they shot where it did go. Doesn't matter where. They walked in shooting. So people run. Some people got killed. And then they, they didn't do like the German SS, slowly, you know? They catched you by your hair. They give you with the feet here or somewhere else.  INT: Who is this? MG: The new SS. This was Ukrainian soldiers who run away from Ukraine, got to the Germans. They were two years closed up like us. And then they took them out. And they send them to the SS. And they gave them the, the, the SS [INAUDIBLE]. And they were SS. But they were, in their behavior, terrible, much, much worser than, than the SS, the German.  INT: How did you know they were Ukrainian? MG: They spoke Ukraine. They couldn't speak German. Could be some could, but not all of them. So they-- so they closed the ghetto like this. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] And after three days and, and-- three and 1/2 days and three nights, in September 27, we came near middle of the night to the concentration camp.  INT: What year is this? MG: '43-- September '43, 27. 
INT: Can you describe the conditions on the train? MG: Ter-- yes. I was-- everybody was in the train, where it was 80 people. It was terrible. You couldn't sit. You couldn't stand. It, it-- so when they're stopped to take out people to go out came two Ukrainian with lamps. And they took the mother and the daughter. They didn't take them out-- took them in aside. And they did what they did. And I saw it. And my girlfriend, who lives in Sweden said to me, Maria, we have to run. I says, yes. So I walked out. And I looked for another train. And I find a train. They called them [INAUDIBLE] train. We closed 12 girls inside. And nobody could open it. And thank to this, I think we came to Kaiserwald. Otherwise, they would to us what they did to other ones.  INT: What became of the women on that other train, do you know? MG: She came to Kaiserwald. And she was very, very scared. She asked a German-- I was standing there. And she said, please, sir-- In Jewish, she couldn't speaking the German. Please, would you please kill me? I can't stand. He said, what are you talking about? We don't kill people here. She said, but you have a gun. You can kill me. He said, no. You go in your barrack. Barrack, that mean the place where we sit. I don't kill people [? here with this. ?] And why is it smelling? So he said we make the disinfection so nobody will get sick. It's true. So-- and then it was the [INAUDIBLE]. They-- I don't know why, but they think that everybody who comes must have lice. Nobody did. But they tooked 40, 40 people in one time. I was from the 41st people. And I was [INAUDIBLE] It means they took away my lice. They took away my, my, my dress, my everything. And they gave me to, to wear a sweater with long sleeves-- here, everything open, a short skirt. And I had my own, my own shoes. And I had 16 year not cut my hair, just the ends. And the commandant, the, the-- he was, he was sitting in, in concentration camp, too. His name was Rosenmeyer. He came. And he said, where are you? Are you from the crazy house? I say, why are you saying it? He says, you look like one. I say, I got this stuff from you people. He said, they not mine people. I'm a [INAUDIBLE] like you. I-- that means I sit in the concentration camp like you. I said, well, we think you are a little bit better. You're not Jewish. So he said to me, come. I will give you what to wear. And he-- which one is your package? I said, I have two. He said, take one. So I tooked one. And I got dressed. I changed [INAUDIBLE], because I-- 
INT: So you were able to put your own clothes on? MG: Yes, yes. And then they send us to another place in concentration camp.  INT: Where had you arrived to? MG: To Kaiserwald. And--  INT: What city was that near? MG: Riga, but it wasn't in the city. It was outside the city. But the whole place is called Kaiserwald. Later, I lived there, 12 1/2 years. The, the whole city-- the whole place was called Kaiserwald.  INT: But it was an enclosed camp? MG: The cl-- the camp was separate-- but in the beginning from the, from the place. Then later, there was just villas-- no houses, no, no, no little house-- villas, beautiful villas.  INT: But they took you into a camp? MG: They took us in, everybody, to the camp. And we had to work. And I remember the first time they send me to work to SS [INAUDIBLE] [? Rutenburg. ?] This is a, a, a hospital for the SS called [? Rutenburg. ?] And they telled us to sing [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH].  INT: Which means? MG: When the Jewish blood is running from the knife, they will win the war.  INT: And you had to sing this? MG: Yes, we must do. And there, I worked all over. First, I tooked out nails from all the wood. Then we opened all the houses. Then we take the wood in another place. Then they send me to wash toilets, to, to, to wash steps, everything. And then the, the [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]-- that means the chef. He was a officer-- came and asked who speak German. So we were two girls. One is in Israel. I said, I speak German. He said, would you want to work with the sick people? I said, may, may I say yes or no? He said, you can saw what you want. I understood. I said yes, I would want. At least I will be warm. So I worked there. And the soldiers brought me eight sandwiches a day. But I didn't eat myself. We eat, eight people-- 
INT: Which soldiers? MG: The sick soldier. They were-- who came to, to get healed. They were shot, you know?  INT: So these were German soldier? MG: German soldiers.  INT: And they gave you food? MG: Food-- eight sand-- eight people, eight sandwiches a day. And I gave it to eight people, because my girlfriend had a son. He was 14 years old. She was my girlfriend in, in that time, because she was much older than I. And I gave for him. He lives in Los Angeles. He's a engineer, very nice man. This was the first place where I worked.  INT: So you had-- the food was ample at that time? MG: Oh, yeah. Oh, yes. Then they sent us to [INAUDIBLE]. This is the first place for the, for the German-- how do you say flyers? The--  INT: Pilots. MG: Pilots, the officers-- And we worked there. First, I-- we cleaned the potatoes, the bad in one side, the good one in other side. Then they sent me in a villa to the colonel to clean the villa-- to wash the windows, wash the toilets, clean. So there was a Latvian lady. She stole food from him. And when he, he saw that there is not enough food, he asked her. She said, that's not me. That's the two Jewish girl. So [INAUDIBLE]. So he asked me to come to his room. And he said, how about food? I say, what about food? We get once a day bread and soup. Would you know who stole the bread and the cake what I get from Germany? I said no. I really didn't know. So he gave me his key. He said, when you hungry, you go and you take food. He was an old man. He would play on a [? flight. ?] You know, a [? flight? ?] He gave me food. And the young lady out, because he understood that she did it. 
INT: Do you recall his name? MG: No. I I remember he was a, a, a colonel. He was a very intelligent man. He was playing music by notes. That means he was something in his head. But I can't remember his name. I see him. He had big glasses on. But his name, I don't remember. And then they send me back to work again in [INAUDIBLE]. What they said that we do-- we were not the bosses. We did everything that men supposed to do. Oh, they send us to bring in blocks for houses. And it was January or February. It was very cold. And we stood on the ocean into one block. And I froze my both feet here. Because I didn't have what to wear. It was cold. There, I worked. Then they send me to another place called [INAUDIBLE]. [INAUDIBLE], that means the main boss of the place. He was aristocrat, really. He didn't see us. Me and my girlfriend from Sweden, he send us to cut trees. [LAUGHS]  INT: Tell me about that. MG: It was terrible. [LAUGHS] We didn't-- first, of all, we were scared. It was snow up to here. And to cut trees, this is for men work. But she said, [INAUDIBLE], you know what? Don't talk about it. We will try. And we tried. And a man came. He said when the-- you look how the tree is going, to the right or to the left. Otherwise, you get killed. So one day, this [INAUDIBLE] came. And he said, this is not work for girls. This will do the men. And you come inside and work-- clean the offices. Work where you need to be working, not there. So this was a very nice time. And then I worked in another place called [INAUDIBLE]. There were [INAUDIBLE]. They weren't SS, just people who brought us there were the SS. And there was a Latvian man called Pukitis. And he want to do to me. And I-- in the beginning, I think he's, he's making a joke. And then he said, lie down. Otherwise, I will shot you. And in that moment came Pukitis. And he said, what are you doing? He said, why not? He said, you German. You can't touch a Jewish girl. It's not clean. And he make to me like this. He means so he will not touch me. So he didn't. 
INT: And Pukitis was an SS officer? MG: No, no. He was a private man who had this place. And they took it from him, but he was head boss. This was Pukitis. His name, I remember. Some names, you can't always remember names.  INT: So how long were you at Kaiserwald? MG: In Kaiserwald, I was from Sept-- '43, September 27, in the middle of the night to August the third. They send me to a small concentration camp called Strassenhoff. In Lithuanian, it was [LITHUANIAN SPEECH]. It's easier to say it's Strassenhoff. I don't know.  INT: Where was it? MG: In Riga-- not in the city-- away from the city. There I was-- from there, I got free. We got free October 13, '44.  INT: Describe your experience there in Strassenhoff. MG: There-- when I came, it was terrible. Because they tooked me-- I didn't want to go, but nobody-- what, what could I say? I did want to go together with my girlfriend, but she worked. So I had to go alone. And I cried, of course, because I didn't know what was waiting for us there. And when I came, the wait nothing. 50 girls from there did go back. From the 50, three stayed in Kaiserwald. And me and two more sent back there.  INT: To Strassenhoff? MG: To Strassenhoff, to clean up the concentration camp before they leave the place. Because the Russian were already under the head.  INT: We're going to break and go to the next tape. MG: Mhm. 
INT: This is tape number four in the interview with Maria Glickman. Please continue. MG: I have to about where I stopped.  INT: OK. MG: That's the truth.  INT: They had taken 50 girls-- MG: To Strassenhof. And when we came there, they said to us that we will not go out. We just work inside the concentration camp. Because before us, 15 girls runned. They catch them. Three girls run, they didn't. They did go to the partisan. But 15, they were catched. So we worked inside the concentration camp. And I got to know my husband. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] And he liked me. I--  INT: He was-- MG: --I didn't have my hair on my head. I forgot to tell this.  INT: He was a prisoner? MG: Of course. They cut my hair in Kaiserwald. I forgot to tell it.  INT: You could tell it now. MG: I was working in [NON-ENGLISH]. And 12 people ran away. And I was between the 12 who could run. But I didn't, because of my girlfriend. We got like sisters. So [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] they called the German SS. And they came. And they looked for the people who run away, but they didn't find them. One lady had her husband, not Jewish. And he came with a two horses and a van. And four of the people got inside, some run alone. I remember a beautiful musician in '39. He got a gold saxophone from the government. He run away where he was living before. And the lady hold there 16 people up to the moment that the German came-- the Russian came. And I stayed. I didn't run. They want to take me. And I said, no, I'm not going. So when we came back in concentration camp, I was a [NON-ENGLISH]. That means I was responsible for 10 people. We had 178 people. And I helped out, because I-- I spoke German. And [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] the main boss, [INAUDIBLE] was the main boss. [INAUDIBLE] is like a-- a general-- a general major. Yeah. And he called me to come. And he asked me questions. He put a piece of [NON-ENGLISH] from the machine, a piece of [INAUDIBLE]. You know? And he's gone on the table. And he hold me an hour and a half. How did they run away? How come I didn't know? Why didn't I tell? I said, I didn't know nothing. 
INT: The people that ran were amongst the 10 that you were-- MG: Among the 12.  INT: --that you were responsible for? MG: No. No, among the 12 who run together and four run separate. They run-- I didn't know where they run. I just know that my [INAUDIBLE], the lady who had a husband, he came with his cousin. And he saw me through the through the-- toilet, excuse me. And he said to her, take your friend. I will hold her. And I said, no, I didn't go. So, then after we came home-- home, in concentration camp, [INAUDIBLE] asked me to come. And he asked me questions. And I told him that I really didn't know where they did go. But I would never tell, that's for sure. He said to me-- by the end, he said to me, [NON-ENGLISH]. That means my hair-- my hair must be cut. And I must have the striped dresses. So I said, thank you, Herr Kommandant. Danke, Herr Kommandant. That means I thank him. He said, just a moment, why? I said, my head is here. Hair will grow. He said, out of here. So, I did go out. Twice he helped me. That's true. Twice he helped. Once he helped me when we came. I don't know if I told you. We came from work. And everybody who came had to get undressed. Me, too, everybody. And there was a lady before me. And she had three pair of pants. She took the pants, must be to sell to buy a piece of bread, I don't know what. And she had bread. And she said to me, take my bread. I said, no. I was scared. So, the SS lady, the Blitzfrau [INAUDIBLE], gave me one. So I took my other arm. And I want to take the bread. So she gave me another one while I want to take the bread. So, I didn't know what to do. Then she took-- she made a fist. And she beat the lady over the head. And then eggs [INAUDIBLE] [LAUGHS]. And I began to cry and laugh. [LAUGHS] She had three eggs in her hair. She didn't know. I didn't-- nobody knew. And she gave it over the head. And it run, the eggs. And I couldn't stand. So she give me one with her foot. So, Sauer, the general, came in and said, please stop and send her to the barrack. And she send me. Because really it wasn't my fault. But, otherwise, they get undressed. And they get beaten. And if they had what they-- some had could be gold, I don't know-- they took away everything. And then we go to the-- our places. This was one of the nice things that the-- it was terrible. Because in a big place and there were men and women. For a man to get undressed is much worse than for a woman. The men cried like babies. They couldn't-- your know, they hold their hands like that. I will never forget. The girls, not so. But all of us get undressed. And they looked at what we have. Could be some have gold, I don't know. I didn't. This was one fall when we came from work. [LAUGHS] It was terrible times, and terrible things. And you cannot remember in one time everything. But it itches your heart all the time. And you think how people got killed, how your family got killed, how your father, how your brother. Some had wives they are alive. And their children got killed. And their wives got killed. What can you do? Nothing. And then we-- we were there up to October-- no, September, 26 in '43. And my husband told me that in case the-- the Russian will come, the German will kill you-- will kill us for sure. Because they don't have time to take us to another concentration camp. 
INT: This is '43 or '44? MG: '4-- '44, September 26 or 25. And he said, I make-- where he worked, he heat the water for the factory, 50,000 liters one place and 30,000 in the other. And under this was a chimney 45 meters tall. And in the chimney, through the place, he would go through. And first of all, he closed up the-- so nobody will know that there is something inside. He closed it with-- with-- with cement, with everything. I don't know. I haven't seen. And then he maked a hole downstairs. And where he find this, I don't know, something to close up. And he find a piece of wood. And he would put the wood to this piece and to the other wall. It was very small. We were supposed to be there 24 people, and we were just 11. The other ones got scared to go in.  INT: So, he built a hiding place. MG: A hiding place, 11 months. He brought water in. He stealed a radio. He stealed 350 loaves of bread by the [NON-ENGLISH]. That means the [NON-ENGLISH], a-- a place where all the food comes together, and then they give to the soldiers. So, my husband, in the middle of the night, would go and steal, and through the chimney go down and bring the food. But when we came, the bread was worth nothing. It was green. What we had is, we had for meat, like-- like soup, like goulash, I don't know what, in boxes, and marmalade, and the water and, for three days, two little pieces of bread. So, I gave my bread to my husband. Because he is a man. I didn't need the bread. And what I heard is that one of my friends who came out with me got very sick. She would die if not me. She had-- I didn't think it's cancer. But I didn't know. I was too young. Here under the right arm, so big. She had fever, I think, the highest that it can be. And I said to my girlfriend, the other one, I said, Jeanette, I think I have to open it. Because, otherwise, she will for sure die. I had a needle. So, first I put it in the ground. And then I washed it. And with a clean paper-- not paper-- handkerchief, I cleaned it. And then I-- I asked her friend to hold her arms like this. And I cut, and cut, and cut. And then I open it. And everything did go on me. But five minutes later, she opened her eyes. And I washed it, and cleaned it all night. And in the morning she said, what did you do to me? I said, nothing, I just opened your wound, that's all. 
INT: She was in the chimney with you? MG: Yes, she was in the chimney. We were three girls. Her name is [? Sarah. ?] And the other one was [? Jeanette. ?] And I was Maria.  INT: And your husband? MG: And my husband, and seven more.  INT: What is his name? MG: Hanon. In Hebrew, Hanon. They called him Honay. We had a rabbi with us. He was 11 weeks before us. When they came to take from concentration camp the people to Germany, people got scared. They did think they take them to kill them. So what they did is, they run. Him and the other man, was-- his name was [INAUDIBLE], they both came to the chimney. They did know-- I don't know how-- where. And they were there 11 weeks before us. And when I saw them, I didn't want to go back. Because both have eyes like crazy people. Six weeks, no air, but they had food. The food was fresh then. And then we came. And my girlfriend [? Sarah, ?] her boyfriend, tooked her in a bag. And he sit on her. Not on her, he sit by her. And boss of our concentration camp did think that he's sitting like this, that she was there. And at night when everybody was asleep, waiting for them to go to the concentration camp, he walked in quietly through the place in the chimney. Then my husband did go out. He put on pieces of junk, I don't know, something to wear on both hands. He would go to the end and close it, so when the dogs come they wouldn't smell the-- the-- the feet, that somebody walked there. And they closed up. And we heard the German coming in knocking and looking for us. And they make fire under the water. Nothing, we didn't feel. It was hot. And there was holes to the chimney. I would open it. And I would catch in. But we-- we had to do something. We did go out three-- three times, for 18 days and nights, three times. 
INT: How did you know that it was time to go into hiding? MG: Because they took the-- the people to the concentration camp.  INT: So, the entire care was emptied out? MG: Liquidated, liquidated. So, when they took the people-- so, we didn't know. So, me and my girlfriend, the SS was walking inside. She opened the window. She got in, hold open the window. And I got in. Well, I closed just the window, put down my head, an SS man walked through. And my other girl, the third girlfriend who I helped, her friend took her in in the baggage.  INT: And you were in there for 18 days. MG: 18 days and nights. Then, three days before the Russian came, they cut the water off. Not for us, they cut the water off. How did we know that the Russian came? We didn't, because the fire was done. And the water was done. My husband said, from where it goes the steam must go water. It was so big, like a finger. And three men-- my husband, one I don't know if he's alive, one is in Israel, Leva Mil'shtein, they did go out to take water. And when my husband got three boxes of water, a Russian came in. And he said, [NON-ENGLISH]. And my husband stood and looked at him and didn't know what he's saying. So, the other one spoke Russian a little bit. He said, take your hand up. He said, what is he, German? He said, no, he's Jewish. Here is a concentration camp. And there is around and around mines. He said, no more mines. 4:00 at night, we take out all the mines. They were since 4:00 there. And we didn't know. Then they said, out all of you. And so, I tried to go out, and I couldn't. I got paralyzed lying on the floor, so they took me out. And the-- how was his name? A general from the second army, he said, who speaks good Russian? I said, I speak perfectly Russian. He said, I want to ask you questions and you please answer. I says, of course, I will. So he asked me everything that I know, and I told him. And then they took me. And they took me to wash myself, because I was black. And my hair was so big. And the eyes was scared, so I looked like crazy, must be. And then they took us to the city. And-- 
INT: You understood by now that the war was over? MG: Yes.  INT: --and that they had liberated you? MG: Yes. They said, yes. We saw the Germans running and the Russian coming. We know that it's over, the war. But it wasn't over yet. Just in Riga, it was over. In-- in [INAUDIBLE], where we say, a city in Latvia, there wasn't-- the Germans stood there and shot. Took a couple of weeks to take them in. It wasn't so easy. But we were free. So, I sit on a bench. I couldn't walk. And a lady came, a Russian lady. And she said, young man, how old are you? I say, I'm not a young man, I'm a young lady. And I'm old 19 years. She says, why are you here? I says, by Hitler. You're from concentration camp. I says, yes. Ah, now I know you wear pants, and a jacket, and boots. And you don't have hair. I think you were a-- [LAUGHS] you were a boy. I wasn't a boy. This was the first thing. Then I had very hard by the Russian, because I write to Wilno to send me papers. I didn't get an answer. And the Russian didn't believe me nothing. They don't believe their own brothers. What they did is they gave me a paper. And I had to come to the police every month and sign my name. [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] In '46 I got a paper to go to Wilno. I came. And the government in Lithuania didn't help me with nothing. 
INT: So, you went back home. MG: I went back home. And I didn't get nothing. And I did go back to Riga. But I got-- it was very hard for me. I lived 17 kilometers, like 20 some miles, away from the city. I lived in Kaiserwald in a villa. I lived very-- in a very rich villa, but I didn't have what to eat. They don't-- if you don't work, you don't get food. So my husband get 350 gram bread, but not me. So I had a watch I sold. I had earrings I sold. And I didn't have more, nothing.  INT: So, you still had this jewelery from-- MG: No, the jewelry they took away.  INT: But the watch and the earrings-- MG: The watch and the earrings my husband gave me. He had it somewhere in concentration camp. He had where to put it. Where I was, in Kaiserwald, you couldn't put nothing away.  INT: So, you sold that for food? MG: For food, yes, in-- in market by the-- by the Russian.  INT: When you went back to Wilno, did you go back to where your home had been? MG: Yes, of course.  INT: And what did you see there? MG: Nothing, just a naked place. Nothing.  INT: Was your home gone? MG: Yeah, yeah. Everything was gone. Not mine-- most of the people. [INAUDIBLE] All they left, a house half-- house and half nothing, or nothing at all. I did go where my mother's sister was living-- nothing. Most of the-- because they didn't want people to talk what they did. This was the Germans. And then it was the Russians with the Lithuanians. Everybody did something to us and didn't want people do talk, so they close it up. 
INT: So, when the war was over, nobody was interested in hearing about what had happened to you? MG: Oh, no. You see, what I know is we would talk between themselves. But nobody-- [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] I tell you, the-- the how do you call it, the place where in Ponary, my friend made that was written about that here was killed 360,000 people in Hebrew and in Jewish. And they take it off. And they [INAUDIBLE].  INT: Who is they? MG: Hm?  INT: Who is they? MG: Somebody from the government [INAUDIBLE] the-- I don't know. Police, somebody-- you can't--  INT: This was after the war they changed the monument? MG: Yes, of course. They changed what was written, that here are lying people killed by Hitler. That's all, nothing else. And then there was two cemeteries. There was one cemetery-- a holy man. He was Christian. And he changed for Jewish. [INAUDIBLE], his son, and they took his-- they burned him alive in-- in the city, the Polish people. So they took the-- when a person burned, what comes out?  INT: The ashes. MG: Ashes, like in Jewish. And they put it in a grave. And it grows-- did grow a tree like a person-- hand, feet, really. And the Germans didn't touch it. I don't know why. They left it be. But the-- [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] I don't know, the Lithuanian or the Russian, they closed both cemeteries. No cemeteries anymore, houses-- new houses. 
INT: Where the cemeteries used to be. MG: Yeah. They did it in Kiev, too.  INT: So where did you settle? MG: I settled where my husband was. I didn't want to go to Poland. But he got to know that his mother and two sisters are alive. There were in Siberia. So he said, what will we go? You don't have nobody. I don't know the language. Let's sit here. So, we sit. 10 years of the 12 and a half, I was most of the time hungry. Yeah, because he worked very hard. But you couldn't make a living. Because if you get 350 gram bread, then you need 600. Because you don't have fat. You don't have eggs. You don't have nothing.  INT: This was in Riga? MG: In Riga. So we were hungry. I got food for the children from the government, that's true. But I have to walk or to go by train, street train, 17 kilometers a day in one side.  INT: When where your children born? MG: My first daughter was born October 11, '45.  INT: And her name is? MG: [? Malka, ?] [? Musia, ?] [? Malka. ?] Her name-- her real name [? is Musia. ?] But she calls herself Molly. It's all right. And my second was born '48, March 10.  INT: And her name? MG: Sima Glickman. She isn't married. And my husband was born June 23-- 13, in year '23. And mine you have, I think. 
INT: So, you stayed in Riga for 12 years. MG: 12 and a half years. I write to Molotov. You know Molotov?  INT: Who was, please? MG: Who was then like here is the Secretary of State. He was a very intelligent man. Nothing to say about him. But he didn't-- to-- to say something just had to say Stalin, nobody else. What he said goed. If you said, this-- you have a suit. And this suit is a good suit, somebody will say. He would say, it's from London. I bought it in '39, '38. You got three years for it. If you have stealed bread and they catch you with a loaf of bread, they did so-- how many years you worked? How many days you worked? 40 the years? 25 years to Siberia. If you worked good there, you sit 12 years. If not, you die there. It was terrible cold there. It's unbelievable. It's the best air in the world there. But with no food, there is not enough. So people died. My husband, thank to God, didn't sit. And me neither. But what I did is I got to know people from the Jewish theater. And we had to play Sholem Aleichem's You know it?  INT: Please explain. MG: The [NON-ENGLISH]. So nine days before we had to play, Stalin said, no Jewish theater, nowhere. No concerts, no dance, no music, nothing in Jewish. So this was the end of my playing. So and other things I couldn't do it. Because I have small children. You can't leave them alone. I didn't have money to pay for somebody to look at them. So we lived up to '57. I gave my papers in '56, in December month. And in '57 marked the first I got the papers. I got alone. My husband didn't go. He was scared. He just came when he had to sign. So when we get to Poland, there I got my real papers. And we were in Poland. The Polish people gave us everything. They gave us where to live, two and a half months, food, train tickets, money, everything. 
INT: And they knew you were Holocaust survivors? MG: They picked us up like Holocaust survivors. Of course, they knew. We came to our country. I was the who was born in Poland. And then when my husband looked for work, he couldn't speak of word of Polish. He couldn't speak good Russian, either. But they liked him. And they gave him a green number to have a taxi, a cab. But we-- we didn't have the money. So a friend of ours had the money. So my husband took his cab. He got 70% and my husband 30%. What would you do?  INT: We're going to break here and go to the next tape. MG: OK  INT: This is tape number five in the interview with Maria Glickman. Where did you go from Riga? MG: From Riga, we did go to Poland. We did go with-- with a train through Vilna, Minsk, Brest-Litovsk. This was the end of the-- the-- Russia. From there, we did go to Biala Podlaska. This was the first place in Poland. We stood there three days and nights. The cardinal-- you know what a cardinal-- he came to see my children. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] He put his hand over them, and he said, you came with God, and you will go with God, and you will be happy. And he gave them packages with chocolate like this, both of them. This was-- I felt very happy of it. It means that not just the government, but the Holy Father from Poland was good to us. 
INT: So life was better in Poland. MG: Yeah. Oh, yeah, much better. In Poland, you got right away work. You made money. And I played a little bit Jewish theater concerts. And--  INT: Were the Polish people interested in your story? Did you ever tell-- MG: Oh, they know everything.  INT: You told them your stories, though. MG: We didn't have-- they did know all themselves what did go on. They have seen.  INT: But they didn't ask you about your experiences? MG: No, some asked, some not. They've seen-- Russia was terrible, what they did. It's-- it's not-- Russia had 600,000 people. 90% of them got killed. They had to see. But they helped us. They gave us money to buy furniture. They gave us-- my girlfriend left Poland for Israel. They gave us the apartments where there's a new house. Otherwise, you have to stay two, three years and wait. They gave us estate.  INT: All through the government? MG: Through the government. Right away, I came, I signed the papers, they gave me the keys, and it's mine. Yeah. And my husband worked there. We were there from-- in Poland from March 12 to August 27. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] This was March-- March 12, '57. We left '58, August 27.  INT: And where did you go? MG: To Israel. I had my mother and my sister there. So it took a little bit of time to go by ship, by train and by ship. We came. I had-- my cousin was a-- a big person in Israel. He was an ambassador in Brazil, in Argentina, in Paris. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] So they said to me, your cousin is [NON-ENGLISH]. You will have a good life. But it wasn't like that. But-- it was hot, and I was sick with my heart. Because of my feet, I got sick with my heart, my valve. And I couldn't stand the heat. I worked two and a half years in a prehistoric museum for the government. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] And they took me in because-- not because they did know me, but my girlfriend worked by the mayor of the city. And they did know that I speak a couple of languages. And people would come from all over the world, so I could talk to them. So I worked two and a half years. I made very little money. I had to make $600. They paid me $250. 
INT: Why was that? MG: Because I worked two works. I would come early in the morning, [INAUDIBLE], clean the museum-- two museums. Biologic museum upstairs, and on the second floor, the prehistoric museum. And then I would sit and write down who came, who lived, who-- from where it is, what they looked for, what they want to know. I worked two and a half years there. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] And then we-- eight months before we left, my cousin said, if-- I don't tell you to come from Israel here. But if you feel that you must, I will send you the papers. And in that time, you had to have, they call it quota. You had to have a quota. My husband had. I didn't, because the Latvian people, they lived a very rich life in Europe. They didn't want to go to no place. So they had free places. So we came here. After four and a half months, came here. I have a wonderful girlfriend. She-- I had already an apartment, furniture, food, and work for my husband. We came December 27. And December-- January 2, my husband worked.  INT: What year was this? MG: We came December 27, in '65. January the 2nd in '66, he worked already. And since then, he worked. But he got sick at work in '72. He got a stroke. He was 57 years old. [PAUSES FOR 5 SECONDS] Then the whole luck changed. We had a house. We had to sell it because I didn't have money to hold the house. Now they said they will give us pension. We don't get it. I don't know why. 
INT: Who said they would give you pension? MG: I did go to a lawyer, and from the lawyers, the Claims Conference. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] I got three letters from Germany that I got-- in '72 we get to $7,340, me, and my husband, $7,350 in '71. So what we did with the money is we bought the house. And the rest, my daughter got sick-- very sick, in Israel. She got tuberculosis. And I said to my husband, we have $5,000. I'm going. Two small children. So I came there. And thank to God she is alive and everything is all right. But I was three months with the children, and I need the money. No more money, but they don't give us money.  INT: And your children now? MG: My children-- my daughter is director in Workmen's Circle in Elizabeth. My younger daughter works for CBS. She's a coordinator and producer. They're very intelligent girls, both. They learned. They know what they want. This is all.  INT: Do you think that your experiences during the war had any effect on the way you raised your children? MG: Oh, yeah. The young one, 100%, the younger one.  INT: In what way? MG: In every way. She lives with it. She likes the people from there. She likes to hear everything. She's-- she's in the organization for the people who had children after the war from the concentration camp. She-- she speaks perfectly Yiddish, like me. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] She is-- she got more than my older daughter, because my daughter-- my older daughter came in '75 here. Because when we left, she was married, two children. He wanted to go. She didn't want to go. 
INT: So do you think her involvement is a result of the way you raised her, or what you told her? MG: Of course.  INT: Did you tell your children what had happened to you? MG: Of course I did. Of course I did. They had to know. Sometimes, could be I was not together. I mean, I would say something. But later on, I would remember what I said, and I tell them why I said it. That where I walk, where I sit, when I sleep, everything did go with me. I live with it. It's-- it's a terrible thing, but I would walk out in the middle of the night and walk in the dark street, not to lie alone in bed. I can't help it. Now as then, there is nothing to wait for. Not young any more. I-- I just think sometimes, why didn't I feel that other girls-- young girls felt, to have a young man, to be loved? You know, everybody liked me when I was a child. But later on, there-- everybody looked for himself how to get a piece of food, something. This was my life.  INT: What do you think sustained you? What helped you to survive? MG: I want to survive. I did everything. I was-- it was-- one time I slipped by a Polish lady five days, me and my girlfriend and her brother and his mother. We run, you know? We didn't know what to do. So we run here, we run there. We tried to ask people to help us. Sometimes, people didn't want help me. They don't-- they didn't believe me that I'm Jewish. I came to ask for buying-- buy bread. The lady said, I don't have bread. I said, why not? Two ladies came just out-- Jewish ladies-- they bought bread. She said, it's not true. So I open and I show her the-- the yellow thing. She said, are you Jewish? I says, of course I'm Jewish. Oh, she says, I will give you bread. You understand? Jews-- this goes with you. I have forgotten many things. Could be I have forgotten half of it. But a little bit was inside, and it stays with me. Can't help it. 
INT: Do you ever dream about your experiences? MG: Not anymore. Since I had my open heart surgery, no. Nothing at all. Before this, yes, every night. I fall. I run. They shot me. Killed. Not anymore. No. Since '81, I don't dream about nothing.  INT: You have great grandchildren now. MG: Yes.  INT: Is there a message-- is there something you would like to say to them and to future generations? MG: I would like that they should be who they were born. They shouldn't change their religion. They should think about what can happen if you forget who you are. I don't-- I like people, all kinds of people. But everybody has to remember that he has his roots. And I want them to have their roots. Their mother is born in Israel, and they are born here. They're very smart children, and beautiful, both of them. Really. That's all. I love very much my granddaughter. She's very smart, intelligent, and good. And I love very much my grandson. He's finishing lawyer next year. My family knows the main thing is to learn. If you don't learn, you have nothing. If you don't have much money but you have, here, something that you can give to other people, it's very-- it's very important. I think so. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] This is it. My younger daughter, she says, Mother, I love you. You know I love you. I says, thank you very much. But when I talk to you, I laugh. And everybody laughs there. I say, it's good. To laugh is healthy when we speak in Yiddish. So I-- I say something, and she laughs. So the people who [INAUDIBLE] they love you, so It's better than to cry. I cried enough. [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] I am happy that I didn't cry here. 
INT: Is there anything else you would like to add to your story? MG: In this moment, I don't remember. Could be there are many things, but [INAUDIBLE]. Don't remember. The only thing that was terrible when I found my mother. When my mother came to pick me up in Israel, [SIGHS] she didn't recognize me. I didn't recognize her. But my daughter said, Mother, your grandmother is asking for you by radio. I said, yes. I don't-- didn't hear. She says, here. So I heard. And I looked around. And my mother's standing behind me. She says, shhh. I shouldn't cry and not talk. And she lost her voice. She didn't talk all day long.  INT: Why was that? MG: Nerves. And my sister came at night, because her husband was working, she was working. She came at night, and my daughter was in the balcony by my mother. And she said, Mother, Aunt Asya is coming. She recognized her. So I rang down, and my mother was living in a city where the real Hasidim live, in Bnei Brak. And everybody pulled out their head to see what-- what will go on. And my sister falled to my feet and kissed my feet. And I couldn't take it. [PAUSES FOR 6 SECONDS] This was a terrible thing.  INT: Do you want to mention something about your sister now? MG: Yes. My sister is a wonderful person, first of all, for everybody. If somebody needs something, she would be the first one to help. She's very intelligent. She is a poet. What they say in Israel, they compare it to Goethe. She's a wonderful poet. Six and a half years ago, she got sick, and she did go to have operation, and she never walked out. She got paralyzed. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] She was then-- six and a half years ago-- 56 1/2 years old. [PAUSES FOR 6 SECONDS] She has a wonderful husband. That's true. Of course, now she has three nurses a day, for 24 hours. It's very good to hear. This is the only luck that she has, because she had lost-- she had three sons. All three died, [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] one in New York, one in Philadelphia, and one in Israel. Because he was sent from the hospital to teach. [BACKGROUND NOISE] I don't care. Let him knock. And [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] five abortions. [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] Not-- she didn't, by herself. So she's alone. She's always alone. [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] Now what I know, my daughter talked with my brother on a Sunday, that she stopped to speak. [PAUSES FOR 5 SECONDS] That's my sister. 
INT: Anything else you would like to add at all? MG: I don't know. About?  INT: About your life. MG: My life. I had a very hard life. Believe me. I was steps and-- and-- and floors and toilets in Israel. And everything that I could, just to have a little bit money for food. Because my husband didn't make enough money. I had it very hard. And this made me to leave Israel, too. [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] My daughter, my older daughter, wasn't with us. She was in Kibbutz. And the younger was with me. They didn't take the younger, because she was too young. They took just from 12 years, and she was 10. So [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] that was my life. The only thing, I had friends, many friends. From the ghetto, from concentration camp, people where I lived. I had always friends. I wasn't alone. And now I am in the United States, and I'm always alone. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] My husband is in the hospital, two years. January 15, it will be two years. So I'm always alone. My daughters work. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] That's all. For all my luck, I came here. What can I do? Some people don't have anywhere to sleep. So I have to say thank you. And I had what to eat. [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] I was very sick in this country. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] I just came a year. In a month and a half, I got sick. I had a mastectomy. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] And later on, we got to know that I didn't have cancer. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] 10 Years later, I had an operation on my breast. My girlfriend was working there-- doctor. She said, no cancer. No taking of the breast. And then-- this was in '76. And in '81, I had open heart surgery. And now, October 29, I had one oper-- two operations. In 30 I had a [INAUDIBLE] operation. [PAUSES FOR 5 SECONDS] Anyway, I hold-- I'm holding my own. [LAUGHS] I want to live up to 80, at least. We'll see. I think this is enough. 
INT: We are very grateful, and thank you very much for sharing your story. MG: Thank you. Thank you.  INT: Thank you. MG: Every Jewish man in the Vilna ghetto had to wear the-- how is it in English?  INT: Star of David. MG: The Star of David. And I wear them, too. I sew it myself. It's not something that they make for us. You had to do it yourself. When I came to the concentration camp, they took away my clothing, there it was. So because of this, I had it. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] This is a picture of my mother, taken in '45, in Siberia. Her name was [? Marjette ?] Kuricki Sonia [? Basel. ?] [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] This is my friend, Musia Dajches. She was an actress. This picture was taken in '32, sent to Israel. [PAUSES FOR 5 SECONDS] This is a picture, taken by me in '93 in Vilna, where it was the ghetto. Now it's just this piece of the ghetto. It was taken on the [INAUDIBLE] 16. The street is [INAUDIBLE].  INT: And what is on the wall? MG: On the wall is written, where it was-- was it was in this place. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] This is a picture of me and both my daughters. The bigger one is [? Mosia, ?] and the smaller one is Sima. [? Mosia ?] is born in '45, and Sima is born in '48. Taking the picture is in Kaiserwald, where I was in concentration camp. That's all. This is a picture of my husband, Hanon Glickman. Make the picture in Haifa in '65, in April month. [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] This is a picture taken in '56, before my friend left Vilna. It's in Ponary, in the grave where the Jewish people were killed. There is my friend, [? Hasia, ?] her mother-in-law, [INAUDIBLE], her friend, Misha, and her friend, Rosa, and her daughter, Miriam. [PAUSES FOR 7 SECONDS] This is a picture taken in '93. It's in the same place where the picture come from '56, in Ponary, in the grave. [PAUSES FOR 5 SECONDS] This is a picture taken in '40-- in '45. It's a monument in Ponary. But it was re-erected-- re-erected, and it was taken off the Hebrew Jewish words, and now is just in Lithuanian and Russian, written that here are people killed by the Germans. That here are people killed by the Germans, that they were Jews. [PAUSES FOR 7 SECONDS] This is in Jerusalem, by my sister in her house. It's my sister, Asya Gay, and her husband, Dr. Isaac Gay. [PAUSES FOR 5 SECONDS] This is my sister's book, written in poems. And the book's name is [NON-ENGLISH]. 
INT: And when was the book written? MG: In the '70s. The date, I don't remember. [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] This is a picture taken in the United States, in Irvington, by a wedding of a friend's son, me and my husband. [PAUSES FOR 5 SECONDS] This is a picture of my family, taken when my grandson had bar mitzvah. There is my daughter, Sima, from left, my granddaughter, Rifka, my daughter, Molly, my husband, Hanon, my grandson, Leor, me, my son-in-law, Nathan, and his cousin. That's all. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] That's all. This is a picture made here in Springfield. It's my daughter, her grandson-- do I say the name? Adam. And her husband, Nathan, and her granddaughter-- [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] I don't have the name. [PAUSES FOR 5 SECONDS] My great grander-- Lemor. Granddaughter, Lemor. Nervous.