INT: Today is January 2, 1997. The survivor being interviewed is Janet Singer Applefield. The interviewer is Beth Cohen. The interview is being conducted in Plymouth, Massachusetts, United States of America. The interview is being conducted in English. Could you please state and spell your name? JA: It's Janet Applefield, J-A-N-E-T A-P-P-L-E-F-I-E-L-D.  INT: What was your name at birth? And could you spell that, please? JA: Gustawa Singer, G-U-S-T-A-W-A, Singer, S-I-N-G-E-R.  INT: Do you have any other names? JA: My nickname was Dzidzia, D-Z-I-D-Z-I-A. Just it means baby. And I had other names during the war. My name was Krystina Antoszkiewicz, K-R-Y-S-T-I-N-A A-N-T-O-S-Z-K-I-E-W-I-C-Z.  INT: Any other names? No? JA: No, I think that's all.  INT: OK, what's your birth date? JA: June 4th, 1935.  INT: OK, and you're how old? JA: I'm 61.  INT: Where were you born? Please spell that. JA: I was born in Krakow, Poland, C-R-A-C-OW, Poland, P-O-L-A-N-D.  INT: Thanks. Janet, why don't you begin by talking about your early memories of your childhood? JA: Well, I lived in a little town, Nowy Targ, outside of Krakow, with a large extended family. I had a baby sister. And I was the first grandchild in the family. And my father was one of six brothers. And my mother was one of three sisters. And one set of grandparents, the Singers, lived in Nowy Targ. My other grandparents lived in Wadowice, a little village-- same place where the current Pope is from. And I remember a lot of fun things. I remember my uncles doing a lot of fun things with me in particular. My uncle Arthur used to take me out on his motorcycle, and we would go to the candy store, and he would buy me things. I remember preparation for the holidays when my mother and my grandmother used to cook and bake. I remember making challah, braiding challah with them, and making noodles. Everything was made from scratch, so it took a long time to prepare. And I remember the house being cleaned and-- but in particular, I recall the gypsy woman used to come. And she used to scrub-- you know, scrub the floors and get the whole house ready. 
INT: For the holidays? Was this for-- JA: For the holi-- like for Friday night, for every Friday night when, you know, we'd have our Shabbos supper.  INT: What did you have for Shabbos supper? JA: We had chicken soup, of course-- chicken, fish, cold fish. I think it was carp. And it was cooked with raisins. And I remember the gelatin from the fish. I remember certain dishes that to this day, I kind of favor, you know, like sliced cumbers called mizeria with cream and [PAUSES FOR 5 SECONDS] borscht. You know, I mean, different things, but not always the same things.  INT: Did your grand-- you said your mother and your grandmother cooked together. Did your grandmother live with you? JA: No. No, we lived in a-- I think it was an apartment. I don't remember exactly where we lived, but I-- it wasn't a house. But I remember a couple incidents that happened. Once-- well, I must have been two, three years old. There was a beautiful table cloth on the table, in the dining room table. My mother did a craft called tatting. It was kind of an embroidery, but lace-- sort of lace making. And I remember having a wonderful time cutting it up with scissors. And another time, I remember the housekeeper was cleaning out the bird cage. And the bird was on the balcony. And she told me to hold the door closed, you know, not to let him out. Of course, I did let him out and the neighbors running around looking for a canary that was flying around. [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] Different little things-- I remember the first time my parents went out. I was still in a crib. The crib was made out of like, a netting, like a rope, rope netting. And my parents were going out for the evening and leaving me with the housekeeper. And I remember you know, carrying on, screaming. And that was my first experience with separation. And it's so incredible, because I remember the design of the nightgown that I was wearing. And I must have been really little, because I was still in a crib. So things like that, you know, those very early memories-- but mainly the family and the warmth of the family. 
INT: What was your mother's name? JA: Her name was Amalja Nabel-- her maiden name.  INT: And how did your parents meet? JA: It was an arranged meeting. And the story goes that when my mother first saw my father, she locked herself in a room and would not come out, because my father was a red head. In those days, red heads were really stigmatized. And you know, she didn't want to come out. But I guess-- I don't know how or how she was convinced, but she did come out. [LAUGHS] But so it was an arranged meeting.  INT: And how old-- how old was your mother when she got married? Do you know? JA: She got married in 1934. And she was born in 1910. So it would make her 24.  INT: Was she from Nowy Targ? JA: No, she was from Wadowice.  INT: And where was that? JA: That was a village-- not far. You know, we used to go there by train. So it wasn't very far.  INT: So her family lived there? JA: That's right.  INT: And your father's family lived-- JA: Lived in Nowy Targ.  INT: What-- you mentioned Shabbos and holidays. Was your family religious when you were little? JA: My grandfather Nabel was very religious. And my other grandparents-- I think they practiced it, but I don't think they were-- I don't think they were very-- I think my father sort of put up a fuss, even though he did it. Because you know, there was either orthodoxy or there was nothing. So-- but I remember the men praying, you know, with the teffilin. But as I said, my grandfather, Jakob, was very religious. And we used to go there very often. I remember one time I was there, and I got very sick. I had scarlet fever. And so the treatment in those days is to be kept in a darkened room, and you had to-- you couldn't eat. You had to be on a strict diet. And I remember everybody would come in the room. And I would want to smell their breath to see what they ate. And to this day, I still smell tomato soup. And I love tomato soup. [LAUGHTER] 
INT: What about cousins? Were there cousins around? JA: There were cousins. There was-- my father's brother was married. And they had a little girl, [? Anette, ?] Anushka. And then my mother's sister was married, and they had a little boy, [? Marzelic, ?] so I had little cousins.  INT: What did your apartment look like? Do you remember? JA: I just remember the balcony, where the bird-- I let the bird out. And I remember the dining room. And I remember my crib. And I remember one time stealing [LAUGHS] a little hot dog. They were all linked together, and I just pulled them and ate them raw-- things like that. But I don't remember the layout of the whole apartment.  INT: Do you remember the neighborhood at all, what the area you lived in looked like? JA: I think I remembered more because I've been there in recent years, and so I pictured that, but-- and also from the photographs that I have. Actually, the village has not changed at all. It's basically how it was, with the exception of the main square, which is called the [POLISH]. That used to be all cobblestone, and now it's a big parking lot, you know, that they use for parking. Oh, also I remember the market day. I think it was on a Thursday. And I particularly remember that, because that was the day when all the peasants-- the peasants were called [POLISH]. And they were-- came from the mountains. And they came to shop that day. And the market was right in the [POLISH]. Today it's not there anymore. It's a different location. But-- and that was a very good business day for my grandfather, who had the houseware, home improvement type of store. 
INT: In Nowy Targ? JA: In Nowy Targ, right in the center of the town, in the [POLISH].  INT: What did your father do? JA: Well, my father worked with my grandfather-- not willingly. He-- he had-- he wanted to become a dentist. And actually, he was-- the story goes that my father was on the train going to-- enrolled in a technical school to learn dentistry, and my grandfather pulled him off the train and made him stay. And being the oldest son, he had to do that. So my-- the other brothers sort of got away from-- [LAUGHS] wherever--  INT: How many other brothers were there? JA: Well, there was six altogether, including my father-- six brothers.  INT: Did your mother work outside of the home? JA: No, she did not, no.  INT: Do you recall if there were other Jews? I know your family lived there, but was there a Jewish community in Nowy Targ? JA: There was. And I understand that pre-war, it was about 2,500. And there was a synagogue. And--  INT: Do you remember the synagogue? JA: No, I do not.  INT: Do you remember the neighbors around where you lived? JA: Not really. I remember the-- the nurse maid that took care of me. Her name was [? Osza ?]. I remember her.  INT: Did she live in the house with you? JA: She lived in the house, yes.  INT: Did you have any brothers or sisters? JA: I had a baby sister. Her name was Sarenka. Well, it was Sarah, but we called her Sarenka. 
INT: And who-- who was older? JA: I was older.  INT: Oh, you were. Excuse me. JA: Yes, I was born in 1935. And she was born, I think, '38 or '39.  INT: And what happened to your sister? JA: Well, my sister died in 1940 or '41, after the war had began. She was sick with diphtheria. There were no medications. There was no-- there was no medical treatment at all. And she died.  INT: Do you remember any awareness of things changing in your community, or times changing, or of the war approaching, your parents talking about it? JA: No, I don't remember any changes before the war. After the war began, I became much more aware of something happen-- being very, very wrong.  INT: Before we get to that, I just want to ask you if there's anything else that you remember about your life in Nowy Targ? Was there anything special you liked to do? What did-- who did you play with? JA: I remember some of my toys. I rem-- I don't remember playing with-- I actually don't remember playing with other children. But I remember the toys. And I remember the family. And I remember going out with my mother for walks. I remember the winters. I remember riding in a horse-drawn sled in the wintertime. That's how we really got around-- or even on skis. My father used to say he would keep a pair of skis at the door, so if he wanted to get around, he would use-- because there was so much snow all the time. 
INT: What about vacations, family vacations? Do you recall? JA: The family vacations were mainly to visit my grandparents. And--  INT: How often did you go to see them? JA: It seemed like it was a lot. I don't know. I used to like to go there, because they had a big garden. They had a big house, and there was a garden behind their house. My grandfather used to make wine. And my grandmother used to can the fruits.  INT: How many children were there in your mother's family? JA: She had three sisters. She was one of three.  INT: Mhm. JA: Right.  INT: And-- JA: She was the-- she was the middle daughter.  INT: Did they-- did your aunts live close to your grandparents and close to you? JA: They lived-- one aunt lived with my grandparents. She was married, my oldest-- the oldest daughter. And the youngest daughter had gotten married, I guess after my mother and father got married. And they lived in a town called Katowice.  INT: Where-- JA: Also--  INT: Was that near Nowy Targ? JA: Also a train ride away, short train ride, all within maybe half hour or an hour, or something like that.  INT: What was-- do you recall the nearest large city? JA: Krakow was the large city nearby.  INT: Did you ever go there? Do you remember going there? JA: I don't remember going there, but I think we did. 
INT: And-- JA: Because we had family there. My mother had family.  INT: And how would you have gotten there? What was the-- JA: We would take the train.  INT: Anything else that you'd like to add about your extended family or your parents? What do you remember about your mother when you were a young child? JA: I unfortunately remember so many other details, but I don't remember my mother very well. I just know some of the things that I've been told about her. I've been told that she was very bright, and she had a very good business sense-- something that I don't have. And-- [PAUSES FOR 5 SECONDS] but otherwise, I don't remember her.  INT: So what happened when the war started? JA: So some of the things I'm going to tell you is what I heard my father tell me, because I don't remember-- actually remember. But he said that he was awakened at 5 o'clock in the morning hearing shots, and shooting, or explosions, or-- and he turned on the radio. And he heard that Germany had invaded Poland. At that point, my father took me, and my mother, and my sister to my other grandparents' house. I'm not sure exactly at what point, whether he waited days, or probably you know, the next day or whatever. But he returned to Nowy Targ. And so I stayed with my grandparents, my mother, and my sister. And at that point, my grandfather loaded up the wagon-- horse and wagon. My grandfather was in the-- [PAUSES FOR 5 SECONDS] he traded hay and everything to do with horses. He had that kind of a shop. So he loaded up the wagon with the family-- my aunt and uncle-- two aunts and uncles, my mother and myself, my sister-- and as many belongings as we could fit into this wagon and two horses. And we joined a caravan of people heading eastward. And there were people walking, riding on horses or any which-- bicycles. And we were traveling for days and days and days, heading toward Russia. During this travel, I do remember a-- an airplane, a German plane. I think it was German. It may not have been a German, but an airplane that was shot down and fell out of the sky. We were being shot at. There were bullets. And we-- often, we had to get out of the wagon and hide in ditches and wait till the shooting stopped. Sometimes the roads were blocked. Sometimes bridges were out and we couldn't get across. And so we would have to go across the river. And so this continued until-- until we reached Russia. 
INT: Do you have any idea why your father didn't join you on-- JA: Well, my father returned to Nowy Targ. And he and his brothers and father joined the Polish army, if there was such a thing, and tried to repel the Germans. Apparently, the Polish army disbanded very shortly and they just came back. At that point, my father and his brothers [PAUSES FOR 6 SECONDS] joined this caravan of people heading eastward. My grandmother and my grandfather and one uncle remained. They chose not to go. So my father finally arrived in Russia, but he could-- he didn't know where we were. We were separated. He didn't know where we were. My father said-- so my father was in Lvov. We were in a town called [? Wutsk. ?] I don't think that was terribly far from-- the two towns were close by. And my father advertised in the newspaper looking for us. He mentioned me-- he particularly mentioned that I had a birthmark on my leg, and so he mentioned that. And in time, he did find us and joined us. Of course, at that point, my father and my grandfather and all the men had to think of a way of earning a living. And they decided to take dairy products from the country, bring it to the city, and that's how they earned some money. We all lived together in one big-- it wasn't so big, but one ar-- one house. And after a while, my father and my mother and I and my sister left them, because we were just too crowded. And we went to a town called Winniki. At that point, my father got a job working in a coke-- like a peat factory, you know, for coal. And so that's what he was doing. And I-- I remember my mother got very sick one time. And once again, there was very little medical treatment. She-- I remember this, because it was so frightening. She had leeches put behind her ear and they sucked out the blood. I guess she must have had infection or fever. And she got better. 
INT: And that was in this town Winnik-- JA: Winniki.  INT: Winniki. JA: Mhm, right.  INT: Was it nearby to the rest of your family? Were you in contact with them? JA: No, I don't recall being in contact with them. I don't remember-- I don't remember that at all.  INT: And what was your-- do you recall your sense about where you were or what was happening? JA: I recall that there was something terribly wrong. No one sat me down and explained anything. But somehow, I knew-- I just-- I always felt, as a child during the war, I knew what was going on, without having really been told. Because I heard the adults talking. But I knew there was something bad happening.  INT: And how long were you there for? JA: Months, maybe-- months. And my-- that's when my sister got-- my baby sister got sick with diphtheria and she died.  INT: And do you remember that? JA: I remember her being sick. I don't remember the burial or the death, or I don't remember that.  INT: And when do you think that was? JA: I think that must have been in 1940, or close to '41-- something like that. '40, '41.  INT: We're going to stop now and change tapes.  INT: Tape number 2, January 2, 1997. Survivor being interviewed is Janet Singer Applefield. The interviewer is Beth Cohen. The interview is being conducted in Plymouth, Massachusetts, USA. The language of the interview is English. Janet, when you were living in Winniki, Russia, was there anyone else with you and your parents and your sister? JA: I recall my cousin Kay came to live with us because she did not have any working papers. So she was not legal, and she had to-- we were actually hiding her. 
INT: How old was she? JA: She was just a teenager. She married my cousin [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] during the war. And they were together. But he, he had working papers. So she stayed with us for a while.  INT: And how, how was she your cousin, in what way? JA: Actually, she's my-- she is a cousin by marriage. My, my cousin Edward is my mother's first cousin.  INT: Mm hm. And how long did she stay with you? JA: She stayed several weeks with us. And she, she has told me, because she's still alive, she's told me that she used to take care of me and take care of the baby, [NON-ENGLISH].  INT: What, what did you have to eat during this time? JA: I remember my mother making a mushroom stew. So she-- we would sometimes go and pick wild mushrooms in the woods. And she would prepare it with cream or sour cream. We didn't have any meat. And I also remember eating bread with a little bit of sugar sprinkle- sprinkled on top, mostly dairy things, a lot of, a lot of potatoes with sour milk and buttermilk. That's a, sort of a staple food in Poland.  INT: Were there other children around that you had contact with? JA: No, I had no contact with any children.  INT: Do you remember what the place looked like where you stayed? Could you describe it? JA: No, I can't. I don't remember it. 
INT: So what happened? You were there for a while. JA: We were there for a while. And then the, the government, the Russian government decreed that everyone-- because I think there were, like, a couple hundred thousand Polish people who came across the border. So, so the government said that in order to stay, you had to take out Russian papers, which meant that you had to give up your Polish citizenship. Actually, people didn't really know what it meant, but they were fearful that if they took out Russian papers that they would be giving up their Polish citizenship and the rights to their property and their homes and-- so at that point, people were very divided and confused and really not know what, what to do about it. And my grandparents, the Nabels, and my one aunt and uncle-- two aunts and uncles decided to, to do this, to take out the Russian citizenship. And they were actually shipped on, on, by train to Siberia. And the, the people who refused to do it had to return to Poland. So we returned. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] And I guess that was a very grave mistake. My one aunt, one aunt and uncle who were heading toward Siberia just before the train left, they got off the train and went to Poland. My father told me that, [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] that he had one of his brothers come and pick us up in a truck. So we all returned to Nowy Targ. 
INT: How, how long did it take? Do you remember? Was it a long journey? JA: I think it was a long journey. It's several hundred kilometers away. So we, we went back to Poland. And at that point, there was a ghetto in Nowy Targ. So we had to live in a ghetto. My grandparents were still there.  INT: Now, when you got back to Nowy Tag, you immediately went to the ghetto? Did you-- what happened to your-- where you had lived previously? JA: I don't really know. I, I think-- I just know that we had to-- we all lived together in, in a very small apartment in the ghetto.  INT: So you went directly to the ghetto when you came back from Russia. JA: Right. Right. All the, all the belongings from, from the apartment and the store, everything was confiscated. When we returned, my father was arrested because he was-- they thought he was a communist. And he was arrested. And I remember my grandmother preparing food every day for him. And it was put in these little canisters that stacked up and brought over to the prison. Eventually, he was released, and--  INT: And he returned to live with you? JA: To the-to the ghetto. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] My father told the story that [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] every day, you know, there was the, the the Judenrat. The Jewish police had to make certain-- had to fill a quota of people that they were forced to do. And they had to select people and send away to, I guess, to concentration camps. Another time, a story he told me was that there were three old Jewish men who, who were hung in the town square. And a sign was posted on them. And it said kosher meat. Another story was that the Gestapo came to our, to our apartment. And they, they made everybody strip naked. And they took anything they-- you know, if you had any jewelery or any furs or anything of value, they took that away. 
INT: Do you, do you remember that or was this-- JA: I don't remember that, no.  INT: What, what do you actually remember-- JA: From the ghetto?  INT: --about the ghetto, yeah. JA: I don't remember anything about it.  INT: Do you remember what it looked like or could you describe where you lived? JA: Not at that point, no. No.  INT: How-- roughly-- so you were about how old at that time? JA: Probably around six.  INT: And you were, at that point, you were together with who? JA: I was together with my mother, father, grandmother, grandfather, one aunt and uncle.  INT: This was your grandmother and-- your father's parents who had stayed in Nowy Targ. JA: Right. And so we-- I don't know how long we remained there. But at one point, at one point my father said we were going to leave. We left at night, my mother and I and my father. And we took a train, a very dangerous thing, because we didn't have papers. And we had the armbands.  INT: Did you have arm-- do you remember having an armband? JA: I, I personally don't remember that. For myself, I don't remember that.  INT: Do you remember seeing other people wear it? JA: Yes, I do remember that.  INT: Your-- did your parents? JA: Yes. Of course, when they took that train, they couldn't-- they didn't-- they took off their armbands. So we took the train. And we went into Cracow. And we stayed with somebody that my father knew, Polish, Polish people. And we just stayed overnight. And the next day, we took another train. And we went to a place called Niepolomice, close by, a little village, because my mother had some cousins there. It was an attempt to, to get away, [LAUGHS] although, you know, there was no place really to go. So we, we came to this little town. And we rented with the family. And we were with them in there. I'm not sure whether this was the ghetto or whether they lived-- whether the ghetto hadn't yet been formed or what. I don't remember where we lived. But we lived-- we stayed with them for a short, very short period of time. And one night my father, he rented a horse and wagon. And one night we, we, tried to escape in the middle of the night. It was summertime because it was warm. And I remember the moon was out. And we, we were just heading, I don't know where. I don't know what their plan was. But they were just going somewhere. [LAUGHS] And all of a sudden we, we saw the police. It was the Polish police. But they-- and we got, got out of our, the wagon. And we ran into the field. And we hid. There were potato plants. Potato plants aren't very tall, so we-- obviously, we didn't hide very well. But the police came, and they beat us with, with sticks and made us return. So we went back. We went back. 
INT: To where? JA: To the same-- to the family house--  INT: In that village. JA: --in the village. And once again there was an order that people had to report to a sports stadium by a certain day. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] I think at that point my parents knew that there was no escape. There was no place to go. And maybe, perhaps, they had heard what was happening. They must have had some inkling of what was happening. And they, they said, they desperately tried to do something with me. There was a woman who took care of the family's children. She was a [GERMAN], half German, half Polish. And she-- they begged her to take me. And they-- and she agreed to take me. And she said that she would only keep me for a very short time, but I could go with her to Cracow. So my parents, at that point-- I guess it was-- I don't know, was it the next day or two days later-- reported to this sports stadium where all the Jews in the town had to go. And that's where the selection process took place. And my parents talked ahead about this, and they decided that they were not going to be together, thinking that if they weren't together, maybe one of them would survive, and-- thinking about me. So they, they separated. And what, what happened was that my father was sent to Cracow to a-- as a worker. He worked in a cable factory. My mother, it's not clear. We're not sure. I've tried to find out, but I still haven't been able to. There were, there were about five or six thousand Jews that were marched from that sports stadium to the woods, the forest right outside of the town, and they were shot. So that could have been one possibility. Another possibility was that she did go to the, to Cracow and was in the ghetto. And I think that, I think that actually might have happened, because I, I have this-- I, I sort of remember seeing her one time. Because then I went to live with this woman Maria. And she-- we went by train. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] And I, I don't remember how this whole thing was explained to me, except I know that it was-- I knew that it was very, very serious, and I knew that I had to do what I was told and that-- and I went by train with her. And during the train ride I had to be quiet and not really say much. And, and then I went to her apartment. I remember the apartment because it was-- she left me there at night. And I was very frightened. She'd, you know, she'd go out in the evening. There was no electricity, so it was pitch black. But it was in a very main, main thoroughfare. So I saw the lights, and I remember the streetcars going by. And, and I remember being kind of panicky. I was, you know, crying and trying all the doors, and everything was locked up. 
INT: Were you-- there were no other children? JA: No, I was the only person there.  INT: So you think that you saw your mother at some point during this? JA: So-- well, one other thing I recalled at that-- during my stay there, at one time the Gestapo came. And it was a, a, a man, very blond, very good-looking with black leather boots. He came running upstairs. And he was looking for Jews. And he asked who I was. The woman said I was her niece, that I, I, you know, my, my mother, her sister was ill and she was taking care of me. And he ransacked the whole apartment. He pulled out all the drawers from the furniture. And then he came up to me and looked at me. And I had long braids, blond braids. And he just sort of played with my braids. And he, he left. But I still remember the sort of staccato heels running down the steps. So I stayed with Maria only a couple weeks. And, [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] and then I'll go back to the story, because my father was then in the, in the ghetto. He--  INT: In-- JA: In the ghetto, in the Cracow ghetto--  INT: In Cracow. JA: --and working in the cable, cable works. It was a factory that, that was a couple miles away. And every morning he and other prisoners were marched to this factory. And he-- and that's where he worked all day. He said he kept my picture in front of his-- it was a, a-- [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] I forget what you call that-- assembly, a sort of assembly line. And he told the story of one time someone misfed the machine. And, you know, they were terrified because they thought they were all going to get shot. And, [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] and he, he said he had a very kind foreman who was German and kind of helped them out. So but-- so while my father was in the ghetto, he, he knew he had to do something to get me out of this woman's care and find another solution. So he purchased the birth certificate of a girl about the same age as I. Her name was Krystina Antoszkiewicz. And at the same time he got in touch with a cousin, my father's cousin. Her name was [NON-ENGLISH] Singer. And she also had assumed Polish papers. And she agreed to take me. So my, my father [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] met me and Maria at the ghetto gate. It was a very dangerous thing to do. But I somehow remember my mother there. I don't know if it's, like, sort of wishful thinking that I could remember her. I, I just don't know whether she was there or not, but I have that mental picture of her. And, and then my cousin came, and that's how my father transferred me over to her care. 
INT: And where did you and your cousin go? JA: We went to live in another little town called Myslenice, also close by. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] And we lived in a little cottage next to a big house. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] I remember that very well, that cottage. It was like-- it was one room with a ceramic stove in the middle and, and a little outer room, very tiny, where my bed was. So I was, I was there. She was in the other room. And she had a Polish boyfriend. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] And the boyfriend used to come to visit. And she, she didn't, she didn't like me. I don't know why, but she-- yeah, she was very abusive to me, and she used to beat me. And I used to get my beatings with a fireplace poker. So I used lean on the, on the stove, and, and I had to, you know, keep my hands behind my back, and she used to beat me with a poker.  INT: How old was she? JA: She was 21, 22, something like that. Her Polish name was Helena [NON-ENGLISH]. And we used to go into, into the city. She, she was fluent in German. So we could ride in front of the trolley car because Germans could ride in the front. The Poles had to ride in the back, and-- but she would say to me, now, don't speak. Don't, don't say a word. 
INT: Did you speak German? JA: No, I didn't speak German. So she told me she didn't allow me to speak. And-- so we used to do that quite often. I also recall something that was very, very dramatic, I think. But she-- I told you that she had this lover. And she became pregnant. And I witnessed an abortion. And in fact, I had to clean up after the abortion. This was done right in the room. So that was--  INT: Who did it? JA: Some, some--  INT: Somebody came in to help? JA: Somebody came and did it, yeah, right. And she did other things like there was a river right behind the cottage. And she used to throw me in the river. I couldn't swim. She, you know, she would just throw me in. And-- but one day-- well, there was-- the, the woman in the front house was very kind to me. And because my cousin used to lock me out-- she'd, like, go away for the day. She'd lock me out of the house, and I would be sitting there. And this Polish woman used to come and take care of me. And I remember that one time when she gave me such a horrendous beating, all my finger-- I lost all my finger, fingernails. And the Polish woman, [? Eugenia?], made these little booties for my fingers, and she would, you know, put salve and, and treat me that way. And she used to feed me. 
INT: Was that your main source of food was from the neighbor? JA: Well, when she locked me out--  INT: Yeah. JA: --it was. But otherwise, I guess--  INT: Do you remember-- JA: I don't remember being hungry. I, I, I don't think I was ever hungry. We ate, you know, as I said, potatoes and bread and--  INT: Was she working, your cousin? JA: My cousin was not working, but-- and I didn't know this at the time, but I found out since, my cousin and her boyfriend were part of the underground. And I used to be sent to the post office with these very, very big, heavy boxes. And a lot of them were going to Russia. And I'm not sure if she was in the Polish underground or the Russian underground, because there was the army [POLISH], and there was-- that's the Polish-- and there was the army [RUSSIAN], the army of the people, which was the Russian. But I remember sending these packages to Russia. So my sense is that she was part of the Russian underground. And-- but-- go ahead.  INT: Yeah, just-- you had no contact with your father during this time? JA: No, the last time I saw my father was at that ghetto, ghetto fence. And you asked me before if I remembered the ghetto. I remember the Cracow ghetto because I remember the barbed wire around it, you know. But I was never inside it. 
INT: You were never inside it. JA: No.  INT: So just looking in from the outside. JA: Right, looking in from the outside.  INT: And what was-- I mean, do you remember what was going through your head when all of this was happening, when you were living with your cousin? What did-- did you ever think about-- JA: I just wondered what happened to everybody. Everybody from my life was gone, and I, I didn't really understand what happened to people. [PAUSES FOR 6 SECONDS] That was, that was basically what I, you know, thought about. And, and, and the other thing-- and I don't know so much that I thought about it then, but sort of in retrospect as an adult, I think that what held me together and gave me some strength was the fact that I had such a very strong foundation and, and, and such good family life and, you know, love and-- but I don't know.  INT: Did you know how to read? JA: I knew how to read and write because I learned that when I was still, like, three or, three or four years old. I learned in-- because I, I have a copy of a letter that I wrote when I was three or four to my grandparents.  INT: How long did this go on with your cousin? JA: Well, it probably went on for maybe a year or so, because she was arrested in May, on May 21, 1943. 
INT: And you were how old? JA: 1943, I was eight.  INT: That was just before your eighth birthday, right? JA: Yeah, just before my eighth birthday, right.  INT: Let's stop there. JA: OK.  INT: Tape number 3. Today is January 2, 1977. Survivor being interviewed is Janet Singer Applefield. The interviewer is Beth Cohen. The interview is being conducted in Plymouth, Massachusetts, United States of America. The language of the interview is English. Janet, I just want to go back and ask you about your cousin who took care of you. And why do you think she did it? JA: Well, my father gave her money to do it. He paid her.  INT: Do you remember that? JA: No.  INT: Or was this something that he told you? JA: This is something that's been told to me, yes.  INT: And do you remember when she was arrested? JA: Yes. Well, not exactly. But what happened was, one day, she said to me we're going into the city to Cracow to meet Victor. That was the boyfriend. And so we, we went in. And she took me to a church. And she took me in and said, you sit here and wait for me. And she went across the street to a cafe. This was on [NON-ENGLISH]. [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] And that's where she was to meet him. So I sat in the church, and I waited and waited and waited for hours. And she didn't come back for me. She didn't return. So I guess, eventually, I just walked out of the church. And the whole street was cordoned off. And the cafe had been raided by the Gestapo. I-- at the time, I didn't know. You know, I was just seven years old, almost eight. But I didn't know. But I-- since then, I've learned that this was a cafe that was frequented by the underground. That's, that's where they used to meet. In fact, that particular arrest was a very famous arrest. And it's been written up in a book, [INAUDIBLE], the Polish book. 
INT: What was significant about it? JA: There were just so many people there that were arrested. It was like a major underground meeting.  INT: Was her boyfriend arrested also? JA: I had thought that he was. But when I returned to Poland in recent years, I met Victor's brother. And he said no. He was alerted not to go. So he didn't. He wasn't there. So she was arrested.  INT: And what happened to her? JA: I don't know for sure. I really don't know.  INT: Did she-- JA: I think she was sent to concentration camp. I do not know. I think she survived. But I'm not sure if she did or not.  INT: Did her boyfriend know that she and you were Jewish? JA: No, he did not.  INT: And how did he treat you? JA: He-- I don't have any negative feelings toward him. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] I don't have any recollection, actually. I mean, I remember what he looked like. But I don't remember him really dealing too much with me because when he came, I had to stay away.  INT: So there you were on the street. JA: So there I was in the street, walking the street, crying. It was, it was getting dark-- and crying. And all of a sudden, a woman came up. And she was wearing a black cape. She stuck me under the cape. And she pulled me away and took me into the building where the cafe was. [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] And she took me upstairs to the, I think, fourth or fifth floor of the apartment building. [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] The apartment belonged to the Alicia Golomp. The woman who took me off the street was this sort of a superintendent or concierge of the building. And she, she took me upstairs. Alicia and-- her husband's name was Ludwig. Alicia asked me, you know, who-- you know, what's your name, and who are you, and what's happened to you? And I had been told to, to-- I had this pat story that was sort of drilled into me. And the story was that I'm the daughter of a Polish officer from Warsaw and that my parents were killed in a bombing raid. And I was just downstairs with my, my cousin, and she was arrested. And, and so Alicia said, OK, so you, you know, stay here. [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] It, it was customary that if the Gestapo came, they would return. That was their mode of operation. So they had to get me out of there, they felt. Also-- 
INT: Why? Had they already been there? I mean-- JA: Well, they had-- they were in the building also. See, I've learned this since, that in the building was another-- there was a, a SS man living. Also, Alicia's mother was very active in the underground. She had a-- she ran a hospital in her apartment. They had shortwave radios. They had ammunition. So they got scared. And they-- that same night or just a few hours, or an hour after, the, the oldest son, Stasczek, took me, and we walked for several kilometers to a farm outside of the city. This was a, a farm that was owned by the Catholic church and administered by Ludwig's brother, Jan. And I stayed on the farm. That's where I remained--  INT: And-- JA: --for the most part-- for the most of the war, the rest of the war.  INT: Do you, do you think they knew that you were Jewish? JA: Well, I've asked them since. And they said to me, we suspected it, but we didn't really want to know because if you were, it was more dangerous for them to know. The other thing I neglected to say is that the way I looked had really everything to do with my survival because I was so fair. I was-- my hair was very, very, very light. And I looked like a little Aryan child, Polish child, Swedish child but not, you know, [INAUDIBLE]. I wasn't dark. And so I remained on the farm. And they didn't ask me any more questions. But they didn't-- they were afraid to send me to school. They said it was dangerous for them because they didn't-- they had to explain my presence. And-- [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] but they were very kind. They cared a lot about me. Alicia had a family of eight children. The youngest were twins. They were 15 and 16-- they were 15 or 16 years old. 
INT: And where there other children around, younger ones, for you to play with? JA: Just neighbors' children.  INT: Did you have much contact with them? JA: Yes.  INT: The neighbors? JA: The neighbors' children I played with. But it was, it was-- I remember being very contented and happy playing in the barn, barn. You know, jumping in the hay and taking milk to wherever they took the milk, you know, in big vats, you know, milking cows. And there was a big fruit orchard there. And climbing trees and things like that. And one thing that happened was that my cousin's father, Oscar--  INT: Now, which cousin? JA: This-- the cousins that took take care of me. Oscar Singer had heard that his daughter was arrested. And he heard where I was because he, he, he inquired. I mean, he came back. And he looked for me. And, and so he came to the farm to get me, probably because he was afraid that I would say something. And I didn't want to go for good reasons. And the family said, look, she's fine. Just leave her. So he left me. But they were always a little confused because a package was sent with some of my clothing. And a lot of my clothing and, like, rubber boots were-- came from Russia. So they didn't quite understand what, what that was all about. So I remained on the farm.  INT: Now, who actually was-- was there a couple that was running the farm? And who was this? JA: Right. There, there was Jan. And Eugenia was his wife. Jan was the brother of Ludwig. So they were the older couple. Then there was, there was Stasczek. 
INT: And they were Alicia's brothers? JA: Jan was Ludwig's brother.  INT: OK, so what was the connection to Alicia? JA: Alicia was the wife, Ludwig's wife.  INT: Oh, OK. JA: And she was the mother of the eight children.  INT: OK. JA: They were mostly grown up. And they were, they were-- some of them were there. Some were, were not. Some were in the underground. And, [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] and [NON-ENGLISH], [NON-ENGLISH] was Eugenia's and Jan's daughter. So she was the-- she was in her 20s at time. And so she, she basically kind of took care of me. And Eugenia took care of me. I was the youngest. I was a child there. And then, one time, I remember we used to make or slaughter, you know, a pig or calf. We weren't allowed to keep the meat. And--  INT: Why not? JA: Well, the-- they were not allowed to. They-- all the meat had to be sent out to the, to the Germans. But one time we slaughtered a, a pig. And it was a very messy affair because they, they, you know, stuffed the sausages, and they cut up all this stuff. And we were alerted that the Gestapo was coming. So we had to hide everything. And now the story goes-- and I don't remember doing this, but the Polish family told me this-- when the Gestapo came, I started to sing and dance. And they start-- they-- and, and I said, I said, get, get the vodka. You know, get the-- give them vodka. So they gave them vodka. And I'm singing, dancing, and they just laughed. And they were amused. And they left. I have no recollection of doing this at all. So I was, basically-- you know, I didn't go to school. And the family has said to me since-- you know, as I said, I've met, I have seen them twice since, since the end of the war-- that, you know, that the people wanted to know who I was and even the mayor of the town, and-- so there was a church. I used to go to church. The family was pretty religious. We used to go to church. I knew my prayers. [PAUSES FOR 5 SECONDS] But I always knew I was Jewish, somehow. 
INT: But-- did-- so you thought about it? What-- did, did you ever think about your parents or wonder what-- JA: I wondered where, where everybody was. I wondered. But I, I knew that I had to keep this a secret that I was Jewish. I knew that I had-- couldn't tell anything. I, I knew all this, you know.  INT: It must have been very difficult being on your own, being somewhat isolated, and having this secret. JA: Keeping this secret--  INT: Yeah, yeah. JA: --this tremendous secret. I don't know. I don't know. It's, it's, it's-- I've tried very hard to, you know, to get in touch with all that. And I-- it's-- I, I really can't. Yeah.  INT: How long were you there for? JA: Couple years.  INT: Yeah. JA: A couple years.  INT: And what-- it sounds like you have quite fond feelings about this, this time that you were there. JA: I do. I do because I was well cared for. Stasczek has told, had told me that when I came, you know, I had nothing. I had no clothes, nothing, you know. So they had to go out and buy me clothes. And, [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] and they were very good to me.  INT: Did you, did you have any books to read during this time, do you remember? JA: I don't remember reading at all. I don't remember writing at all. [LAUGHS]  INT: So when, when did this come-- JA: But I was just going to add-- 
INT: Oh, yeah. JA: --that Stasczek used to do the bookkeeping, you know, the accounting for the farm. And he said I was very good with numbers, which I'm not [LAUGHS] now, but-- and I used to help him, he said. And they also said that the farm used to send-- they used to send some food to the ghetto. I mean, secretly send it.  INT: Do you ever remember going into Cracow once you were on the farm? JA: I do because what I remember was the bombing-- being in-- having to go to the, into the shelter in the middle of the night. And I remember the-- I remember the bombing. And to this day, certain sounds scare me terribly. We would go in the cellar and wait till the siren, you know, sounded when it was over. So, so I remember going back there. I don't know how-- what-- for what reason. But I used to-- we used to go back.  INT: And so when did this come to an end, your stay on the farm? JA: Well, the Russians liberated us. And I, I remember the fighting when, when they were coming because there was, there was fighting, you know. There were-- I remember going to the outhouse and my-- and, the, you know, like, remember bullets going by. So, [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] so [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] the Russians liberated us. And then, my uncle, my cousin, his father, came back one more time. 
INT: Oscar. JA: Oscar came back for me. And at that point, the family felt that they didn't have a right to keep me. And they turned me over to him. I didn't want to go, but they did.  INT: Were you-- when you-- were you aware of what liberation meant, that the war was over? I mean, what was your sense of what was going to happen then? JA: No, I don't think I was aware. I, I don't think I understood what that really meant. I mean, I think I knew it was something good. But I don't-- I didn't really know the implications of it.  INT: You were-- [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] you were 10 years old at that time of the liberation? JA: In 1945, I was 10 years old, yes.  INT: So what happened then when Oscar came? JA: Oscar came and took me away. And I went to live with him and his wife. And [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] at that point, [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] Oscar and his wife still continued to live on their Polish papers. And at that point, they, they had me confirmed [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] and sent me to church to study. And I, I was confirmed.  INT: So did you go to school at that time? Did you start going? No. JA: No, I did not start going to school. But I remember going to the catechism, you know, to learn to be confirmed. And I stayed with them. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] But I wasn't, I wasn't permitted to visit the Polish family. And-- 
INT: Why not? JA: They wouldn't allow me to go. And one time, [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] one time, the, the family saw me in the park. And they, you know, they felt very upset and hurt and, and really missed me terribly. But they wouldn't-- my, my cousin would not have anything to do with them. And, [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] and the, the story also goes that I-- one time when I was in the park by myself, I, I went to visit them because-- on my own. But I wasn't allowed to go.  INT: How far was it from where you were with your uncle and-- JA: It, it was within walking distance.  INT: And how did your uncle treat you? JA: I don't recall any beatings. But I don't have-- I don't feel very warmly toward-- to him or his wife. And shortly after I was with them, he turned me over to the refugee center at the Jewish committee. He brought me over there and just left me there. So that's, that's where I was.  INT: So why do you think he, he took you away from the family? JA: Maybe for his own safety. You know, for-- maybe he, he was fearful for his-- that he wouldn't be known as a Jew. And he didn't know what I would say or do or--  INT: So where was the refugee center? JA: That was in Cracow on [NON-ENGLISH]. And that's where everybody returned. That was the central place where everybody came back. I was the-- I was one of the children that was brought back. I was very sick at that point because I remember being in the infirmary. I had jaundice. And there were a whole bunch of kids who were sick. And I remained there [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] until a, a woman-- her name was Lena Kuchler-- came. And she saw 50, 60, children just in one room without any clothing, adequate care. Some were sick. Some were terribly frightened. And she who, herself, lost her own family, made a decision that she had to do something for these children. So she, [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] somehow, managed to get a home. And she had two homes for the children. One was in Zakopane. Zakopane was a resort town in the Carpathian Mountains, maybe a couple hours away from Cracow. And so she rented this big home. And the other home was in Rabka. In Rabka, the children who went there were children who had tuberculosis. And while we were still in, in the refugee center, [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] we were-- the place was stoned, and it was very unsafe because some of the children were being sent to school. And they were, they were not accepted. There was tremendous anti-Semitism. And, and so I remember the day that we were being transported to, to Zakopane in the trucks. And we had to leave quickly and without much-- not to be noticed, you know. And then the tarp was pulled over so we wouldn't be seen. And we were taken over there. 
INT: And how long were you there for in the home? JA: In Zakopane?  INT: In-- yes. JA: [SIGHS] It's hard to know. I don't know. Maybe months. I'm not sure.  INT: What did you do while you were there? JA: Well, we went on outings. We, we, we had-- we were in different age groups. And we slept in a dormitory. [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] And every child was given a, a little bag of powdered milk because [LAUGHS] I remember keeping it in a little night table. I remember keeping it there. And I used to eat it dry with the end of my [LAUGHS] toothbrush. I remember doing that. But it was-- the counselors took care of us. And we used to have fun, except that I had-- I don't know whether I had rickets or something, but I had trouble going on-- walking a lot. My, my joints were swollen, and I-- so I had trouble going on long trips. Some of the children went to school, and-- [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] but they had a lot of bad experiences. Beatings. Stonings. And--  INT: Did you go to school? JA: No, I did not go to school. And one time, men came on horseback with guns. The older children, the teenagers, were equipped with guns, ammunition, and they defended the home. And they-- and the, you know, the attackers were-- went away. So, [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] so-- but one day, when Lena-- we called Lena matka, mother. And, and we, we felt like she was our mother. You know, my, my, my nickname was Krysza. Oh, now I remember, [LAUGHS] Krysza. And one day-- 
INT: What does that mean? JA: It's diminutive for Krystina, Krysza. [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] But one day, Lena went into town. I had written a letter to Oscar Singer. And she brought the letter to the refugee center. At that same time, my father, who had survived and was looking for me, came. And he saw the letter because he saw the name. And that's how he found me. And Lena came and said, I have this wonderful news for you. Your father has survived, and he'll be here now. So-- and my father finally came.  INT: Do you remember that day when he came? JA: I do. I-- she took me-- Lena took me up to her office. And my father came. And when I first saw my father, I was absolutely terrified of him. He looked like a skeleton. I was terribly frightened. I didn't want this strange person hugging me and kissing me. And, and I, I was just very uncomfortable with it. And I think, I think I realized it also meant change, another change for me. You know, I had already made so many changes. And this time, I had a mother, and I had all these friends. And I was ready to stay. So--  INT: OK, we'll stop here and continue on the next tape. JA: OK.  INT: Tape number four. Today is January 2, 1997. The survivor being interviewed is Janet Singer Applefield. The interviewer is Beth Cohen. The interview is being conducted in Plymouth, Massachusetts, in the United States of America. The language of the interview is English. Janet, you were talking about seeing your father again after the war. JA: So I wasn't that comfortable with my father, because I didn't remember him. It had been-- I'd been separated from him-- well, over two years-- more than two years. And-- and I-- I always felt so uncomfortable with that feeling. I said, how could I not be excited to see my father, you know-- my father survive. And I never understood that till I heard another survivor say a very similar thing, But anyway, my father was very ill. And he needed time to recuperate. So he-- he rented a room nearby and got stronger, and stayed there for maybe a month. And-- and then he came and took me away. We went back to Nowy Targ. Several other people returned. And I'd say there were about 10 of us. I was the only child. 
INT: But do you mean out of the family-- JA: No.  INT: --or out of the Jewish community? JA: Out of the Jewish community who returned.  INT: Mm-hmm. JA: And so we all went back and lived in my grandfather's-- above the store. There was an apartment. The apartment apparently was all burnt out. I think that when the Russians came, they-- they-- they camped. They actually camped there. You know, they lit a fire and stuff. So we-- we lived there. My father and a couple of his friends started a little business-- once again, he had to earn a living. They started a candy business. And there was a woman, a friend. Her name was Hanka-- Hanya-- and she took care of me and cooked for us. But anti-Semitism was raging. And several of my father's friends were murdered after the war.  INT: In that town? JA: No, they were traveling. They were driving a car, and they were just murdered on the road. And we started to get notices posted on the door that we would be killed if we didn't get out of town, and that, you know, that Hitler didn't finish his work. My father went to the police chief and said, you know, what can you do? How can you help us? He said, the only thing I can do for you is to give you guns. So we had guns, and we slept with guns under our pillows. And, I guess, in time, we all realized that we couldn't stay there. We weren't safe. So we left. 
INT: And who left? JA: We all left, and people went in different-- different directions.  INT: How long had you-- were you there in Nowy Targ before you-- JA: Probably not very long-- maybe months. I don't know.  INT: And this was what year? JA: 1945.  INT: It was at the end-- the late 1945? JA: I'm not sure when.  INT: Mm-hmm. JA: And we went to Krakow. And my grandparents-- my grandfather, and my aunt, and uncle, the ones that ended up in Siberia-- returned. They survived. My grandmother died in Russia. And we all lived together in an apartment.  INT: When did you find out what happened to your mother? Or at-- JA: I think my father must have told me, and said your-- your mother died. Or I don't know how he told me. I don't know when he told me. I don't remember his words. I-- somehow I-- I was told, and I knew. I don't remember any reaction. I don't-- you know, I was so closed off, you know. And I just don't remember feeling anything of anything very much. So we-- we were in Krakow. And then my father said, look. We-- we-- we can't stay here. We have to try to leave. And he said to me, where would you like to live-- in the United States or in-- or-- it wasn't Israel-- in Palestine? And I said, United States, because I had always heard things about United States-- one of the myths, you know-- 
INT: [LAUGHS] JA: --like money grows on trees, and things like that. My father had a brother in-- in Palestine. He was one of the you know, one of the settlers who left in 1935. He was one of the brothers that got away from my grandfather. [LAUGHS] He was very idealistic and started a kibbutz-- kibbutz Ein HamIfratz. And then another uncle who survived, my Uncle Jack, was-- he-- when the war began, he was in Italy studying engineering. And he escaped on a boat to Shanghai. He was taken prisoner of war by the Japanese. And he was in a prison during the war. And he returned to the United States. So I had an uncle in neither-- in-- in both countries. So we also had some distant cousins in the United States who sponsored us to come. And in March-- March 25, 1947, we-- well, first, we went to Paris. And we-- we-- we were there a couple months. My father enrolled me in-- in a school to learn English at that point. And then in March 25, 1947, we-- we came on a boat to New York. It was-- the boat's name was the Marine Falcon. It was a marine boat. You know, the women had to be on one floor, and the men were on a-- on another floor. So I was separated again from my father. And I think that--  INT: How long did the trip take? JA: It took-- it took a long time. I think it took about 10 days or 8 days, something like that. There was a raging storm. And-- and then we came to the United States. 
INT: The two of you-- JA: The two of us.  INT: Was there anybody else with you on-- JA: No, just the two of us. And we came on a visitor's visa, which allowed us to be in the United States for 90 days. At that point, you know, the only way we could remain if-- was if my father married an American. So the family kind of searched and looked for a single, eligible woman. And they found my stepmother. We came in March, and they were married in June. [LAUGHTER] And when we first came, we lived with my uncle and my aunt.  INT: Where was that? JA: That was in Rahway, New Jersey. And-- and my uncle and my-- he married an American woman-- my aunt Rose-- and her brother and sister, and we lived with them. My uncle took me-- so this was end of March. Well, actually, though, April, because by the time we arrived-- and like-- like toward-- I think in May-- they took me-- my uncle took me to school to enroll me in school. And-- well, before that-- before that, there was this real attempt to make me an American child, you know? There was no assimilate-- there was assimilation rather than maintaining your own, you know, identity. And so my hair was cut-- cut short. And, you know, like my aunt took me for clothes. And-- and--  INT: Did-- did you want to be more American? Do you remember? JA: I don't remember wanting. I was-- I was a child who was just so complacent, because I just did what I was told to do. It was like-- I don't remember rebelling, or wanting, or not wanting. It was like, look. This is what needs to happen, and it happened. And I think it was just so deeply ingrained that my-- my life depended on it, you know? So they just cut my hair, and I don't-- I don't think I was upset about it. You know, I was, like, OK. Do whatever you need to do. [LAUGHTER] And so my-- my uncle took me to school. And as-- as he was enrolling me, he said, well, what name would you like to have? And he said, you know, you have to have an American name. You're an American girl now. So I picked the name Janet. And I think in the family there was a cousin. Her name was Janette. In Polish it's pronounced Janette. And I think I liked it. She was a very lovely woman-- looking-- good-looking woman. I said, I like Janet. So he enrolled me in school. And I started-- that was the end of the school year, but I was in-- put-- placed in a fifth/sixth grade combination. I was speaking very little English. And toward the end-- well, the end of the school year, I was promoted to my grade, which was seventh grade. And at that point, you know, my father met my stepmother. She did not speak any-- any Polish, but they both spoke Yiddish. 
INT: Did you speak Yiddish? JA: No. I never learned Yiddish. And they got married June 5th. My father didn't speak any English. And so he had to-- he was going to the movies every day to learn very-- you know, as fast as he could. He also got a job in Macy's, in the sporting goods department; learned English, got married. They bought a business.  INT: What kind of business? JA: A hardware store in Newark, New Jersey. For the first year, we lived with-- with my stepmother's mother, in Carteret, New Jersey. We lived there for a year. I went to school-- seventh grade. And I'd fit in. I was accepted. When I was-- when I got into the eighth grade, my eighth-grade teacher referred to me as the little foreign girl. She always sort of identified me that way. [LAUGHS] And so we moved to Newark. And my-- my stepmother, Sadie-- her-- her maiden name was Allman-- Sadie Allman-- she adopted me. And they worked very hard, very hard, in the store, you know, because they had to catch up. She was in her early 40s. And I guess my father was, too. So they had to make up for lost time. She had never been married before.  INT: And so you grew up, then, in New Jersey? JA: I grew up in New Jersey, right. Mm-hmm.  INT: And then-- then what happened in-- in your life? JA: Well, my parents' ambition was to send me to college-- send me away. You know, I couldn't live at home-- I mean, not that I couldn't, but they thought I-- I should have that experience. So I did. I went to Syracuse, and-- you know, with nice clothes, and did very well; did well in high school, got-- got good grades-- just-- just adapted very well-- wrote for a newspaper. You know, I did a lot of the other things. But anyway, so then I went to college, and I-- I met my husband. I was still in high school. I was a senior in high school. He was a senior in college. And-- but I transferred from Syracuse to Boston University. And then I was here for a year, and we got engaged. And so I came back to New Jersey, and I finished at Rutgers. So that was my college career. 
INT: What did you study in college? JA: I was a history-sociology major. And-- but while I was still in school, I had my son, David, my oldest son. And--  INT: When was that? JA: He was born in 1956. I was married in 1955. But I hadn't quite finished college. So-- but I-- I finished-- carried him to school--  INT: [LAUGHS] JA: --many times, held him. You know, I took my finals with him in my arm. And-- and then-- then I was home-- [LAUGHS] for-- you know, I didn't work after I graduated. I graduated in 1958. I had three kids. And in 1978, I went back to school for my graduate degree, at Boston University.  INT: And what was that in? JA: In social work.  INT: Mm-hmm. JA: Mm-hmm.  INT: And are you working now? JA: Yes, I am.  INT: What-- what are you doing? JA: I'm a clinical social worker, and I work with the geriatric population.  INT: When you were a teenager in New Jersey, did any of the other kids ever ask you where you came from? Was anyone ever curious about what had happened to you as a child? JA: No, not really. They knew that I was born in Poland, but I never talked about my experiences with them, because nobody really asked. The Holocaust wasn't really discussed very much in those days. I always talked about it with my family, with my kids. My father always talked with me, you know, he told me what happened to him. And I-- I was always very open with my children about it. So they-- you know, there wasn't this dark cloud that hung over our house. 
INT: When-- when did things start changing? When, you know-- did people seem to start to get more interested in learning about the Holocaust? JA: I think it was the-- the movie on television. Things started to be talked about on-- publicly, you know, on television, radio. Lena Kuchler wrote a book, which was published in 1961. My father noticed a little, little article in the that she was on a speaking tour in New York. And we went to see her. And she also had tried to get-- get it made into a TV movie. And finally, it was made. I think it was 1988, '89, something like that-- maybe '86-- it was on-- on television.  INT: What was that like, seeing her? JA: Oh, it was wonderful. It was wonderful. She-- when she got into Israel, she-- she had studied-- I think she had studied in Poland-- psychology. When she got into-- to Israel, she-- she was a psychologist. And she officiated at all the children's marriages and births. She was-- she was always very involved with all the children. At one point, I got an invitation to come. There was a reunion. But I never made it. But I visited her in New York-- twice actually. Two times I saw her-- that one time when she wrote the book and then again in-- many years later. And she died just prior to the-- to the-- to the film, the TV film being shown. Mm-hmm.  INT: How did you end up in Plymouth? JA: Well, I-- I came to school here. I was-- well, I came in 19-- in the '50s. I always liked Massachusetts. And then I wanted to be near the ocean. And we came. 
INT: Is-- you know, looking back on-- on your experiences in your life, what do you think-- how do you think your experiences have-- have shaped or influenced who you are today? JA: I think that it-- it made me strong. It made me self-sufficient. It-- I think it made me accepting of other people. One lesson that I got from my father was that he-- he was not an embittered person. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] He-- he always felt that there were good people and bad people, and accepted people for who they are. And I think that's-- that was a very valuable lesson to me. And that's something that I've hopefully I've instilled in-- instilled in my children. I think that the war experiences-- [PAUSES FOR 5 SECONDS] I'm-- I'm very sad during holidays. I feel like I've been cheated of my childhood. I've been cheated of family. My kids don't have cousins. They don't-- you know, they don't have extended family because of that. And that's something that they have felt very strongly.  INT: Did your children get to know your father at all? JA: Yes, they did, and they adored my father. In fact, my son, David, has written a book. And it's based on-- it's a novel, but it's based on my father's memoirs. He was very close to my father.  INT: And when did your father pass away? JA: He died in 1978.  INT: Mm-hmm. In-- in New Jersey? JA: In Texas. He had open-heart surgery, and he died. He-- my son has often said that he-- he didn't fear death, because he was so close to death so many times that he-- he didn't fear it. You know, he was prepared. 
INT: Do you have any other words you'd like to add, being a survivor, any message you'd like to-- JA: I speak about my experiences to groups-- children mostly. And-- and I-- I hope that when I speak to kids, I let them know that it's so important to speak up when they witness any kind of discrimination-- to be sensitive, and to-- don't stand by. Do-- you know-- be proactive. [PAUSES FOR 6 SECONDS] My feelings toward Germans or Germany, I've-- I've had-- it-- it's taken me a long, long time to really be in touch with my feelings, you know. And it's sort of like peeling an onion. [PAUSES FOR 6 SECONDS] I-- I have sort of mixed feelings. I've been-- I've sort of made a circle where I'm just at total acceptance. And now I'm-- I have a little-- a little fear and concern, and at times, a little discomfort with with Germany-- Germans or Germany. You know, it's like, I want to know, you know, what's your position, or what--  INT: Have you been to Germany? JA: I have, yes. And the first time I went, it was horrendous. The second time I went, it was a little better. Same thing when I went to visit Poland. You know, when I-- first time I went, I didn't want to go to the museum. I didn't want to enjoy myself, you know. But I've met with my Polish family a couple times, and they're just so wonderful. They're very exceptional people. They-- they had a-- another brother-- uncle of these children-- who was a priest. He saved, I think, 200 Jews. I saw the book with all the Jewish names, because they made up baptismal papers for the-- for the Jewish people. He also hid a-- a Jewish person in the rectory and in the garden. So you know, they-- they're just a very special family. And-- and I-- and I consider them my family now, you know? I don't see them that often, but I call them, and I send packages. And they haven't been here. But they're dying. They're dying, you know? They're older than I am, so-- but now, our children know their children, which I hope they will continue to maintain contact. So. 
INT: Is there anything else you'd like to add? JA: [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] I don't know. [LAUGHS] I mean, there's a lot more, but--  INT: Well, is there-- JA: --like, you know, like--  INT: --anything? JA: --there's things about my father, you know, like how he survived, stories that he told.  INT: Yeah. Well, is there any particular-- I mean, this obviously is not, you know, your father's story. JA: Right.  INT: But is there anything special that you would like to-- to say about your father? JA: My father was an incredible person. He was just so kind and so good. But I think the war really affected his health, and he used to have terrible nightmares. I just remember him screaming at night, and you know, breaking out in cold sweat. And-- and I-- I know that it affected his heart and his health. When he died, he was only 73-- when he died. So-- he-- he was just a great person.  INT: Well, I want to thank you very much for sharing your story. And-- thanks. JA: Thank you.  INT: Tape number five. Today is January 2, 1997. The survivor being interviewed is Janet Singer Applefield. The interviewer is Beth Cohen. The   interview is being conducted in Plymouth, Massachusetts, United States of America. The language of the interview is English. Janet, can you describe who's in the picture, where, and when it was taken? JA: This is a picture that, I believe, was taken in the mid-'30s. On the left is my Uncle Alec. He's married to my Aunt Liba, next to him. And next to my Aunt Liba is my Grandmother Nabel and my grandfather, Jakob Nabel. [PAUSES FOR 7 SECONDS] 
INT: OK. JA: This is my parents' wedding day. They were married in 1934. On-- on the left, as we're looking at the picture, are my grandparents, Singers. And on the right of my father is my grandmother. And my grandfather is standing way in the back. And it's the rest of the family. Aunts, uncles and cousins.  INT: And where was it taken? JA: And this was-- they were married in-- I think they were married in Krakow, Poland. [PAUSES FOR 9 SECONDS] This is a picture of my mother, on the left, and her sister, Liba, on the right. They're standing in front of my grandfather's store. It says Singer-- E. Singer, I think. His name was Emmanuel. And that was taken, oh, in the mid-'30s, I think, in Nowy Targ, Poland. [PAUSES FOR 9 SECONDS] That's a photograph of my mother and me, when I was born in June 4, 1935, in Krakow, Poland. [PAUSES FOR 10 SECONDS] My parents. My father's holding me. We're standing on a balcony in Nowy Targ, Poland. And I must be just a few months old. I don't how old there. [PAUSES FOR 8 SECONDS] This is a photograph of my mother and father holding my baby sister, Sarenka. It's the only picture I have of her. She was just an infant and this was taken in-- I think in 1940. Thank you. [PAUSES FOR 8 SECONDS] This photograph was taken in Nowy Targ in our apartment. My mother and father-- I'm sitting on my mother's lap. My Grandmother Singer's sitting next to my mother. And my aunt is on the right and my cousins are on the left. And that was taken-- I-- my guess is 1938 or '39, prior to the war. [PAUSES FOR 7 SECONDS] This is the cottage where I lived with my cousin, Lala, in Myslenice during the war. [PAUSES FOR 9 SECONDS] This is a picture of me, on the left, with two little friends when I lived on the farm. We're sitting on the stoop of the church, a wooden church. And that was-- my guess is 1943. [PAUSES FOR 13 SECONDS] This is a photo of me being held by Helena Golomp when I was living on the farm. And this is in the orchard, where there were fruit trees and gardens. And she's holding me. And once again, I think that was about 1943, '44. [PAUSES FOR 8 SECONDS] This photo-- these two photos were taken during the war of my parents. You could see the tremendous change that has taken place in the way they look. I imagine this-- the year is 1942 or '43, something like that. [PAUSES FOR 11 SECONDS] This is a photo of Alicia and Ludwig Golomp.
I think this was taken way pre-war. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] I-- I really don't know the date but probably in the '20s. And-- and they-- Alicia is the woman who took in-- took me from the street and saved me. [PAUSES FOR 10 SECONDS] This is a picture of my confirmation. I'm the third one from the right in the top row. And this must have taken place in 1945 in Krakow, Poland. [PAUSES FOR 14 SECONDS] This is a picture of myself and my father taken in Paris, France, and in the winter of 1947, just prior to our trip to the United States. [PAUSES FOR 9 SECONDS] A picture of my-- me and my father taken on the boat that we came on March 15, 1947, the And we came-- we came to New York from-- from England. [PAUSES FOR 15 SECONDS] This is a photo of myself, on the left, and Janina, a Polish woman who helped me out during the war when my cousin used to, you know, abuse me and beat me up. Janina used to bandage me up and feed me and-- and took care of me. And this was-- well, this photo was taken [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] about four years ago, 1993. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] That's it. [PAUSES FOR 8 SECONDS] The picture on the-- on this-- on the left was taken in 1947, just prior to coming to the United States. I was 10 years old. [PAUSES FOR 5 SECONDS] And then the next photo is my-- where I-- after I came to this country, my eighth grade graduation. So I think I was 12 or 13 there. And the next one is my high school graduation in 1953. And the last photo is my engagement picture in 1954, taken 1954. [PAUSES FOR 17 SECONDS] I'd like to introduce my husband, Jerry. JERRY APPLEFIELD: Hello. JA: And my oldest son, David, in the red. DAVID APPLEFIELD: Hello. JA: My daughter, Debbie. DEBBIE APPLEFIELD: Hi. JA: My youngest son, Jonathan. My son-in-law, Craig. CRAIG MILLEY: Hi. JA: Milley. Julia, where are you? And Julia, my daughter-in-law. And Alexandre, my grandson. Anna-Amalia, my granddaughter. And the newest member of the family, Jakob Applefield-Milley. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] So-- JERRY APPLEFIELD: Well, anyone care to start the dialogue? JA: Why don't you? JERRY APPLEFIELD: Why don't I? Well, it's been interesting. It's been an experience that one would have to say, of admiration. The attitude that Janet has maintained over the years and the achievement that she has attained have been incredible. We don't always agree on-- in terms of the Holocaust. Her position is one of much more acceptance of the German nation and looking for the good.
And for that I admire her. I don't always agree with her. But I think her achievement over the years has-- has been most admirable. JERRY APPLEFIELD: Somebody else? David you're next in the lineage. DAVID APPLEFIELD: Well, the only thing I would like to add is that I feel that the story of how my mother and her parents lived and came through, has been in a very indelible way passed on because it's part of our cultural tradition and part of our direct history. And I think the fact that Julie and I have named our children after our-- well, Anna-Amalia is-- Amalia is my mother's mom that we never knew. And Alexandre, comes from Alojzy, which is Alexander Singer, the [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] father of-- of my mother who had a strong influence on-- on us as we grew up. And I think that's a lot of the experience of being children of a survivor of the Holocaust has influenced the way we see the world. JA: And your book. DAVID APPLEFIELD: Well, I-- I wrote a novel called which is coming out very soon. And it's pretty much based on the history of my mother and her father but brought forward a generation. I had-- had it set in contemporary America. And I think the fact that I was compelled to write a-- a book based on a story indicates the-- the influence and the importance and certainly the presence in today. [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] DEBBIE APPLEFIELD: My experience in regard to growing up knowing what my mother had gone through and all that she has become-- I feel very, very lucky that my mother has, for the past 36 years, nurtured an incredible mother-daughter relationship with me. And I certainly aspire to be the kind of mother to my son that my mother has been to me, especially in light of the adversity and-- and the horrific experiences that she went through as a child. And I think the biggest thing for me is that I feel under no circumstances does my mother ever deserve to be in pain. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] Just knowing what-- and seeing, you know, the films that we watch, and growing up knowing the stories. And just the whole story of her family. It sort of puts everything into perspective, of the-- what's important. And I feel that as a family we're really very honored and blessed to have her with us. JONATHAN APPLEFIELD: Well, I love my mother very much, and I'm happy she was saved and that she has maintained a very generous and compassionate view towards [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] people in general. She's very gracious and helpful. You know, she's very into helping others, and I think that's because of her own experiences of being [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] hidden and then cared for and-- and protected. And-- and I love her. CRAIG MILLEY: I was-- when I first met Deb and she told me of the story of her mother and her flight to freedom, I was truly amazed. And being a non-Jew, it has really heightened my sensitivity towards prejudice and racism around the world. And you can be assured that Jakob will know the story of his grandmother for years to come. [PAUSES FOR 8 SECONDS] DAVID APPLEFIELD: [SPEAKING FRENCH] We lived in France so we speak French and English as well. And not sure if Alexandre or Julia-- ALEXANDRE APPLEFIELD-ALVAREZ: I don't want to speak. DAVID APPLEFIELD: You don't have to. ALEXANDRE APPLEFIELD-ALVAREZ: I think you all said everything. JA: Everybody said everything!