INT: Today's date is January the 21st 1997. The survivor is Mr. Solly Irving. His last name at birth was Judensznajder. The interviewer is Ms. Simone Redbart. The interview is being conducted in London, in England, and is in English. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] Today's date is January the 21st, 1997. The survivor is Mr. Solly Irving. My name is Simone Redbart. And the interview is being conducted in London, England and will be in English. Could you please tell me your name and spell it? SI: The present name is Solly Irving, S-O-L-L-Y I-R-V-I-N-G.  INT: And what was your name at birth? SI: My name at birth was Szlama Zelman Judensznaider, J-U-D-E-N-E-N-S-Z-N-A-I-D-E-R.  INT: And how do you spell your first two names? SI: Szlama, which is, uh, Solomon, uh, Zelman, Z-E-L-M-A-N.  INT: And your middle name? SI: Middle name is Zelman, yes.  INT: Right. And were you known by any other names? SI: No.  INT: What is your date of birth? SI: Officially, at the moment, is 11 of August 1930. But my original actual date since I found my birth certificate, a copy of it, was the 12th of August. I was actually born the 12th of August 1930.  INT: And how old are you? SI: At the moment, I'm presently 66, coming on 67.  INT: And what city were you born in? SI: Ryki, Poland.  INT: And how do you spell that? SI: R, uh, R-I-K-Y.  INT: And that was in Poland. SI: Mm. 
INT: Right. SI: It's actually is between Warsaw and Lublin, exactly halfway between Warsaw and Lublin.  INT: What was your mother called? SI: Chana Necha.  INT: And how did you spell that? SI: Uh, I should imagine it as C-H-A-N-A and Necha, N-E-C-H-A.  INT: And your father? SI: Simple. My father was, eh, Icek in Polish and in Hebrew was Yisrael Yitzhak, Israel, eh, Isaac.  INT: And what are your earliest memories of them? SI: Oh, of them? I would have to say, would be three years old when I was taken for my first haircut. You know, it's-- traditionally, in among the Hasidic sect, the boys don't get their hair cut until they're three years old. In fact, my three grandchildren had the same-- same custom, yeah. That's what I remember my first impression of my parents.  INT: And what were they like? SI: To be honest, I'm ashamed to say, I don't remember very much. It's completely blank what they were doing-- I mean, what they were doing professionally I've learned since. But what they were like as people-- I mean, as all parents, I had fear of my father. And if anything, we stood under my mother for protection. That used to be the thing. Although he never hit us, but we always, always expected him. And the same thing my mother-- I was always told my mother was always a ill person. Yet, when the Germans came in, she was one of the strongest in the family. What her ailment were, was, uh, I'm not sure. 
INT: And do you have-- did you have any brothers or sisters? SI: I had four sisters. I was the only boy. I had four sisters, three before me and one after me.  INT: And what were their names? SI: And the oldest one was Rivka. And the second one was Leah. The third one was Hinda. And the fourth one was Mendel. Mendel was the youngest. I have no recollection of their ages or anything.  INT: And do you remember what they were like? SI: Not really. I remember my oldest sister coming to fetch me from school 'cause school used to finish the year of-- going to school was only one year before the war broke out. And she used to collect me from school mid-day and give me some sandwiches or lunch and take me on to for the next lessons or next school.  INT: And do you remember the name of the school? SI: No.  INT: And what was the relationship like with your other sisters? SI: As far as I know, very good-- being the only boy, spoiled no doubt. But I don't have, uh, very good recollections on exactly what else, what it was like.  INT: And what type of accommodations do you live in-- in Ryki? SI: The last we lived in a house, a brick built house that I remember.  INT: And how many bedrooms did it have? SI: I don't remember how many bedrooms. 
INT: Did it have a garden? SI: It had a backyard, yes, not so much of the garden. It was a backyard, exactly what was there I don't know. I remember that because I remember my father when the-- during the war, we dug up and hid certain valuables and also in the cellar. In the cellar, we used hid, to hide the small things.  INT: Like what did you used to hide? SI: Valuables, jewelry.  INT: And did you help in burying them? SI: No, I didn't help in burying them. Children were always been to-- told to stay out of the way.  INT: And did you ever find them again? SI: No, I didn't. Uh, I certainly didn't and none of the family did that were survived. Because, um, I came across a cousin, with the name Chaim Judensznajder. He was the, um, the bro-- the nephew of my-- my father, one of them, anyway. And, uh, he told me he jumped from the first train, from the ghetto was liquidated. And he was trying to hide in our house. And he told me that everything was dug up within hours of being liquidated [INAUDIBLE] the Jews taking out everything [INAUDIBLE]. They knew who to go-- also we were, we were in business. My father was in grain business together with his brothers. And I think he had-- they had partners, as well. So, obviously, the people knew, yeah.  INT: And the train that your Chaim was on, where was it going? SI: Well, I've learned since it was going to Sobibor. I always felt, for many years, I thought they would went Treblinka, which was at Lublin. But since Martin Gilson, Matthew Gilbert, called the of and he gives clear all the towns and the dates and everything. So since then, I-- I assumed that it was Sobibor. 
INT: And what other childhood memories do you have? You mentioned in-- SI: Eh--  INT: --you had-- SI: Good ones or bad ones?  INT: Both. What the-- if you tell me the good ones. SI: Well, the-- the-- the good ones is because, um, as a boy, we played, going to cheder, you know cheder. But the unpleasant memories is when I first went to school, and I was abused as a Jew, as a Jewish boy. And it was terrible. And originally my mother didn't want me to go to a mixed school. But my father, I suppose, being in business he wanted me to grow up also and to have a better education. Because the cheder only taught Jewish religious things, most of them anyway. So before-- year before the war broke out, my father bribed the headmaster, and, uh, he took me to school. And the schools were always outside the center of the town, certainly by-- by church, mostly by churches. And, uh, one day I was attacked coming home from school by boys and rubbed my mouth with ham, abused me, hit me. And-- and I came home, obviously, cried for my father. Next day my father took me to the school, to the headmaster and explained what happened. And the headmaster took me around in their parade, assembly. And he said, show me who did this to you. Of course, I couldn't tell him. But he pulled me by my ear. He didn't take me by my hand. I mean, I couldn't have been that much bigger, but I was a young-- I'm small today. So I was much, much smaller then. I could have only been what, eight, nine years old. 
INT: And do you remember the name of the school? SI: No.  INT: Do you remember any of the names of the boys that were in your class? SI: None at all. None at all. I was the only boy sitting with a beret in school, with my payot-- you know what payot are-- tucked under. So, obviously, I was a target for them.  INT: Did you wear a uniform? SI: Uh, no. In fact, my mother insisted the school caps, in those days in Polish schools, was a-- was almost like a-- if you ever seen a Polish soldier, they have the-- like a cross on the top sticking out there. And so my mother objected. So I was the only one wearing with a beret instead of a school cap.  INT: And do you remember any lessons that you were taught? SI: No.  INT: Any teachers? SI: No. It's completely out of my-- I was only there a year, if that, before broke-- war broke out.  INT: What other childhood memories do you have? SI: Oh, we played games, uh, going with my parents in the summer months to, um, to the forest for holidays.  INT: And what type of games did you play? SI: Well, the biggest game in those, it used to be like-- from a piece of wire, we used to make like a-- and for wheel, take a wheel from the bicycle, and roll it along, and catch it in that piece of wire. So it shouldn't fall over. There was an, also, um, uh, here you have cricket. We didn't play cricket. I played football, tried to play football. We also had a game, it was a piece of wood, short piece of wood with two ends sharpened down and used to hit it, how far it could-- it would travel, or coins against the, the wall, you know. 
INT: And did the games have names, or-- SI: They had names. I don't remember them. One-- one particular [? pallent-- ?] [? pallent, ?] used to be called, a piece of wood with the-- with the edges, eh, sharpened down so you could hit it, and have fun-- I used to -- [INAUDIBLE] used to be called [? pallent. ?]  INT: And who used to play that, the boys or girls? SI: Boys, mostly. But we-- I didn't play much with the girls. We very much, uh, of the Orthodox sects, and I don't remember playing with girls, to be honest, even at that young age, yeah.  INT: And your neighbors around you, were they religious, as well? SI: Yes, yes.  INT: Was Ryki a very religious town? SI: Ryki, was yes-- as far as I know, yes, it was very Orthodox.  INT: How many synagogues did it have? SI: Many, I wouldn't-- yeah, there was one large synagogue, which belonged to the town. And then each sect had their own [NON-ENGLISH], yeah.  INT: And how many sects were there? SI: Quite a few. I don't know exactly how many but quite a few.  INT: And which sect-- SI: Because each offshoot had their own-- the rabbi's offshoot had their own. And if you belong to a [NON-ENGLISH]. If you belong to the shoe menders, they had their own synagogue. The tailors had their own synagogue. So each one had their own, their own little pla-- parish. 
INT: And which sect did you belong to? SI: It was a place called [NON-ENGLISH], which was [? near Pol-- ?] near Warsaw. And that's an offshoot of [? Gehr ?], or the famous [? Gehr ?] was an offshoot where one of the relations, a son, son-in-law, nephew or somebody established a sect, and that's what, uh, we went to.  INT: Um, did you wear any specific type of clothes? SI: Yes. You'll see in the picture, I used to wear little black coat from the time-- from the time I was five-- black coat and black socks.  INT: And who gave you that? SI: The, uh, coat, I remember distinctly when I started learning chumash, my grandfather, my father's side, gave me that. And also a gartel, you know [INAUDIBLE] where a dividing, uh, belt on top of the coat. It's-- it's not called a belt. It's called a gartel, a divider between the heavenly and the bottom part of the body, spiritually.  INT: And do you remember, like, celebrating all the festivals? SI: Sure, uh, in exactly what way I don't remember. But I remember when I started learning chumash that was, uh, that was something. The party, it went on for hours, and after I had to give a speech, um, which I was thankful, told what to say and how to say it, you know. And, um, it was almost like a bar mitzvah today.  INT: And do you remember a lot about your dad still? SI: Yes, I do on the religious side. Yes, yes, I do. 
INT: And the festivals, do you remember getting dressed up for Purim or-- SI: Yeah, oh yeah, of course, always Purim, and always it was customary twice a year, you got new clothes-- Pesach and Sukkos. You always got something new-- however poor we were then how poor or how rich we were, we always had new things.  INT: And do you remember you got given? SI: Well, it was-- it came naturally. Well, whether-- if you needed shoes, you got shoes. If you needed a-- a pair of trousers, you got a pair of trousers, or shirt, whatever.  INT: And your sisters, as well, did-- SI: Yes, yes, yes.  INT: They also got presents. And they were-- SI: I would imagine so.  INT: And what do they do? Did they also learn chumash or-- SI: I don't know exactly what the-- my oldest sister went to gymnasium, which is all year high school. Um, I seem to remember she almost finished, because she worked for my father's business parlor at the time. What else she did after, I don't know.  INT: And this was Rivka? SI: Yeah, yeah.  INT: And what about your other sisters? SI: As far as I know, they were still in-- learning.  INT: And did you all-- SI: Whether they-- I don't think they went to-- to high schools at that time. Maybe they went to girl's [? sams ?] or something like that, yeah.  INT: And did you learn together? SI: No, no. I was always tested by my father on a Friday night-- excuse me-- what I've learned. Actually he paid for it, because he wanted to know what I learned. It wasn't, um-- education, like even today, a lot of it is private. It's not state aided. It certainly wasn't in Poland. I'm sure it wasn't state aided. 
INT: And did you always get the answers right or what happened? SI: Well, I'm sure I didn't. I'm sure I didn't, but I was very friendly with the, um, the son of our town rabbis. And we always learned together. And [INAUDIBLE], I went to his father, and he came to my father always to be tested. It was mostly on a Friday night or Shabbos depending on when there was a-- it was Friday night. In the summer, it was Shabbos afternoon.  INT: And do you remember the walk to from the houses? SI: Yes, I remember the walk going through to him, yes, yeah.  INT: And what was your daily routine like? SI: Well, I don't remember exactly the detail, but I would imagine when you get up in the morning you had certain prayers. I'm sure I must have gone with my father if I was old enough to go with him to [? Shul ?], uh, like so many today. And-- and then went to school, [NON-ENGLISH] school, came home for lunch, met my sis-- my sis, met by my sister, gave me some lunch, and take me on to the next stage of my education. So didn't have much time to-- for play, but we always found [? time, ?] with boys we always found time. I'm sure we found time to play, mostly winters, skating on our hills, or sliding down some little hill, and making up, um, slates or whatever, you know. I'm sure we [INAUDIBLE] doing the same thing as boys do today, maybe more modern way today you got computers. So they sit in those and watch television. We never had television or radio. I don't remember having radio at home. 
INT: And, um, with whom did you play? SI: Boys in the cheder.  INT: Did you ever mix with your school friends socially? SI: This the year of the school, nah. They, they were mostly non-Jews anyway. And the Jewish boys I used to meet in the cheder. We used to play together.  INT: And as a family, where you a very close family? SI: I would think so. I don't know how close we were. I'm sure we were. In those days, most families were close, rich or poor. Family was something that we could learn today, from today, yeah.  INT: And you mentioned that you had your hair cut in 1933 when you were three years old. Uh, that was the time also when Hitler came into power. How did this affect your due-- SI: I don't remember, um, when he came into power. I wouldn't, I was too young to remember. The only time I remember when this came about was, um, when war broke out, and the planes kept coming over our town. And people are running to hide. And they used to come down so low, you could see the pilots, almost their eyeballs and shooting at the people. That's my first recollection.  INT: Did you ever know anyone that got shot? SI: I can't. I'm sure I must have done. I'm sure, but who exactly individually, I-- I wouldn't know. I don't remember. It's a terrible thing to, uh, to have gone through a life and not remembering many things with them in childhood. I used to be so jealous when I came across recent years of friends, say, oh, I've known them so long. I've known them so long, and they did things together. I used to be terribly envious of them. And now, when I think of it, I also know people now that I've known 50 years, people I met up in the camps [INAUDIBLE] and since the camps, yeah. So it's-- it's a long time. Yet, um, when you think about-- I was still-- I was envious. There were two very close friends of mine. Whenever we got together, used to talk about holidays that you have to get together from school and the things they used to do in school. And I always used to think, if only I had someone who remembered me from home, yeah, what I was like. 
INT: And what were your friends' names? SI: My friends were here. It was one of my closest friends, Sidney Wagner. He lives up the road here and David Halo. These are some of my closest friends, from English boys. I'm talking about English bo-- boys. Of course, many from my group that I know and--  INT: And which groups' this? SI: The 458 Society, Holocaust survivors. We very close. And also the boys that I've spent the time with in the different hostels since I've came to England or met [? up in ?] Theresienstadt or met up during the war-- my longest friend, another one is still alive. It's two actually. One lives in Australia. His name is, um, Jack Feingold, Fein. He calls himself Fein, used to be [? Feingzer, ?] calls himself Fein, that I visited uh, on a year ago in Australia. He's been here several time--he actually came with me to England. And he left for Australia he had two uncles that survived the war and took him over. They went after the war to Australia. And they took him, and brought him to Melbourne. Unfortunately, when I went this time-- I remember that his uncles from the camps, early camp days-- and they weren't alive anymore. So I was very sorry. One dies within weeks before I got there. So I was rather upset. I thought they might have been able to tell me about my father, because they were much older, and they knew my father. But I was too late. 
INT: Have you ever met anyone else that knows your parents? SI: I came another one that came across, much younger [INAUDIBLE] my age, who said to me, he remembered me from home and he met my father. And I said, what he look like? He says, like all Jews with a beard and a certain type cap. You know it didn't help very much.  INT: Going back again, when you mentioned about the Polish army coming in, what were they like? SI: German army.  INT: The German army, sorry, coming in-- what-- what were your first impressions of them? SI: Well, uh, when the planes came over, and after they-- it-- it-- it died down a bit, we, um, his children-- my parents took me away to another town called [? Jelehova. ?] And-- and there we've spent a few months. And when we came back German occupation [INAUDIBLE] and it wasn't too bad. My father carried on business with him. I remember one year the army provided them with an escort and a lorry to go to Lublin, to bring back flour for Pesach. I remember that. When exactly it was I don't remember. But so we must have carried them. He must have had some-- some-- made some friends in the German occupation now, because I have a telegram which was sent via that person. Now we had no-- no way of doing it at [INAUDIBLE] unless he had, um, somebody he knew in the occupation forces that, um, would have given that to help to send a telegram to my uncle to Palestine who lived in [? Haifa then. ?] 
INT: And when did your-- SI: --to say all was well.  INT: And when did your uncle go to Palestine? SI: He left in 1933-34.  INT: And what was his name? SI: Yaacov Finkelman. He was the brother of my mother, one-- one of the brothers.  INT: And he survived? SI: He-- well, he-- he-- lived in-- in-- Palestine, in Israel.  INT: And does he remember your parents? SI: Of course, we never spoke much about it. I tried to talk to him many times about it. He always avoided talking. He felt very guilty of-- because apparently he, uh-- he had-- obviously things were tough in Palestine in those days. And my father, I believe, asked him what he should do, whether he should to come to Palestine or not. And he advised him not to. You see, things were hard. He had to work as a laborer, in the building material on the-- the land. And, uh, he knew that my father, [PAUSES] or my mother, rather, was the oldest of-- of the family. And there was still sisters of my mother that weren't married. And she sort of looked after them. So he felt a bit guilty for advising my father, not directly, but hinted to him that it wasn't the place for him.  INT: And what was your relationship like with your uncle? SI: Very good, almost-- almost like a father to me. And in fact when I, when I was demobbed from the Israeli army in 1949 he wanted me very much to come and live with him. He had two daughters and, uh, obviously his wife And his wife, particularly-- she was like a mother to me. They wanted me very much to come live with him and for me to go to college, get an education, which I never had. But, um, I felt it was wrong of me to stay on, because things were very, very tough for them even. He was in the army. He was trying to bring up two daughters himself. And, uh, things were not easy, and I felt that I should give them a little bit rest. 
INT: And what was his wife's name? SI: Minucha.  INT: And the children's names? SI: Sa-- one-- the oldest one is Sarah and the second one is Shoshana. And we still very close. Although they marry and aunt and uncle died. And-- But I'm close to my cousins. And we're very much in touch with each other.  INT: And were you going back then to when the German planes came in, how, um, ho-- what happened after the planes came in? SI: Well, exactly what happened-- I mean, I'm sure after awhile they stopped coming over to find, and they occupied Poland. We came back into town, and things carried on as normal. And then, um, sudden they created a ghetto.  INT: Do you remember the year? SI: Ghetto must have been-- must have been-- ghetto must have been I would reckon '40, '41 they establish a ghetto. And, uh, and they designate a certain area. We were lucky that our house was in the ghetto, so we didn't have to move out. But a lot of people came in. And there's one, uh, one man in Israel, at the moment, called Moishe Oppenheim that lived-- he spent, his family, spent time in our house.  INT: And was he the only family that spent time in your house or were there others? SI: No, I'm sure their others, but I don't remember.  INT: How many people lived in your house? SI: Well, until-- till the war, it was only just our own family, but then, obviously, my mother's sisters and brother came in and this family, Oppenheim, came in. And there must have been others, as well. It was quite a lot. 
INT: And do you remember-- do you remember sharing the house with the family? SI: Yes, of course.  INT: And what were the conditions like in the house? SI: Not very good. Not very good. I don't know how long the ghetto was established. But, um-- but then suddenly town was surrounded one morning. It was a commotion and town was surrounded. And then German lorries came in, surrounded the center of the town, and took everybody into-- into the mid-- square of the town and started transporting them to-- away.  INT: Did you know where they were being transported to? SI: No, we didn't, but my father, somehow, managed to bribe  a guard to let me through.  INT: Do you remember the guards' name? SI: No, I don't remember the guards' name now.  INT: Do you remember your father telling you that he expected to-- SI: No, my father-- I remember my father coming to-- to the house, and pulling me by my hand. And he said, I want you to escape, and to [INAUDIBLE] I think there should be somebody of the family left. And I will tell you where. Make for such and such farm, and that I've given the men certain valuables and he will look after you. So he thought, obviously. And so I escaped. [PAUSES] Don't ask me how I managed to escape. I don't really know how. There was, um, Germans going up and down the road. And I was dressed-- I must have been dressed in the almost in the uniform that I wore with the black coat. And so I didn't look Polish. Why they didn't stop me, I don't know. And then with minutes escaping a sister, my second older sister, Leah, came running and we managed-- met up with me. And she managed to-- to escape with me. 
INT: And what happened to your other, the rest of your family, your other sisters? SI: All I know is that the man, the farmer that I made for, my father told me to-- to go to eventually came home that night and he told me, he so. He took a horse and cart. They were ordered to bring horse and carts to town to transport the Jewish people. Those who could walk had to walk, and those who couldn't, had the older or the infirm put on the tracks and the horse and cart to be transported to the station.  INT: This is the end of tape one.  INT: This is tape number two. The survivor is Mr. Solly Irving. SI: Irving.  INT: Irving. Sorry. [LAUGHTER] Before the tape break, you were talking about the liquidation of the Ryki ghetto and that your father bribed a German soldier. Your other sisters, what happened to your family in the ghetto? SI: Well, according to the guy who-- the farmer that went with the house accountant to town-- he told me he saw my father walking in line with my older sister. He saw my mother in another line with my other sisters. That's all I know.  INT: So when they liquidated the ghetto, then the sexes were split then? SI: Not necessarily, not necessarily. Those who were able to walk, walked. And those who weren't-- obviously, my mother must have been maybe even in one of the carts with my younger sister. I don't know. Yeah. That's what he told me. 
INT: And do you know where they were going? SI: Well, not-- not then, I didn't know. But I've learned since that they were taken to Sobibor by train, and so Sobibor.  INT: Going back to life inside the ghetto, were-- how did life change? Did you-- were you still be-- were you still able to carry on with your religious learning? SI: Yes. Yes, we did. Yes, as far as religious, yes, or whatever. If you went to hide and they taught other subjects, obviously, you carried on, not for very long. I don't know how long the ghetto was established-- how long it was in existence, rather, before we were all taken out.  INT: And what was the food like there? SI: I don't remember. I  don't remember much about it.  INT: And when you and your sister left, then, the Ryki ghetto, what did you do? SI: Well, we went to this farm that my father told me to make for. And the woman-- obviously, the man wasn't there. He was taking-- he went Tschenstochau to Ryki, but the woman was there, and she showed us into-- into the place. And she gave us some food and told them that we shouldn't stay here. We should carry on somewhere else. But we managed to stay until the man came home. And the man came looking for us in one of the outhouses of the farm. And he told us the story. He saw my father and my mother. And he said he couldn't look after us. He couldn't hide us because his wife was of German descent. So he advised us not to stay too long, gave us some food, and he told us to make for some other farms. There were farms in the area established and the Jews-- some of the Jewish people-- were taken in as laborers. So we wandered around for a while, and I think it must have been all night. And the next morning, we came across another farm, and we saw people working on the farm that I recognized. And it-- it was the rabbi's wife and daughters were there and some other people, and mostly women. And obviously, they were gathered. Whether they were Poles or Germans, I'm not quite sure. They were gathered. And somebody suggested that I should lay low till at night. My-- my sister, being older, joined in with them, working on the farm, and talked to the other people. And they advised me that I should stay low. But at night, they would try and take me into one of the barracks on the farm where they lived. And they did. And after a while of being there, we heard the-- the owner of the farm. He called the Politz, you  know. The squire come in, and, oh, somebody must have seen me climb through a window and do that. And he came in looking for me, and I was under the bunks, hiding under the bunks. I was small, so I slid under the bunks. And he said, I know somebody is here. You  better come out. If you don't come out, I'll send the Alsatian dog after you. So I came out, explained who I was. He was sympathetic, and he told me to stay, try and find some work, and so forth. He must have known my father-in-law, because they were all in that area. He must have known. And eventually-- I think it was a day or so later-- we heard that he was summoned to come into the-- come into to the [? tour ?], which is the headquarters of the German headquarters area. And the-- the farm had to be judenrein. It's sort of to do away with the Jews. And the Jews were going to be taken away again. And I heard about this. So he was going with his horse and cart, [? Toshki, ?] and I managed to-- with my sister-- managed to climb on the back of it. He didn't see us. And we ran. And we jumped out and on halfway, and we carried on running somewhere else. And eventually, I turned up in Deblin. Deblin was the nearest town, and we had a distant cousin of my father's. And he was also in the Judenrat, and he gave us shelter. And a while after-- again, I don't remember how long it was-- then we heard there was the-- it was the ghetto was being liquidated again. And that-- although it's what he wants, there were some people left behind because there was a camp nearby. And there was also an Air Force Base nearby. They needed people to work. So they kept on keeping people behind. And that-- that was the second liquidation of Deblin. 
INT: Just to go back a little bit, when you reached the farm, do you remember the names? You don't remember any of the names? SI: No.  INT: The names of the squire or anyone? SI: No.  No. No.  INT: Right. And do you remember like the size of the farm or what it looked like? SI: No, I don't.  INT: Nothing? Or if it had animals on it? SI: It must have.  INT: Or where it was? SI: All farms-- no, no.  INT: Right. And why were you hiding under the bunk when you were in the second-- when you went to the other farm? SI: Well, I was [INAUDIBLE] because I wasn't allowed to be there.  INT: Right. And you said that the women that worked-- SI: Yes.  INT: --were mainly-- were mainly-- were mainly women. SI: Yes.  INT: Why was it that-- SI: I don't know I don't know. Unless, I can only assume that the farm in-- I mean, being-- Ryki was a small town, all right? Most were people, either farmers or dealing in farm goods, like grain, and so forth. And they must have known the squire. And he beginning, took in these people to try and save them. That's-- that's-- I can assume so. I'm not quite sure. He obviously needed laborers as well, so he took the people in to labor. One-- one, particularly, was the wife of the rabbinate-- we call him in Hebrew-- of our rabbi's-- rabbi's wife and his daughter, [? Ahel, ?] who was my godmother. I remember that I was told that she was my godmother. And then the-- the mother was quite an elderly woman already by then. But nevertheless, I mean, people had some influence with these squires, and they-- but they bribed them to take them in. We thought it was-- maybe they thought it was only going to be days or weeks before the war would be over, and they would go. So they were hiding out. 
INT: And do you know what happened to them? SI: I would imagine happened to so many others. That's all I can assume.  INT: And when you were in Deblin, were you in-- when you went there first, did you go straight into the ghetto, or-- SI: Yes, there was a ghetto, obviously. All Jews lived in the ghetto. So if I looked for somebody-- I can't even remember his name, even-- and I looked for-- for this cousin, a distant cousin that I have. I had to look for him.  INT: And he was in the ghetto? SI: He was in the ghetto, yes.  INT: Right. And what was that ghetto like in comparison to the Ryki ghetto? SI: I don't remember much. Like all ghettos. Some did the-- I mean, we're not talking about Warsaw ghettos. Obviously, it was much different than all large ghettos. But these small ghettos, being in small towns, it was restricted, obviously, to go out. There were restrictions of what you could do, but it wasn't threatening-- life-threatening. People were surrounded after taken to a different works. Like this friend of mine, Monty Tabachnik, [? Moto ?] Tabachnik, who comes from Deblin. And he was much taller than me, and he still is. [LAUGHS] And he was taken. He was grabbed in-- in the center of the town and got him taken to work.  INT: And how long were you in the Deblin ghetto for? SI: Not-- not long, not long, could've been weeks, if that. 
INT: And what did you do there? SI: Nothing, as a child, nothing-- absolutely nothing.  INT: And who did you live with when you were there? SI: With my distant cousin.  INT: And what was the conditions like? SI: I don't remember much.  INT: Food. SI: It wasn't the luxury we have today, let's put it that way. I have a flat here with three bedrooms and two bathrooms. I'm sure that many, many families could have fitted in here. The-- we didn't have those facilities and those luxuries in those days. It might have been one or two rooms and everybody mucked in together. That's all it was. The toilet must have been on the outside, you know.  INT: And what about food? Do you remember? SI: Food? I don't remember much about food, you know.  INT: And why did you leave there? SI: Well, I didn't leave. The town was surrounded again, and it was being liquidated. And remembering when my father was there trying to stay alive, we always had a little parcel ready, in case you had to run, to grab it and run. But it was a change of clothes, a bit of food. That's all-- that's all it was. I came running home from the center of the town. I heard that the Germans were coming again. My sister was home.  INT: Where's home? SI: Well, Deblin is where I stayed with my cousin, but I called it home. And I grabbed hold of her, and we opened a back window, and we jumped in the fields, in the back of it. And we jumped out, and we were running. 
INT: Did you see other people running? SI: No, I didn't see. I was only concerned about myself and my sister. I held her by my hand. She was older, but-- and we ran. And suddenly, we heard calls, 'Halt!,' which means stop and being shot at. And somehow-- somehow, we came across a farmer who was on the fields. He grabbed a hold of me. I wiggled out. He grabbed a hold of my sister. And this is only seconds. It couldn't have been much longer, because they've been running after me. And I begged him to release her, and I tried to give him money. We always had some money on us. I don't know how much, or whatever-- had to give him. And he wouldn't release her. And he says, look, they're behind you. And with remembering that, I just pulled my sister again, and I ran out around a little forest in the distance. And I must have passed out. That's the only thing I can-- all I remember is being shot, fired at, and 'Halt!, Halt! Halt!' And when I got up, I saw nothing. Everything was just bare. I must have still been dazed. I lay there for a while and started walking in the forest, coming across little groups who obviously managed to do the same thing that I did. And you heard-- in the night, you heard the cries from the train-- it must have been near the train station-- the cries and the firing. And we kept on wandering. We kept on walking. And the only thing I could follow was the electric poles, or the telegraph poles. I didn't know where I was. And we wandered around for-- for a while-- for-- for a good many weeks like that. And came across little [INAUDIBLE] in groups. They wouldn't-- didn't want me. I was too young. Other groups didn't want me either, because the more people, the more-- more danger. And eventually, after a while, I heard there was a camp nearby. An aunt of mine was in it-- my father's sister, named Tzipporah. She was there. And a cousin of mine named Chaim was there, the one who jumped from the train. How they got to that camp, I don't know, but they were there. And this is nearby an airfield, an Air Force Base. And I knew which sort of direction they were coming from work or to work. And one day, I managed to-- to get near and lie in hiding till they passed through and joined-- and joined that group going back into-- into the camp. And my aunt-- I mean, the people-- most of the people knew me, because they were local people, all local, either Deblin or Ryki people. There were quite a few from Ryki in those days, in that camp. And then they contact my aunt and they told her. And then she hid me in her barrack, the women's barrack. There were barracks for women and barracks for men. She hid me. And then, eventually, there was a registration in the camp, and I stood up. There was quite a lot of children. And I was registered as one of the inmates in the camp. So I was-- I didn't have to hide anymore. 
INT: And just going back a little bit, when you were in the forest-- SI: Yeah.  INT: --what food did you eat? How did you manage to-- SI: You manage to find only from farms, whatever you could find. At night, to get into a farm and find some raw fruit, vegetables, whatever.  INT: Right. And then going back to this camp, what were the conditions like inside? SI: I-- I don't think they were too bad. It was a labor camp. It was near our hometown. It was only surrounded by barbed wire and with a few Germans, about. There was-- I remember the gate, a barbed wire gate. There were times that people were hanged for trying to escape, or whatever. But you could always manage to find some extra food, because the Poles used to come to the camp and try and sell you extra food. Those people had money. And so--  INT: And what about sleeping conditions? SI: Bunks, mostly bunks.  INT: And did you have a mattress? Did you have-- was it just-- SI: Straw, it was mostly straw, just lay straw. Some were better than some of the others.  INT: And what clothes did you wear? SI: Normal clothes I had on. [CLEARS THROAT] Must have been in-- ruined in tatters, or whatever it was. I don't know. I don't remember much about it.  INT: And did you have any other contact with your family members? Or did you see any other family members? SI: No. No. I didn't have any. But many people knew me, and that's why it was easy for me to be [INAUDIBLE] by them. 
INT: And did you ever find out what happened to your parents? SI: No.  INT: Didn't you have their contact? SI: No. And that camp is near also a railroad line. The-- the main railroad line used to pass through just about the camp. And we saw many at the train stop. One day, they took some people out from the camp to unload some clothes. They brought some clothing from the wagons. The people were taken in. You see the barbed wires on the little-- on the windows. And there were times when-- one occasion, when somebody found little notes and the names of the people's clothing they brought into the camp.  INT: And when did you leave this camp and how? SI: Well, I started work, I mean, in that camp, eventually being registered as a-- first, I started. I was doing a little bit of gardening there. And then they needed some people on the airfields to unload cement. And we always tried to register as older to what we were, so more chance of survival. Once you were in a group of workers, you have to give yourself the food. What the foods were like, I don't remember. But it wasn't very much. But nevertheless, you-- you-- you managed to survive, you know. And I was taken to the camps, and I overheard a group trying to-- to escape. And each one had to find their own firearms. But before that, I was working in coal mine-- not in coal mines, working in coal piles. They were unloading-- unloading coal or cement or helping bombs. It was an airfield at an Air Force Base. So therefore, people were needed. One day, a plane came down on fire. And some of the-- don't know exactly how many-- they ran forwards and kicked the-- the cockpit open and saved this pilot, a German pilot, obviously. He was sent for recuperation. And when he came back, he came back with some goods for these people who saved him. And they were made sort of capos of the camp. So they had freedom to move with more movement than the others. And I overheard one night. They were talking about getting a group together to escape, because they had more access to it. One was quite a tall man. I don't remember his name, but I remember he was a good-looking man-- a very good-looking man. And they managed to find some-- break into a warehouse and steal uniforms and guns. As a group, about 10 of them did escape. And I heard that. In those days, although my, whatever job I had-- I also cleaned rooms for German officers. They gave to me extra food, and so forth. When I heard that they was trying to escape and you had to have your own weapons with, I managed to-- to find whether he's kept his revolver in his bag, covered. And the holsters, the German holsters, were very heavy leather, so I only took the revolver. We always worked in twos. I don't remember the guy that I worked with, but he stood watch in the barrack to see if anybody going-- that particular day, luckily, he told me not to come, because he was going away on holiday, or leave, or whatever. So I managed to get into the barrack, steal his revolver, and hid it in a place wherein I thought, obviously, I'll hear when they're going to escape and I'll join with them. I'm sure they wouldn't want me if I officially, but I thought if I turned up, then-- but unlucky for me, they-- they escaped. But the day when they escaped, they stopped going to work, my group. And I was taken to Tschenstochau, further into another camp. So they escaped, but I, unfortunately, ended up in a-- in another a camp, a labor camp. 
INT: And did your, is it commandant at the camp ever find-- or sergeant ever find that his pistol had been stolen? SI: Well, yes, he did. Yes, he did. He came-- what happened was, they had parades. He came back from his holiday, from leave, whatever, and he was in a parade. An officer came to inspect. And they always-- you know, you take  your weapon. You're getting your weapon ready, and so forth. And we were standing from a distance watching in the parade ground. And just before he came to his then, he got himself ready and started-- he looks and he's got nothing there. So I think he was a sergeant, or whatever. He managed to leave and go back to his place and look for it. He didn't find it. Eventually, he came to the place of work where I work to ask if I seen anybody-- didn't accuse me-- if I'd seen it, because he never thought that I would ever be able of doing that such a thing. Did I see anybody go into the barracks? And I said-- of course, I said, I didn't see anyone. You just told me not to come. He asked did I go to the barracks, did I clean his room. I said, no, you told me you were going away. But I was hit by the capo. I was hit so hard for being accused, or even asked by a German, did I see anybody? Did I do anything, you know. So therefore, the capo gave me a good hiding. But within a day or so, and we-- we weren't allowed to go out anymore to work. And the group escaped, and I was right behind. 
INT: And what nationality was the capo? SI: He must have been Polish Jewish. Oh, yes. Most capos were Jews.  INT: And you said you then went to-- you were then taken to-- SI: Tschenstochau.  INT: Right. What was that like? SI: Well, Tschenstochau was already under SS. And as we got off the trains, there was a guy with a little-- with a stick, pointing which way to go. And he-- there's a lot of children came from that camp. So he selected the grownups on one side and children other side And he obviously, he could see I wasn't a grownup, and so he pushed me, and he told me to come with the children. So I went and laid in front of him, kneeled in front of him. I said, I'm a man. I said, ask anybody. I was working at the other camp. I'm 15. And he just happened to push me away. By pushing me away, he pushed me among the grownups. Otherwise, I wouldn't be here to tell you the story.  INT: And how-- SI: And when I think of it, I still shudder. I just had the vision of-- [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] of doing that.  INT: And how old were you really? SI: Well, this was in '44. It must have been '43, '44. I could've been 14-- 13, 14.  INT: Right. And what was it like in the camp? SI: In the camp itself, it wasn't-- it wasn't too bad. Again, it's still Poland, but except it was under SS. I was designated to go to work in a-- in a furniture place. And the guy in charge of the furniture was-- the first time I learned that the deeper-- it's certain rules. The deeper you keep on rubbing it down, the beautiful designs you get in the wood. And we-- we used to make the jewelry boxes or cigarette boxes, that type of thing. 
INT: And who were they for? SI: For German officers, or whatever, or sending back home, you know. And I persuaded the guy who was in charge-- he wasn't too bad. He was quite an elderly man. And he liked rabbits, angora rabbits. I remember, white with the red eyes-- beautiful. I persuaded him that I wasn't much use in the workshop, and he needed somebody to look after his rabbits. Now the rabbit hutch was near the kitchen mess-- the officers' mess, or kitchens, you know. And I felt that I could do better there. So eventually, he gave me time to go and look after the rabbits, to clean out the hutch, and give them food. Because the more food they had, that-- I also helped myself, you know. And it went on for-- for a while. And I managed to get keys made to the storeroom. From wire, you make, you know, your different keys. I managed to get into the storeroom to find out what was in there. There was oil-- barrels of oil. So you light a candle, or something, and you get-- you get little drops to come out. Or you take-- you help yourself to a piece of meat. And I did, one day. I helped myself to a chunk of meat, put it under my jacket, or whatever I was wearing. And I was walking through the place to go into the barracks, and the officer with a little-- had a little dog. The dog smelled the meat. So you can imagine what happened after. And I remember this distinctly. He said to me-- he says, you're not going to be punished for stealing. You're going to be punished for being caught. If you're clever enough to steal, you should be clever enough not to be caught. 
INT: [LAUGHS] SI: Well, yeah.  INT: And what-- what clothes were you wearing when you were in the camp? SI: Again, normal clothes, whatever we had. It wasn't striped pajama type, so not in the beginning, anyway I don't remember having that at all.  INT: No? And sleeping? SI: Sleeping was in bunks, always-- always bunks with straw. If you were lucky, you had a bit of straw. And-- and in those days, it wasn't the-- the bunks weren't too bad. It was straw. But they were a little bit wider, and you didn't have so many people.  INT: Were they wooden bunks, or-- SI: Oh, yes. Oh, yes, wooden bunks.  INT: And were there-- was there any of your family in this camp? SI: No. No.  INT: Right. SI: At the-- eventually, I met my Aunt Tzipporah that was there. And she worked in the laundry room.  INT: And how long had she been in the camp? SI: She must have come at the same time as me. Yes. That was the only transport, you know.  INT: All right. And then from-- when did you leave this camp? SI: We must have left  it-- that camp, I must have left '44.  INT: And where-- SI: It was in '44 at Buchenwald.  INT: Right. And were you all-- everybody that came to that camp, did you all leave together to go to Buchenwald? SI: No, no, no, no, no, no. In fact, my aunt was liberated six months before me in-- in that-- that camp, by the Russians, also by the Russians. 
INT: So why were you then-- SI: I don't know why. They just came in one day and says, right, that bag is going off, or they called out lists, and you're going off. And that's it. I don't know how many left the camp.  INT: And what was Buchenwald like? SI: Well, Buchenwald-- I-- what can you say with-- it wasn't a-- it wasn't a holiday camp, I can tell you. The bunks that we shared were much more difficult to sleep in than-- than the-- the other previous. Many more people shared those bunks. And we all laid sort of like sardines, you know, one this way, one that way, and even across the legs and across the hands, you know, as many as you could put in. And there was a long-- a long bench-- all long benches, with wooden benches there, sort of in the center with the thing down.  INT: We've come to the end now of tape two.  INT: This is tape number three. And the survivor is Mr. Solly Irving. Before the take break, we were getting on to when you went to Buchenwald. But is there anything else that you'd like to say about any of your life in the ghettos or camps. SI: Well, it just came, came to, back to me, asking what I remembered about my father. There was one instant where he was walking through the streets. And he was grabbed by Germans. And he was taken to the barber shop to cut his beard off. And for those people that-- if you know any orthodox people, Hasidic people, it's one of the worst things they can experience to have their beards cut off. And I remember, when he they was taking him to the barber shop, and the barber started cutting off his beard. And he finished halfway, one side, and the German left the room. So my father put a scarf on, as though he had an earache, and he went out in the street. That's what I remember about my father. Yes. The other thing I forgot to mention, at the beginning, where it was still a time before the war, and you asked me, what sect my-- Hasidic sect of my father? I remember, my father taking me one day-- one year to see the rabbi. And we went by train to [POLISH]. [POLISH] is just outside Warsaw. And he bought golden cherries, the white cherries. And every time I see them now, I have to buy them, whatever the price is. And I remember my father. The other thing is, when we moved into our home, the last home we lived in, before the war, was a brick-built. And the rabbi came for what we call [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH], the housewarming, to bless our house. And of course, the whole family moved out. And it was just the rabbi and his close-- And I remember sitting on his lap. And he gave me a coin, we call [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH], blessed-- a blessed coin. And as far as my mother was concerned, then, that was the holiest thing she could-- she could have had. I don't know, maybe because of that, I'm-- I'm here to tell the tale, to tell the little story that-- the few things I remember. My mother was a very righteous woman. People tell me she used to fast Mondays and Thursdays. 
INT: And what happened to the coin that you got given? SI: I don't know what happened. I don't know what happened. I must have left behind it with so many other things.  INT: And is there anything else that you want to say? SI: No, that just I can't seem to remember, particularly, on-- on this one. But this is important, you know, to-- to how she felt about the rabbi. And I was sat on his lap. And the joy that she had in that. Yeah.  INT: And was it customary, in those times, for the rabbi to bless the house and to stay in the house? Or is that traditional? SI: Well, he-- it-- it-- my father must have been one of his great supporters. Because I don't think he did it to everybody.  INT: So by the rabbi staying in the house, it was a great honor? SI: Obviously, it was a great honor, yes. And not only that, when this particular rabbi died, he-- I was told-- he left a will to say, first of all, they should wait for my father, for the burial, to come. And also, there should be a prayer house in our house. And during the war, there was. Yeah, I remember one year, it must have been either Yom Kippur-- Rosh Hashanah or Yom Kippur. In the middle of the service, we heard the commotion, the Germans were knocking on doors. And some people hid. Some people stayed in the house. And some were taken out. And the fate of those people, who were taken out, well-known now. 
INT: And on Friday nights, did you have people that used to come around-- SI: Oh, yes.  INT: --for dinner? SI: Oh, yes, yes. There was always strangers used to come to-- to stand by the doorway. And as you went out, people, we used to invite them-- invite them home.  INT: And did you enjoy that, meeting new people? SI: Yes. you always considered different people. Ah, I remember things, when my mother used to cook, especially for-- for people, poor people. And we, as children, used to take canned food down to them. And we'd be going to one woman, who was living in an attic, and we were taking-- we were walking up on, partly, a ladder to reach her. And we were taking food. It was a great joy for us, children.  INT: And do you remember any of their names? SI: No. No. No. Seems to be complete blockage of the dates and names in the-- I remember things but never the dates or anything. But when we get together, surprising enough, when we get together with other boys, we always talking. Things come to-- to mind, you know, of what happened. I mean recently, my friend, Monty Tabachnik, reminded me that, when we went back from-- after liberation-- I'm going on with it-- after liberation, at Theresienstadt, him and I went back to Poland. Somehow we felt that maybe we still had some family-- mine. And he told them the way-- this is a story on its own, how we went to Poland and no papers and how we went back. And we met up with my aunt, who survived, and his two sisters, who survived. They eventually went to Canada, one who's still alive and one who died. My aunt is not alive anymore. She went-- eventually went to Israel, yeah. And we went-- on the way, we met people and told us, don't go into your home towns. The pogroms, the Poles are still killing Jews, those, the few that survived. And I felt, now! Me, I'm a big man now. I'm not frightened. This Monty Tabachnik went on to Lodz, because he was told his sisters were in Lodz. I want to go back into town. I got stopped at the station, went-- walked into the town. It wasn't far. And I was spat at, stoned at, abused at. Look, there's still a Jew alive. I managed to get as far as the square and no further. There was the Polish and the Russian soldiers, standing, laughing. They still found a Jew. I turned around, went back to the station, went on to Lodz, the next train. In Lodz, we met-- he met his sisters. I met my aunt. My aunt, obviously was delighted to see me. I'll be her child from now on. She will look after me. I says, auntie, I'm not staying. Where are you running to? You've always been running. She always told me, I was running. I never stayed still. I always tried to run. Maybe that's why I stayed. That's why I managed to-- to survive. Always running, looking for hideouts, looking [INAUDIBLE]. I said, auntie, I'm not staying here. I'm going back to where I came from, Theresienstadt. I heard there was-- they were taking us either to Palestine or to England. No, no England just Palestine. we were talking about taking the children. And I, I left. And she came in the station. So did his two sisters, crying, begging us to stay behind. No. And we met another boy, that we met from the camp or we knew from the camp, [INAUDIBLE] [? Meltz, ?] who lives in England now. And all, all the papers we had was just little pieces of paper. And we got to the-- the borders. The Russians couldn't read. I went with a piece of laundry paper through them. And the other two walked behind me, underneath, and they went through. And then I got through as well. 
INT: With a piece of laundry-- SI: With a piece of laundry paper that we had in Theresienstadt or whatever it was. But he tells me that we were arrested by the Poles on a certain station. Wandering around, we didn't know what. We didn't have no papers or nothing. And they arrested us. And I made such a noise, screaming and shouting, they let us go. I didn't know that until he reminded me a couple of weeks ago about it.  INT: Going back-- and then, because we'll come back onto your liberation-- SI: Yes.  INT: --again. When you were in Buchenwald, how did you get to Buchenwald? SI: Well, by train from [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]. Yes.  INT: And do you remember the journey? SI: No, I don't remember the journey much. No.  INT: Do you know-- you don't-- remember how long it took? SI: No No.  INT: And what did you do when you were in Buchenwald? SI: In Buchenwald, almost nothing. Buchenwald, at that time, was divided into three different camps. For your information, the chief rabbi, the present chief rabbi of Israel was in Buchenwald, Rabbi Lau.  INT: And were you there when he was there? SI: Yes, I must have been. I didn't know. Some people remember him. He was-- his is bit younger than us. His older brother was with him. He was-- managed to hide him out in different ways and I'll tell you that, in a minute, how it came about. And in Buchenwald, we did nothing. Buchenwald was something like a-- a transit camp, with taking people to work different places, different camp, different places. We did nothing. We just taking stones from one end and put them to another. That was practically it. We were given a certain ration of food. It was a black bread, I remember. One day, we got a little bit more. I think it must have been with some margarine or something. There were some people coming from the Red Cross. So when you hear the people coming from the Red Cross, you always knew you were going to get some better rations. The-- we never feared death. We saw much of it in Buchenwald or even in other places. Buchenwald, every morning, they were being carried out from the barracks and laid in piles. We were in Block 66, as-- as I was told. It was mostly young, young people, like myself. I remember we-- I teamed up with a boy. Again, I don't remember his name. And we-- we decided the rations, that we were given, we should divide them up for twice in a day. So we had one potion of ration, in the morning, another portion in the evening. And I remember, one day, we had our morning ration, and we left. We went out into the camp. And we hid the second portion. We hid, so we thought nobody would be able to find it. And on the way back, we greeted by other people who said, oh, he stole your ration, or he stole the ration, the ration of food. So we started running to see what it was ours, you know? And by the time we found that it was our ration of food, and he was stuffing it in his mouth. We ran after him. Eventually, we got hold of him. And he fell down. I mean I remember taking stones and just throwing them. But he didn't wait. He just kept on chewing it, whatever it was, he kept on chewing. We didn't turn around to see whether he was alive or dead. We didn't. 
INT: Do you know what religion he was? SI: No. I don't know. No. There were quite a mixture of them. I came across a guy who was brought back from the Russian front. He said, somewhere, his generations back, there was some Jewishness in him. So he was brought back from the Russian front into Buchenwald. Buchenwald also had a lot of political prisoners, in fact, in the big camp. And they were much better off than we were. I was cleaning boots for somebody. And he, now and again, he used to throw some food out of his window. And he gave me, once, some food. I don't know what it was, but little bones, and they were so sweet and soft that I left nothing behind there. I don't know what it was. Food, as far as I, personally, was concerned, was never such a big problem. Always somehow managed to get some extra food. Whether it was like cleaning boots or cleaning rooms for-- for other political prisoners or German officers, yeah, I always managed to-- to find. I was fortunate in that respect. Yeah.  INT: Did you have any special clothes or any uniform that you wore in the camp? SI: I don't remember. I don't remember. There must have been. I mean almost bare feet. I remember there was hardly anything on our feet even in winter. We woken up, very often, in the mornings, and dark, cold, and taken into the wash-houses and washed in cold water. 
INT: And what about illnesses? SI: There were many. There were many. I was fortunate. That's all I can say. I don't know whether it was the coin or whether it was because of my parents. I didn't know. I was fortunate to survive. How, what? I don't know. I must have been at the right place at the right time. That's all I can say. Each one of us has different stories. If you collate them, you must want to get the same story. But different happenings, some worse than others. If you hear some of my friend's sufferings, mine was very mild.  INT: Did you have any contact with anybody else in the camp? Did you speak to the political prisoners or some of the men? SI: Well, only if I went to-- to clean his boots or his rooms, which what did we exchange? Nothing. I was only interested in what I was getting at the end of it, that's all.  INT: And did you know what was going on nationally? SI: Buchenwald, a bit more so. We heard different things. We heard planes come over and-- and dropping bombs nearby and so forth. But that was towards the end of the war, already. And we were talking about end of March-- end of March, I wasn't even in Buchenwald.  INT: And what was the typical daily routine then? SI: In Buchenwald?  INT: Yeah. SI: There was no such thing. I mean getting up early hours in the morning and stand on parade until everybody was counted. And until they found out where the person who was missing, whether they was dead or whatever, you stood there in the cold. And that's all. And if you dropped, you dropped. Very often, we saw-- then we get, at Buchenwald, it was already electrically wired. And very often, you saw people running towards the wire, the barbed wire, and putting their hands on and getting electrocuted. 
INT: Did you see people die? SI: Oh, yes. Oh, yes. Yes, quite often. Yes.  INT: And what happened to them afterwards? SI: Just carried away. It happened to me, once-- not in [INAUDIBLE], but in Buchenwald. They used to bring in the big urns of soup, so-called soup to feed us. It was mostly water. And one day, we were standing, waiting, for this urn to come near us. And there was a prisoner, from way back, two were carrying, all right, and a German, who was walking behind them, one-- mostly one, to shout before there were kapos. And one prisoner was running across. And he-- it was boiling water, however, it was hot. He put his hand, right in, and grabbed the bottom, because you always-- the solid was at the bottom. And he grabbed hold of that. And as it-- it took seconds. And the German took out a gun and killed him. So he never enjoyed whatever he grabbed. Couldn't have been much in it.  INT: Was there a lot of SS around the camp? SI: Not-- they were coming in, from time to time. Wasn't in the camp. You didn't see that many in the camp. It was mostly controlled by kapos.  INT: And what nationality were the kapos? SI: All kinds. All kinds. Yeah. There were some Poles, as well. Yeah.  INT: Were there Jewish-- SI: Mostly Jews, yes. Mm hm.  INT: Did you ever hear of anybody trying to escape from Buchenwald? SI: Only those people who tried to get through-- through the wires, whether they would think of escaping. I don't think-- they knew, already, at that time, they couldn't escape. Yeah, we-- we used to come across people that had escaped. And old-- old or young, used to bring them back with a gun behind them and bring them back. But-- 
INT: And after Buchenwald, what happened to you? SI: Buchenwald, I was taken-- we were taken out of Buchenwald, it must have been the end of-- it took us four weeks, [INAUDIBLE] and we were liberated beginning of May. So it must have been the end of March we were taken out of Buchenwald, suddenly. We were told to march, march out of Buchenwald towards the station. And-- and [INAUDIBLE] and those people who couldn't walk, were shot on the spot, quite a lot. You never-- you never looked around. You never looked back. Only the ones who walk next to you, whether it was four, five abreast, or anything. But if you heard the shot, you already knew that you couldn't walk anymore. And sometimes, people carried, you know-- so they carried one another.  INT: This wasn't-- wasn't this-- was this like a death march or was this being marched-- SI: I don't know whether it started off as death march or not. But we were taken to the trains, in open cattle tracks, loaded on, about 100 or so of us, you know? And we were fortunate, mostly, on my-- on my train, it was mostly the youngsters from-- that we came over with in '45. Mostly the '45 were in that transport.  INT: And where were you taken to, then, after? SI: Well, we didn't know where we were taken. But it took us four weeks. We ended up in Theresienstadt.  INT: So you walked for-- SI: No, we didn't-- but on the train. 
INT: You were traveling for four weeks? SI: Traveling, yes. Well, we didn't travel for four weeks, because they shunted, from line to line, making room for the escaping army. They were trying-- we were told, we trying to take us to-- out to the camps. But the camps were already liberated by the forces, the Allied forces, whether it was the Russians or-- or the Americans. Mostly the Americans, because in Buchenwald, we came in-- back to Czechoslovakia.  INT: And do you remember that journey? SI: Oh, yes. Oh, yes. Yes, I remember it very, very well. One night, we were woken up. Woken up? We were-- opened up the wagons. And we were given a certain type of food, which I can only describe-- poison. It was a cabbage. I remember that. And we just gave a lick, and it was just burning us up. And as youngsters, as I said to you, I wasn't-- we weren't that desperate for food. We were desperate, but not-- we always managed to find something. Because we were stopping on-- on the, on the journey quite often, mostly at nights, and making room. You know, you could hear the trains being shunned from-- from line to line. So we managed to always find-- and one time, we went through Sudetenland. And they threw some stale bread into the wagon. So we managed to find-- oh, or we managed to find some vegetables. If the planes came down, attacking the trains, we ran into the fields to dig for food. The Germans went under the wagons, the guards. We ran into the fields to dig for-- so, and so we managed to find. But this particular night, they woke up, then. So we left it. And we said, we'll wait until the next morning. The next morning, all of us jumped out, those who were still alive, digging the ground, digging the earth for some moist to put in our mouth. And we managed to find some extra water, eventually, and diluted it. And we took bricks onto the wagons. And we made little fires. Or when we were stationed, a little fire, and we boiled it up, diluted the soup. But many, many died that night. You could see the lorries pulling up, by the, by the, by the railways, and carrying people. Some weren't even dead yet. Yeah. Or you saw the time when the German officers or the German guards went into the-- into the railways and pulling teeth out of people who weren't dead. Oh, yes. 
INT: What type of teeth? SI: Tch, gold, obviously. They wouldn't take anything else. Yeah.  INT: And then, when did you arrive in Theresienstadt? SI: We arrived in Theresienstadt almost days before the liberation, which was early May. We were liberated, possibly, between the 5th and the 8th. Some say-- people say 5th, some say the 8th, yeah, 1945.  INT: And who were you liberated by? SI: By the Russians. Yes.  INT: And how did it feel to be liberated? SI: How did it feel? [LAUGHS] How did it feel? At the beginning, all we wanted was to find some food.  INT: Did it matter what type of food? SI: No. My-- my-- my ambition was, at the time, to be able to find a loaf of bread, to be able to cut slices. That's what it was. And when the Russians came in, the first couple of days, we could do what we wanted. I made a pact with a guy, who was older than me, to go out, together. We always tried to find other people to go together. Never go by yourself. Always go with somebody else. And I said, whatever food you find, you give to me. Whatever else I find, I'll give to you. And we came-- we stopped groups of Germans, who were being evacuated, either into camps or-- or into centers, and we stopped them. We took the food away from them. One guy begged me to leave him his razor. However much the Germans-- cleanliness, to them, is very-- and he begged me to leave him his razor. I wasn't interested in that. I was interested in finding food. I remember coming into a house, an officer's house, and there was a big cupboard and a big picture of the officer. And we looked through the house, but we couldn't find. And this guy opened the cupboard, and he saw a lot of postage stamps. To me, it didn't mean a thing. But he knew what he was looking for. And he took pages and pages of books of these postage stamps. I was only interested in food. And I came-- came back to the camp schlepping sacks of food for my friends. 
INT: So you weren't just interested for you? You were interested for everybody. SI: Obviously. Obviously. Yeah.  INT: And what was your ambition, then, at the time, when you were liberated? Did you know-- SI: To see whether we could find some family. In fact, as I said before, within days, or it might have been weeks, we went back. And this friend of mine and I went back to Poland looking for people.  INT: So when do you leave Theresienstadt? SI: It must have been end of May, June. And we came back within weeks.  INT: And you went-- do you remember the friend's name that you went with? SI: Yeah, Monty Tabachnik.  INT: Right. And you went back to Ryki. SI: I went back to Ryki as I said before. I didn't stay long. I only stayed a few minutes, turned around and went back. I met up with my aunt, who told us stories about pogroms. She went and to her-- to her house. She was introduced to the guy, a doctor, who lived in her house. And he said, this is a woman, who's claiming her properties. And the guard from the town-hall left. And this guy, who occupied the house, said, if you don't go out now, they'll carry you out at night. So you better be aware. And she said, that night, other people, Jews, who were still left from the camps, survived, there was a pogrom, quite a few were killed. She managed to hide yourself in a haystack and escape. 
INT: And your aunt was in Lodz. SI: My aunt, eventually, was in Lodz, yes. Yes.  INT: And what was it-- how-- how was it-- SI: Lodz, I don't remember. My-- I was only there a few days. Yeah. You see there was-- I mean, the movements of the people then, there was always running to-- what we call it-- like the town-halls or the Jewish judenrat, to try and find names or whatever or getting vouchers for food. Nobody had anything. So it was only controlled by the Jewish community. And they, in turn, I suppose, by then, were getting it either from England and from-- from-- from America, from the [? Joint. ?] And that's how you, you-- the contact you had. Wherever you went, there was thousands of people. Thousands? There were hundreds of people for the same reason, either getting vouchers for food or getting food or getting some sort of start now. That's all it was.  INT: And then, from Lodz, you went back to Theresienstadt. SI: Yes.  INT: Why did you go back? SI: Well, we-- we-- we were told that we were going to go on to Palestine, the youth. Yeah. And I had nothing left in Poland. And I didn't want to be a-- a baby anymore. My aunt wanted to bring me up as a-- as her child. She lost all her family.  INT: Do you regret not staying with your aunt? SI: Ah, I suppose, on hindsight, yes. Yes, I suppose so. But on the other hand, who knows what my destiny would have been otherwise. I can't tell. Obviously, my destiny was to come here and bring up a family. 
INT: So when you left Theresienstadt for the last time, where did you go from there? SI: We went. We were taken. The whole group were taken to Prague.  INT: How many were-- SI: Well, the first group had 300 of us. We came to England.  INT: And you were a group from-- when you were in the Theresienstadt ghetto? SI: Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Some came in after. They weren't all liberated at the same time. Some came from other camps. We weren't all in Buchenwald. Some came in from other camps as well. Monty Tabachnik came from-- from others, other places, yeah.  INT: But the three of you-- SI: We were separated. Yes.  INT: 300 Of you were all together. SI: 300 of us came-- came, yes.  INT: From Theresienstadt? SI: The first 300 came in August, 1945, from Theresienstadt via Prague. And we were-- now it's well-known, that the boys, the book, written by Sir Martin Gilbert, about the boys. And the British government, in those days, gave permission for 1,000 children to be brought over. But they couldn't find 1,000 children. They could only find 732. And we were the first 300 that came over.  INT: And you came over in? SI: 1945, August the 14th.  INT: Right. And did you have-- what was it like to come into a strange country? Did you have any language problems? SI: Well, I tell you something, I seem to remember that, in Theresienstadt, coming back from, from Poland, I was asked to make a speech in English. I was-- they had it written out in phonetics. And that that's-- I read out. What I read, I don't know. Who I read it to, I don't know. At the same time, it would be given in Windemere, in England, already. I presented the deputation with an album of all us. Didn't mean-- the language didn't-- whether it was English or whatever. I didn't speak English. I read something out, out of this paper, that's all. Why me, I was picked, I don't know. And eventually, we mostly spoke Yiddish amongst-- amongst ourselves and Polish. Polish was my first language. I must have hated it all my life, Polish. Yiddish was our language at home. 
INT: This is the end of tape three.  INT: This is tape number four. And the survivor is Mr. Solly Irving. Before the tape break, you were talking about when you were in Prague, when you were leaving-- when you left Prague. And you were in-- came to England with the boys, 300 of you. Whereabouts did you arrive in England? SI: Lake District, Windermere We stopped off in Carlisle Airport. And we were taken by coaches to Windermere Lake District. And there, we recuperated for a couple months. It was wonderful. There was really what I call a holiday camp now. I remember distinctly the white bread. We used to call it cake with butter and ice cold milk from the farms. That was heaven. Had it not been for that, I'm sure many wouldn't-- those that have survived, had we not had the recuperation for two months, would have been-- although some of them were ill with TB and so forth, different illnesses. But that really gave us a start back to normal life. And I always said that as far as I'm concerned, my birthday is on the 14th of August, 1945, or a couple days before, from the time we came to England. Because before that, there's the early, early few couple of years what I remember of. But in between years, we weren't living. We were lucky that we survived so far. I said before, people used to ask me, how, what, and when? I don't know. I can't give any answer. I don't know myself, how did I survive. I don't know. As my aunt said, I was running, maybe that. Maybe I was fortunate to be at the right place, to kneel in front of the German and push me to the grown ups. And we were told after, at night, people who accompanied those children, what happened to them. It's impossible to imagine anybody who has not lived. And I must tell you this. I admire people like yourself and the others who do this. It brings tears to my eyes, even now, when I think. My body shakes, not of nervousness, but of remembering what it was like. I can't describe it to you, or even how much we put in the video, what it was really like. I recently thought, how come people can deny that this ever existed when we've got a proof of myself and others-- not many others still after 50, 55 years-- still people deny. The only thing I can think of is that it's impossible for them to imagine that one human being could do this to another. Even animals to one another don't do this. And after all, we are human beings, and especially talking about a German nation, educated nation, that they could instill such hatred. I must tell you that some of the Germans weren't as bad as some of the Poles, or the Ukrainians, that went over, or the Hungarians. Everybody had to show that they can do better. And that is something that we can't pass on to others, because each one has his own story. And if people didn't go through what I went through, maybe in different ways, there were some people who suffered in Siberia. But it still wasn't the same thing. They were beaten. They were hard labored. But to do the sort of thing, to take a child by the head, and shoot it, or knock it against the wall, how can one human being do that? And we think of it, it's not really tears. It brings more back. I don't know. I'd like to think that my sisters didn't go through that. At least they died, death was quick, less painful. And I think of [INAUDIBLE], that I was pushed, eventually, had the sense of crying that I was a man. And that group of children, many children, who were taken out into a field, and just dug a grave, and dropped in, the German, whoever he was, Ukrainian or German, how many he could shoot, and how many he could shoot straight or whatever, or lining up two people back to back, and shoot them through the mouth. That's-- that's not human beings. I always felt that if I had the opportunity to do something like this, that I wouldn't do it quickly then. If I had the guts, I'd cut pieces of them, slowly. But we mustn't talk about that. We-- we're not here to take revenge. We're here to testify that Hitler didn't-- didn't do what he set out to do. [PAUSES FOR 6 SECONDS] Very difficult, after so many years, that people still deny what happened. I'm sorry about that. 
INT: When you were in Windermere, then, who provided the funds for you to be-- SI: Well, it used to be called [? Bloomsbury ?] House, which is CBF, and Jewish Refugees Committee. They did all the work. They were volunteers, obviously, that came to help in the camps.  INT: And when you were in Windermere, was it-- what actually was Windermere, and who looked after you when you were there? SI: Windermere was a-- I don't know what it was. I think that was barracks for the army. Each one had an individual chalet, little room. And we went into that room. And we were taken there. And there was white sheets in the beds, and little cupboards standing beside it. We never experienced anything like that. Didn't even have it at home either, a single room. I think at home, I slept with my father in bed. And my sister slept with her mother. I don't believe we ever had individual beds, all shared. There, we had a little individual room. We would take on trips in boats, outings. We were running to shops, little shops. And we were buying kippers, obviously mackerel kippers. We used to eat them raw. Yeah, It was wonderful, really, really wonderful. There was a Rabbi Weiss, who eventually became Chief Rabbi of Zurich, who was the head of the religious, [? including ?] helpers. And after, we would play football. I have a picture, a visual picture, of Rabbi Weiss standing [INAUDIBLE] standing in goal, keeping goal. And there must have been 200 playing in the field. It was wonderful. It was, certainly, an eye opener. And this bread, and the Marmalade, and cold milk, that was really something. I remember the first film we saw [INAUDIBLE] They reproduced the picture in the magazine. And it came last week with that picture. It was me in front, staring, eyes [INAUDIBLE]. King Henry-- I'd never seen a film before. The home I come from, it was a very-- I wouldn't say narrow-- but orthodox home, that all we were concerned about is studying, studying, studying. And apart from playing as well, I'm sure, but [INAUDIBLE] play exactly how, what, and when, I don't remember. I started growing up when I was 15. And by then, I was already a man. So I had no youth. And that's what I regret very much-- for someone to go through life without having youth and education. I had the opportunity to study. But I was frightened. I was frightened to study. My-- my mind would go, with so many things in mind, so many bitter things to remember. I was frightened. I did have a little bit of education, not very much, in Gateshead, eventually when I left Windermere. Windermere was divided up into hostels. And each town, each city, took one or two hostel. Gateshead took a hostel. And they must have noticed that I was more religious. And they sent me to-- Gateshead was a very religious town. And we had a hostel there. Others went to other places. And there, I had a little bit of education, not much. But they couldn't make up for the loss. And my religious knowledge is quite good. Only, I think, I'm sure mostly what I remember from home. 
INT: And when were you sent to Gateshead? SI: Two months after being in Windermere.  INT: And who were you sent with? SI: Well, there was a group of boys. There was [NON-ENGLISH]. There was [NON-ENGLISH], so many others. 20 of us went, the Windermere brothers, [NON-ENGLISH]. Unfortunately, some have died. [NON-ENGLISH] died. [NON-ENGLISH] died. And then from there, people went to families, and went different places.  INT: And what were you taught when you were at Gateshead? SI: We had-- teachers used to come in to try and teach us English, and math.  INT: And then when you left Gateshead, what did you do? SI: Well, when I left Gateshead-- actually, I came a couple of times. I came to London, and stayed in Highbury New Park Hostel for a while, and went back to Gateshead, and then came back to London. And, eventually, I-- as I said before, Mr. Friedman, of the committee, wanted me to go to college. He wasn't a religious man. And I was registered to go [? Haslemere ?] College to study. He bought me tickets to train. In those days, we used to get 10 shillings, a half a pound, pocket money a week. And you used to buy a lot of things for that.  INT: And how much is that equivalent to nowadays? SI: Well, it was 50 pence. But it used to buy a lot more than I think, I'm sure, 10 pounds could buy today. And he registered me to go to college. I got as far as the train, to the station, and came back. I didn't want to go. 
INT: Why? SI: I didn't want to go to study. I wanted to start doing work. And I didn't want to rely on people. All our ambition was to be able to stand on our own feet. It was very difficult for us to settle down to-- to-- to do things, to be told what to do. We were men already. Windermere, when they were passing through beginning, when they were passing school the meals, we were sitting at long benches, long tables. And they couldn't understand, as we were passing through the meals from beginning table to the end, kept on going around. As we were given the meal, we put it on the table. We didn't realize that we were going to get meals in the evening, and in the next morning, and we don't have to hide. We must have been very difficult people.  INT: And who were the people that looked after you? Were they nurses or were they teachers? SI: Some were nurses. Some where, I'm sure, leaders of groups of certain-- I remember distinctly, [NON-ENGLISH] was a religious man. Israel Cohen, who was a teacher [INAUDIBLE] for years, who lives now in Israel. His present wife that wasn't married then was a nurse. And I had laryngitis. We started singing, and eventually voice broke. And I had terrible trouble. It broke on Yom Kippur, I remember. We had service. And we were singing. And she nursed me. She gave me steam towels and steam, to bring me back to-- yeah, they were wonderful people, wonderful. 
INT: So then from the Highbury New Park Hostel, where did you go from there? SI: I registered-- well I went-- I registered myself, eventually got to Israel. And I think from Highbury New Park, I went back to Gateshead, and came back to London. I can't remember where I stayed in London. I can't remember. But, anyway, I registered myself, and got to Israel, [INAUDIBLE] Palestine [INAUDIBLE].  INT: And when did you go to Palestine? SI: [INAUDIBLE] I had to wait. And the funny thing was, every time we went to register in [INAUDIBLE] or in Swiss Cottage there was a place, we always asked for the same person. And it was never the same person, for security. And, unfortunately, it was illegal. I had to wait till I was 18, till August '48-- or just before, it was actually July, I think-- to go to Israel, register myself. I already had contact with my aunt in Israel. And I already had contact with my uncle also through letters. I met somebody in lodge who was my aunt's brother, who died recently in Brazil. He-- he was liberated before me. And he was older than me. And he remembered their names and everything. And he wrote to them. So he gave me the address. When I came to England, I asked someone to write for me a letter. I wrote Yiddish. I could write Yiddish. But I think I asked somebody. My aunt contacted me through Mr. Goodman, who was then the head of [INAUDIBLE] school. He went to a conference in Germany just after the war. And my aunt approached him, and told him that she was looking for her nephew. And she thinks he went to England. And he brought me a letter. So I made contact with her. And she, eventually, went to Israel also. And I met up with her when I went in '48. I was, obviously, enlisted straightaway into the army. We went through Marseilles. In the story, we weren't officially. Obviously, I had to apply for a travel document. We weren't British. I got a green travel document lasting for a year. I applied for a holiday visa to go to Switzerland. And even [INAUDIBLE] transit visa to stop off in France. [NON-ENGLISH] Switzerland. In France, we were given certain addresses to contact in Paris, who bought us tickets to go to Marseilles. And from Marseilles, we waited for the illegal boat. And that's how we went. 
INT: And what was the boat's name? SI: [NON-ENGLISH], I've got a picture with, actually-- was taken by [INAUDIBLE], who I met up with. We were beginning of the war, together. And then some of us separated. And [NON-ENGLISH], he came from Germany to go to Israel, Palestine. And I came from England. And we met up and we stayed together. And I'm still very close in touch. Unfortunately, he's got, developed, Parkinson's, which is not a very pleasant illness. But surprising, whenever I go to meet him, he lives in [INAUDIBLE], his wife thinks that he's as normal as normal can be when we are together. And we talk about old times.  INT: And when did you get to Israel then? SI: '48.  INT: How long was the journey on the boat? SI: About 10 days.  INT: And who were you with when you were on the journey? SI: Well, we met up-- I met up with another friend of mine, this friend [NON-ENGLISH], and another friend, [NON-ENGLISH], it was also one of our boys. He also decided to go to [INAUDIBLE] and several others we met up. And there was quite a lot of people. Then they took on illegal immigrants as well.  INT: Just to go back a bit, the 300 boys, and then there were more so it made 732, were they all boys? SI: No, there were some girls, because of the boys, even the girls. There weren't many girls. It wasn't easy for a girl to survive. 
INT: Then, sorry, then to move forward again to Israel. When you got to Haifa-- SI: We were taken off the boat before Haifa.  INT: And where did you stay? SI: Well, we were taken to camp, at a place called [NON-ENGLISH].  INT: And that's an army camp? SI: That was an army camp, yes.  INT: And what did you do when you were there? SI: Well, in Marseilles, we were given sort of a few minutes training, you could call it, with sticks, not real arms. And then, as I got into the camp, we enlisted. And we were given a couple of days leave. So I went to look for my uncle. I went to Haifa. And they live [NON-ENGLISH].  INT: And did you find them? SI: Yes, I found them, yes. [INAUDIBLE]  INT: And then, afterwards, when you left the army, where did you go from there? SI: I didn't leave the army. I didn't leave the army. I was enlisted into the army, together with my friend [NON-ENGLISH]. We were-- we were not taken into the Anglo-Saxon-- there was Anglo-Saxons, quite a few of our boys in the 300, and the others were volunteers. And we weren't taken, because we were-- I was mixed up with him, [NON-ENGLISH]. And we spoke Yiddish. We didn't go particularly with the Anglo-Saxons. So we were enlisted into the [NON-ENGLISH], which is the [INAUDIBLE] brigade.  INT: And what did you do there? SI: Well, first, as I said, we had a couple days off. And then we were taken-- then we were taken on tours to get ourselves acclimatized. And then we had a little bit of training in the camp. And we were taken-- my camp was taken into a place called [NON-ENGLISH]. [NON-ENGLISH] is on the Gaza area, kibbutz. And it was also a-- what we call a [NON-ENGLISH], an observation post. And we were in the army, so to speak. 
INT: And how long were you there for? SI: Almost-- but not in that particular place. In that place, we were in till we captured [NON-ENGLISH].  INT: And wen was that? SI: Which was September, September, October in '48. I was one of the first who went to [NON-ENGLISH].  INT: And do you remember any funny experiences whilst being in the army? SI: Yes, [LAUGHS], in that particular camp, in that particular place, called [NON-ENGLISH], first of all, they used to grill a lot of onions. [INAUDIBLE]. And, yet, we had a group of Moroccans who joined our group. And at night, each one had a gun. But there was only 10 bullets amongst the group. So you only had one bullet, particularly, or two bullets, to put in there. And the Sergeant told us to put-- to cock one bullet in, but not to put it in the pipe, just to leave it in, in case you needed it. And one of the Moroccans fired, and all dispersed, like Arabs, all dispersed, run. We had, for hours, trying to find him. That's, yeah, amazing.  INT: And any other experiences? SI: Well, the experience later on in a certain place overlooking strategic points. And down below-- this was already in '49, [INAUDIBLE] '49, just before [INAUDIBLE] '49, I remember that. We were in a place called [NON-ENGLISH]. And it was a notorious place-- not the actual place, but the strategic point we were keeping an eye out for, and guarding it. And below us was a field of watermelons. And I decided to walk down and get a watermelon. And I was fired at in all directions by Egyptians. I had to lie low until the help came. 
INT: And were you hurt at all? SI: No, no.  INT: And how long did it take for help to come? SI: It must have been a half hour, an hour, till they came. I wasn't adventurous anymore after that.  INT: [LAUGHS]. Were there any other experiences in the army? SI: We captured, once, an Arab officer, with his car. And we had some prisoners [INAUDIBLE]. And one of the prisoners, obviously, had never seen a radio, heard a radio. And when we put the radio in the car on to listen to the news, he didn't know where it was coming from. So he laid underneath the car to see where the voice was coming from.  INT: And then when you left [NON-ENGLISH], what did you do from there? SI: I-- I was sent to another camp called [NON-ENGLISH], for recuperating. I developed an ulcer. And I was sent for recuperating with an ulcer break, because we were away for some time. And there I met-- it was near [NON-ENGLISH]. And there I met an old friend, my old friend, [NON-ENGLISH]. And we got pictures taken with him in [NON-ENGLISH] Park, which doesn't exist now. SI: And what was [NON-ENGLISH] doing out there? SI: [NON-ENGLISH] also-- I don't know how he came into-- because he was with the Anglo-Saxons as a volunteer. I don't know how he came to our camp. He must have been-- but before that, it's a very important little story I forgot. We were in one camp. And in those days, as you arrived from the boats, [? Latrun ?], a very notorious place-- most strategic points, we had police stations were built along citadels in the strategic areas. [? Latrun ?] was up on the hill. [INAUDIBLE] almost take, in those days, people from the boat without any experience, and sent into [? Latrun ?]. And many, many got killed. There were-- we were in one camp, [NON-ENGLISH]. And we had-- there was an order to assemble. And we were going to be shipped to [NON-ENGLISH]. Whether it was a [INAUDIBLE], or what, I can't remember. And [NON-ENGLISH] and I looked at each other. And we said-- it was already known then it was an infamous place, notorious. And we looked at each other. And we said, it's not for us. So we're trying to find how to get out of it. And we decided we were going to hide. It's not very nice of us, after we came to fight in the army. I don't know whether it flashed through that I just try and stay alive or what, I didn't know. But anyway, we decided we were not going to turn up. And we didn't. The camp was taken out on-- on-- on wagons, transporters, transporters, army transporters, to [NON-ENGLISH]. And we managed to not turn up. After a while, we were walking through the camp. There were, obviously, some people still behind. And we were arrested, put into prison. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] [SIGHS] My luck, who should be the Sergeant in charge of the guard house, is a boy called [NON-ENGLISH]. If you remember, [NON-ENGLISH] was my home town who spent the times in the ghetto in our house. He saw us. He knew us. What are you doing here? We told him the story. And he said, you better try and find somewhere else to go. [INAUDIBLE] said go, go to another camp. Turn up somewhere else. And, unfortunately, that-- the majority of the people who went there to [? Latrun ?] didn't come back. So there is, again, a little story that-- whether I was destined to stay alive, I don't know. It's a bit unpleasant to say that we didn't want to do-- we made out that we don't eat kosher. And we don't [INAUDIBLE] in the army. It wasn't-- but that's what we did. And we're here. It's a little-- it might not be in sequence. But these little stories that you hear from me today that some are pleasant, and some unpleasant. I suppose it's unpleasant to tell that I disobeyed orders. But, nevertheless, I must have a vision that I wanted to stay alive. That's what happened. 
INT: And we've just come to the end of tape number four. SI: Who was--  INT: This is tape number five, and the survivor's Mr. Solly Irving. Before the tape break, you were just talking about your experiences in Latrun. Can I just ask, did you have any numbers assigned to you in the army? SI: Yes, of course. The army-- each one had his-- everybody has a number. My number, if I still remember, it was 58252. [INAUDIBLE] Yes-- [INAUDIBLE].  INT: And also, I forgot to mention, but when you were in the camps, um, in the four different camps that you were in, did you have any numbers assigned-- SI: I don't remember, as such, but it must have been. It must have been, because normally, they used to call you up with numbers-- never names. Although there are names of, uh, each--the German's were so, um, everything so precise, that they've got names of the many camps-- those that, uh, they've kept-- uh, the names [INAUDIBLE]. But I would imagine I must have had a number, yes.  INT: And then to move on, when you Latrun, what happened from there? SI: Well it was the uh-- May came up, towards May then. And, uh, it was a ceasefire. And we were getting ourselves ready to, uh, to have the parade-- the first parade ever. We were given insignias then-- because [NON-ENGLISH] never had insignias. [NON-ENGLISH] was mostly of a kibbutzim-- members of kibbutzim. So we were given insignias, then, um, which I got my first one. And we started brushing ourselves up. Uh, I was then taught how to make white belts-- if you put salt on it, and you leave it in the sun, and you rub it hard and have elbow grease, you get white belts. And we polished ourselves up, and we were assembled in Tel Aviv. And it's called the [NON-ENGLISH]-- in other words, the parade which never took place. There was such commotions, such disorganization-- they had to call it off. 
INT: Which parade was it? SI: That was the first independence parade-- Israeli independence parade.  INT: And what date was this? SI: That was in May. Um, May, um can't remember the exact date. It was May.  INT: 19-- SI: 1949, May of '49, yeah.  INT: And then, after the army-- SI: After the army, I started going into town-- Tel Aviv-- and met the-- we had a, it was a club called the Anglo-Saxon club, near [? Con ?] Street, and [? Allenbee ?] Street. And I met some of the boys from our lot-- the [INAUDIBLE] Society. And, uh, some of them were talking about going back. I, uh, applied for the mobilization, [? they ?] were to go back. But before that, I stayed with my aunt-- even when I had leave, I'd stay with my aunt in Tel Aviv, who was remarried then to a very, very orthodox man-- a [NON-ENGLISH]. Even those days, they had no food the whole week, but Shabbat, the table was laid like for a king. I don't know what my aunt was doing, but he was working in a candle factory. So he couldn't have been earning very much. Anyway he took a dislike to me. I wasn't as religious as I should have been, maybe. He couldn't see the fun of leaving [? Gateshead-- ?] he knew what [? Gateshead was-- ?] to come to Israel. He didn't approve of the army, and so-- And he was a man who survived the wars. So we didn't get on, and I didn't stay with him. I went to stay with my uncle. And the story of how I met my uncle, and how my uncle met me-- he was also in the army. I went looking for him-- I couldn't find him. He wasn't home. I went to his house-- where he lived, I stayed there a while. And I came across my-- I stopped some girl on a bike, on a bicycle, and asked for Emily [? Finkelman. ?] And she already heard that I wasn't in Israel. She threw down the bike, and started shouting in Hebrew-- [SPEAKING HEBREW]. That means me-- Solly has arrived. Little Solly is alive. And shouting and screaming and [INAUDIBLE]. Anyway, I stayed in it. He came looking for me, into a camp. And that particular camp, I was sort of, um, a guard, a policeman in the gate. And, uh, he came ask me if I knew me-- and we both embraced each other. That was-- anyway, I went to live with him. And he wanted me to come live with him-- that's the beginning. He wanted me to have an education, he would look after me.
And I looked this sort of-- the way they, uh, lived. However small that they had a place, they still had a young family sharing it, so they found a little gap for me to put my head down. And things were very, very hard-- he was working hard. I don't know how they made ends meet, and I couldn't deny the opportunity to come back to England, and I couldn't see myself being under a family-- I wasn't used to having a family. As much as I wanted-- I loved him, dearly. But I decided to come back. We also-- we were told that we wouldn't be able to stay on in England. We were only displaced persons-- our pass was only valid for a year. So we had to come back within the year. And those unfortunate who threw their passports away into the-- in the sea, I say, I want to keep it as a souvenir. And I kept it. And that's how I was able to come back. Once it was still valid, even for valid for an hour, they had to let us in and give us an extension-- two months, three months. And that's what I got. And I thought, well, we'll have a holiday-- and we then, we'll go back. It didn't cost us to come back to England. But unfortunate, when we left Israel, it was already Israel. And the government insisted on giving us an exit visa. So when I arrived, first of all we stopped off in Paris-- we got to Paris, and we were told that they had to let us-- let us in. And we mustn't disclose what we were doing, because they will ask us. Because our visas previously was for Switzerland, which I never reached. Anyway, we got to Dieppe, New Haven, and I got to be one of the first off the boat. And we got to immigration, the guy said, ah, he said, another one. Take a seat. We've been waiting for people like you. OK. We weren't-- I wasn't frightened or anything-- all they could do is not let me in. But I would have gone back to Paris, and-- and through there. Anyway, after a long time, one train goes, another train goes. And I went over and I said, look, all the trains left already. How am I going to get back to London? He said, don't worry, we'll put a special train on to you-- for you. And they started interrogating me, eventually. What was I doing? Where have I been? How did I go to-- to Palestine, Israel? And all the stories, we already sorted out. And he said, well, no wonder your uncle didn't want to keep you-- because you weren't allowed to work. So therefore, what-- what were you doing here? You couldn't afford to keep you, so you came back. I say, yeah, quite right. Huh, OK. And eventually I got, uh, the extension, and the CBF-- [NON-ENGLISH]-- extended and extended it, and I managed to, uh-- and must have been '51, '52-- '51, I think. A friend of mine was getting married in Brussels-- also two refugees. He was at 45, [NON-ENGLISH]. And she had family in Brussels. So they decided to have their wedding in Brussels. So I wanted to go up. Another friend of mine who lived in [? Canada ?] wanted to go-- I saved money. And so I went and applied my-- my travel document had expired. So I applied for a travel to-- [INAUDIBLE] at the home office, which was in [? Holven. ?] Got a note back to say, would I come out to the office? I went out. And sitting across the desk-- he had the little windows-- and the guy said to me, I see your application, and will you please tell me the story where you have been that 1948 to '49? So I said, surely you don't want me to repeat every word of what happened? If I make a mistake, you'll pull me up on it. And he looked at me in the eyes, and he said, I'm sure if you put your mind to it, not one word will be different. And that's what it was. He gave me an extension and I stayed on, started in business eventually, applied for naturalization papers and got it. And I've been here ever since. 
INT: And when were you-- and when were you made a British citizen? SI: Must have been-- I can't remember the exact date. I was running business-- it must have been around about '55, '56.  INT: And what business were you in? SI: I was in the handbag manufacturing. When I came back from Israel, I went to see a friend of mine who was working in the handbags in Stamford Hill, in [INAUDIBLE]. And but originally, I wanted to be an [INAUDIBLE] engineer, or an electrical engineer. But the apprenticeship was only paid 1 pounds 50-- one and a half pounds. Board and lodgings, I wasn't supported anywhere-- had to make my own way. But the cheapest was 3 pounds. I wasn't a great mathematician, but I couldn't-- couldn't figure it out, how, what, when. So when I saw this guy, he said, well, you got a job to go to? So I said, no, I haven't. He said, you can start here for 3 pounds a week. I didn't know anything about handbags, or anything. But started off, and within a year, I left that place-- not even a year-- and applied as a-- an experienced man for 7 pound a week, and got the job. I didn't have any tools, did nothing. And when I would apply for the job, there were three of us applying for the same thing. And in those days, certain material was so hard and heavy-- like steel-- you had to open wide to get-- to fit the things into the, uh, what we called the frames. And there was two other guys started the same day. Whatever they were doing-- long bench-- it was [? Huyton Handbags ?] in Liverpool Street. [INAUDIBLE] And I went and whatever they were doing, I was copying. And he said to me, where are your tools? You're an experienced man? I says, well, I didn't want to take the other plat-- I didn't want them to know that I was looking for another job. And I went, and this was a Monday morning, on Wednesday he called me-- the others left. It was too hard for them. And he said to me, you not experienced, but I admire your guts. And I finished up being manager there. After three years, I left and I started my own. '49, '52-- and in '52 I started my own. 
INT: And when did you meet your late wife? SI: Oh, my late wife, I met '60, '61.  INT: And when did you-- SI: Got married July 15, 1962.  INT: And what was her name? SI: Sandra Ann Silver. She was English born-- her parents lived in South London. Unfortunately, her mother died 10 months ago. She died on June 29, 1971-- a young girl of 29. My old-- my youngest daughter, she had-- we had two children, we got two children-- my youngest one was five-- only five years old. Who's now married, got her own family. My oldest one, Hazel-- Hazel [? Rumer-- ?] is 33, 34 coming up. She's not married-- she hasn't found her right partner yet, please God. Hope in my time, still, that she'll find the right partner. So I was-- everybody-- it was [? pain's ?] ambition to find-- the charge and find their own happiness. And--  INT: What's your youngest daughter's name? SI: Ruth Miral.  INT: And your grandchildren? SI: Grandchild one is Scott Pinney-- Pincus-Chaim. Pinney after his great grandfather, who was Rabbi Shepson-- a well-known rabbi. Chaim because my late wife's name was Chaia-- so the gave him Chaim. My second one's Josef Yisrael-- Yosef, after a grandfather of mine, my mother's father. And Yisrael after my father. And the third one, Elli-Moshe. Elli because they fancied it, and Moshe was some-- somebody else in the family.  INT: And how old are they? SI: Well, Pinney's is-- is seven. Yosi, five, coming up for six. And Elli is three, coming up on four. 
INT: All right. And is there anything else before we conclude the interview? Is there anything else? SI: If you want to sit another few hours, I'm sure we can find something else to talk about, but--  INT: [LAUGHING] Is there anything else? SI: Ah, but not enough-- of no importance.  INT: OK, well thank you very much Mr. Irving. Who is the person in this picture? SI: Well, this picture happens to be of my mother-- which was taken before she was married.  INT: And when was it taken? SI: I have no idea. Well, this picture-- the back of it-- is written in Yiddish. And it says 1934. But it was taken well before 1934, because 1934, I mean, my mother-- my mother was already a married woman with many-- she had a few children.  INT: Who are the people in this picture? SI: Now, this particular picture is of myself and my younger sister. Now that must have been taken around about 1936, because by that time-- or '37-- by that time, I would have started learning Chumash and [? Gemara. ?] You see, I'm wearing the dress, the coat, of a Hasidic boy that my grandfather gave me when I started learning Chumash.  INT: And where was it taken? SI: It was taken at Ryki, at home. But it was in the back garden, or front garden-- I don't know. I would imagine it would have been taken in the back garden. 
INT: Could you please describe who is in this picture? SI: Well, this picture, again, must have been, uh, taken the same time as the previous one, because this is myself and my four sisters. And if you see that the dress, of my-- myself and the younger sister, is identical of the previous picture.  INT: And could you describe who-- starting from left to right? SI: The oldest-- the oldest one is Rivka. Then next to her, on the right, is Leah. And then on the left is Hinda, and then the youngest one, Mendel. These pictures, by the way, I did not keep during the war. We had no way of keeping anything. When the Germans used to search us from camp to camp, first of all they used to shave us all, they used to look into your body in case you were hiding not only pictures, but jewelry or valuables. So, but these pictures were kept by my uncle in Israel. As children, obviously, my mother used to send him pictures. But unfortunately, I have none of my father or my mother of late. So I wouldn't even know what they look like or anything.  INT: Could you please describe this picture? SI: Woah [LAUGHS]-- very interesting picture, this. Uh, to me it's worth a lot of money. This picture was taken towards the end of the war by partisans. And this is part of the transport that was explaining that we went from in [NON-ENGLISH]. And if you tune in, uh, on the right, the last little boy on the right, with a beret on, is me. I think you've just-- just about got it in focus. Very difficult. 
INT: Who's the person in this picture? SI: Well, that is me. And this was just after liberation in Theresienstadt, and I've got the Russian star on my lapel. And this was taken just days after the Russians came in through to the Theresienstadt liberation.  INT: And when would that have been? SI: That would have been 1945.  INT: Could you please describe this picture? SI: Uh, which-- [MUMBLES] [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] I think it's a group of the '45 Aid Society of [? all the ?] survivors. That was either taken in Theresienstadt or Prague. I would imagine it's in-- in Prague. A group of the-- that we came-- awaiting the transportation to England.  INT: And when would that have been taken? SI: Again, '45-- that would have been early August, '45.  INT: Who is this is a picture of? SI: This is a picture of the hostel in Gateshead-- all our friends, all my friends together. Some, unfortunately, are not alive anymore. And this would have been taken, uh-- we arrived in-- could have been taken any time between '45 and '48. Exactly the date, I don't remember. But--  INT: Please describe this picture. SI: This picture is actually Windermere, uh, on a trip. On the right here, you've got Israel Cohen, who was one of our leaders. And as part of a group that-- from Windermere, on an outing.  INT: And what date would that have been taken? SI: Well, it would have been '48-- uh, '45 rather, '45. 
INT: Could you please describe this picture? SI: Well, this picture would have been-- this is a picture of me in the army. And it was-- would have been around about beginning of May, '49, or thereabout, when I was in a certain camp, you know, I was made into a guard by the gate-- coming into the camp.  INT: Who is the person in this picture? SI: The person in the picture is me. This is taking in 1948, in Marseilles, at the docks, waiting to go to, uh, to Israel.  INT: Can you please describe what this is a picture of? SI: Oh, this is the famous boat in Marseilles, called the [NON-ENGLISH], that transported people from Europe to-- to Israel, Palestine.  INT: And when was that? SI: This was in '48. It would have been around about August, September, '48-- August, I would think, yes.  INT: Who are the people in this picture? SI: Well, the picture's, uh, of myself and my late wife, on the wedding day in July, 1962. She was beautiful.  INT: And where was this picture taken? SI: This was taken in, um, this particular picture-- I would imagine it was taken in South Lambtom in the [? Brixton's ?] shul hall-- or shul, or the [? Wentworth's ?] town hall where we have the reception-- South Lambton.  INT: And your late wife's name was? SI: My late wife's name was Sandra Ann Silver Irving.  INT: Who are the children in this picture? SI: Well, my two daughters. The one on the left, holding the dog, is Hazel-Nechama, and the one on the right is Ruth-Michal. 
INT: And when was Hazel born? SI: Hazel was born the 14th of August, 1963. 63  INT: And Ruth? SI: Ruth the 25th of May, 1966.  INT: And how old were they both in this photo-- in these photos? SI: Um, Hazel must have been four or five-- I would imagine. Ruthie was a baby, still.  INT: And where were they taken? SI: And were taken at home, in Greyhound Hill, Hendon.  INT: Who are the people in this picture? SI: Well, this is my youngest daughter, Ruth, with her husband, Jeremy Shepson, who were married in, uh, June 28th, 1988.  INT: And where was this photo taken? SI: This was taken in Jeremy's parents' house, in Finchley.  INT: England. SI: In England.  INT: Who are the people in this picture? SI: Well, again, it's yours truly on the right-- [LAUGHS] there's no mistaking that. And Ruth, the middle one, on her wedding day, and Hazel on the left, is my oldest daughter. And this was-- this was taken actually in my house, in Grayhound, before the chuppa.  INT: And when was that? SI: This was, uh, 28th of June in 1988.  INT: Could you please describe what this picture is? SI: Before I describe this picture, can I please-- I made a terrible mistake. It's July '88, not June. It's July that my Ruth got married. Anyway, this picture, it was taken only a few months ago. It was taken of all my present family, and myself sitting with Jeremy, the three boys, and my two daughters. Now, this picture we were taking when St. Martin Gilbert was writing the book about the boys. He wanted to include pictures of the family to present, recent family pictures. But unfortunately, he didn't-- he didn't have room enough in the book to-- 
INT: And you're--the boys are, from left to right? SI: The boys is-- uh, on the one on the right, is Pinney. The middle one is Yosi, and the end one, on the left, is Elli.  INT: Could you please describe what this document is? SI: Well, fortunate enough-- through, uh, my aunt, Tzipporah, in Israel, she managed-- we've always had the friction, uh, she didn't think I was old enough to remember things from home. And I, uh, persuaded her one year to get me a birth certificate, if it's at all possible. I told her, I didn't want to go into the British embassy-- the Polish embassy in London, because in those early days, after the war, people were watched who goes in and goes out from these communist country embassies. And she managed to get me a copy, in Israel, through a solicitor, of my birth certificate, which states the date I was born, and where, and at my father's name-- which is Icek, it's Srul-Icek. My mother's name was Chana-Necha, and so forth. And this is the certificate I have.  INT: And the date is? SI: I don't know what the date-- the date would have been. I don't know whether they're giving the original date, or what. I'm not quite sure. But that would have been the early '50s.  INT: Could you please describe what this is? SI: Well, this is a treasure-- a real treasure. This is a telegram, it was sent the 1st of March, 1940, form [? Rivka, ?] by the Red Cross to my uncle in Palestine, Haifa-- Haifa, Palestine. And there-- there's a message on the back, as well, from my father to say that all was well at home. [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] This is a real treasure. That's about the only thing I have of my father-- with his writing, especially. 
INT: Could you please describe what these little books are? SI: Well, these two little books-- the one on the right, the blue one, is what we call, [NON-ENGLISH], identity card, as you arrived in Israel, as becoming a citizen of the state of Israel. The one on the left is an army book-- in fact, it's the mob book, when I was demobbed-- and that's what they gave me.  INT: And when did you become a citizen? SI: As soon as you arrive-- whoever arrived, which was in 1948.  INT: And when were you demobbed from the army? SI: I was demobbed from the army, I think it was almost May, 1949.  INT: Could you please describe what these are? SI: Well, one-- one is the certificate which I was recently given to identify that I was a volunteer in Israel Army, 1948, 1949. The one on the left at the bottom is the insignia of the army I was in. And that is the insignia of the Palmach-- because during the war, Palmach didn't have insignias at all-- I don't think any of the other armies had, anyway. But this insignia was given in May, '49, before the famous-- the infamous parade that was supposed to have taken place, which didn't.  INT: Could you please introduce your family for us? SI: I think we'll start off with the two big ones. Hazel, on my left here, Hazel, my oldest daughter. Ruth, on my left again, next to her is Ruth-Michal. And she's holding, or standing next to her is youngest grandson, Elli. And on my right-- first right here is my oldest grandson, Pinney. And here, on my left again, is my middle one-- Yosi. They're all called Shepson. 
INT: Ruth, do you have a message for your father about-- or anything you'd like to say about your father? SI: Not publicly. [LAUGHTER] RUTH SHEPSON: Um, it's very difficult because in all the years that we were growing up, we-- we very rarely spoke about his experiences. And now having read his memoirs that he's written down, and watched interviews that he's made, and having read which I'm getting into quite slowly-- it's all quite fascinating. It's impossible to believe that he went through all of that. And now-- SI: And come out the same. [LAUGHS] RUTH SHEPSON: It's, um, it's quite-- I mean, I know that if I was now on my own with these three-- I thank God I've got a wonderful husband-- I don't know if I could have coped-- if I could cope as he has coped over the years. And how he, you know, he brought us up, and I personally don't think he did a very bad job. He may think otherwise. ELLI SHEPSON: Did a pretty good job. [LAUGHTER] RUTH SHEPSON: Um, so, I do-- um, he won't believe me, but I do have a total admiration. And I just-- I find it very difficult to comprehend everything that he's been through, and how he can still be as he is.  INT: Michal? SI: Ruth. HAZEL IRVING: Hazel.  INT: Hazel, sorry. HAZEL IRVING: She's Ruth-Michal, I'm Hazel-Nechama.  INT: It's all these names. HAZEL IRVING: Um, I agree with what Ruthie said. Um, I think that you do become scarred because of what's happened. And it goes through the generations-- you can't help but be affected by it. And it's not the same as someone who has grown up in a background that has not had a Holocaust survivor in the background, or any sort of trauma in the background. But the way Dad's sort of picked up the pieces of that, and everything else that's happened, I think, um, shows-- I think the courage is shown because of what's happened, rather than, um, despite what's happened. He doesn't agree. 
INT: What message do you have for your grandpa? What do you want to say about your grandpa? RUTH SHEPSON: Got anything to say about zayde? HAZEL IRVING: Start with Pinney. RUTH SHEPSON: You're thinking. [LAUGHS] PINNEY SHEPSON: I don't have anything to say.  INT: Have you got a message to say, then, for your grandpa? PINNEY SHEPSON: No.  INT: No? RUTH SHEPSON: No message to say to zayde? What would you want to tell zayde, if zayde wasn't here? What would you want to tell him? ELLI SHEPSON: Mmm, nothing. [LAUGHS] If he's gone away? RUTH SHEPSON: If he's gone away. But you can still tell him, you want to say you love him. Yes? SI: What do you want to say? PINNEY SHEPSON: [INAUDIBLE]. RUTH SHEPSON: The boys aren't very aware, really-- I mean, they're too young to know what's been going on. But I tell them that, you know, one of the reasons-- and I'm sure this is one of the reasons for daddy coming out and doing this is so that they will know, when they're older, they'll be able to be read, they'll be able to see, they'll be able to understand his history and everything that's happened. So, whereas as now they're too young to appreciate it, it's not long till they'll be learning bits of history in school, and they can say, yes, our zayde went through that, or we know that from our zayde. Things like that. ELLI SHEPSON: Come back to me when-- RUTH SHEPSON: You want to say something now? The lady can come back to you? ELLI SHEPSON: When you come back-- RUTH SHEPSON: When we come back to you, OK. 
INT: Solly, do you want to say something? SI: Well, Ruth has touched on it-- and the reason why, uh, I wanted to do this, there's so little that-- however much I've tried to tell them, speak about it, it's very difficult to absorb it all. And I'm doing this for my children, grandchildren, that when they have time, an occasion to look through this video, to be able to grasp a little bit of the background that I come from. I can't tell them much about my own parents-- maybe through the video, they'll be able to grasp a little bit of it. They were too young, that when the family was alive, to ask them about it. And the family weren't ready forthcoming. Uh, and that's just sad-- it's difficult to be able to explain to them in detail, exactly. And hopefully that when they have, that they will be able to look through the video and see a little bit, learn a little bit, and hope and pray that they will never have to come through a period alive-- that [INAUDIBLE].  INT: [INAUDIBLE] RUTH SHEPSON: Quickly, because the tape's going to run out.  INT: What about you two? You don't want to say, I love you, grandpa? Nothing? ELLI SHEPSON: I love you, grandpa. RUTH SHEPSON: Grandpa-- say, you have to say zayde. You have to say zayde. ELLI SHEPSON: I love you, zayde. HAZEL IRVING: What, you're giving mommy a hug? Not grandpa? [INTERPOSING VOICES] RUTH SHEPSON: They got camera shy. [INTERPOSING VOICES] PINNEY SHEPSON: I love you. SI: What about you, Yosi? RUTH SHEPSON: They don't need to say it on tape. It's [INAUDIBLE]. [INTERPOSING VOICES] SI: OK.