INT: The date is March 1, 1997. The survivor, Lyonell Fliss. The interviewer, Linda Behr. The city, Johannesburg, South Africa. The language, English. My name is Linda Behr. The date is March 1, 1997. I'm interviewing Lyonell Fliss in Johannesburg, South Africa. Tape one. What is your name? LF: My name is Lyonell Fliss. L-Y-O-N-E-L-L F-L-I-S-S.  INT: What was your name at birth? LF: This was my name at birth.  INT: Did you have any other names? LF: Well, my parents and my friends gave me nicknames, like Nelu. Nelu is one of the most common names in Romania, as nicknames. It's a shortening of Lyonell.  INT: Can you spell that? LF: It's N-E-L-U. But for my parents and for my closest friends, I was Nelutzu, N-E-L-U-T-Z-U, which means little Nelu.  INT: And what was your birthdate? LF: My birthdate was 1st of April, 1935.  INT: And what is your age now? LF: My age now is 61. I'll turn in April 62.  INT: And what was the city and the country of your birth? LF: The city was Iasi. It is spelled in the Romanian I-S-- I-A-S-I, with a certain accent. In French or German, it's called Jassy, J-A-S-S-Y.  INT: And the country? LF: The country, Romania.  INT: Lyonell, what are your earliest memories of Iasi? Can you describe the town and its inhabitants? LF: I can. Iasi was called the sweet town of Iasi, because it was a dormant town, an old town, a cultural town. It was the center of Romanian culture, where the roots of the Romanian culture took place. Iasi is the provincial capital of Moldavia, one of the three provinces which form Romania today. It is located on the hills of Moldavia, close to the Carpathian mountains, in an area which is famous for its wines and vineyards. Actually, my first memories go to the farm of one of my uncles. Actually, he was an uncle of my father. He had a vineyard, and every Sunday the whole family was traveling from Iasi to the vineyard in a cart with two horses called dokar, and we are spending there a wonderful time. I can remember that my father had a shop. He was a shopkeeper. Fabrics, he was selling, particularly to the peasants of the area. And I was playing in the shop, as a little kid, sometimes upsetting my father's business. Early memories go to strolls through the town to the-- to famous gardens, public gardens, in this town, where great poets of Romania were composing their poems. I still can visualize the house where I was born and we lived for about three or four years, and from where we moved into a different house on the main street of Iasi, which was quite an improvement. On Strada Bratianu, B-R-A-T-I-A-N-U. Not far from my father's shop, just, let's say, ten minutes' walk. I do remember the marketplace, an open marketplace. I do remember the hospital just across the road from my father's shop. And actually, the house where the shop was accommodated the rest of our family upstairs, where my grandfather, my grandmother, were living there, and together with them some of my aunts and uncles. It was a big house. 
INT: Do you remember the interior of the house? LF: I do remember that it was a very big dining room, where the whole family was reunited on Shabbat evening, and with occasions of other holidays or birthdays. In this time-- so I'm talking about the period before the Second World War-- a lot of people were spending their summer holiday at various spas which were not far from Iasi. The whole area was so beautiful and so green, and the fresh air was everywhere, that at distances of about 50, 60, 80 kilometers around Iasi, there were famous spas with good food, good rest, and good mineral waters. And the rule was that the grandparents, they were taking the grandchildren there for the sole purpose to get them strong and fed, and feed them up to they couldn't eat anymore. And the greatest reward was when coming back after a month to put them on a scale, and to find out how much weight they gained. Exactly the opposite of our days. I was actually, in this respect, a failure, to the disappointment of my grandmothers. [PAUSES FOR 5 SECONDS] There were happy days, because the whole family was united, and from my mother's side and from my father's side, the grandmothers and grandchildren and the daughters and the sons, they were going there and spending a wonderful time.  INT: Tell me about your parents and grandparents. LF: Yes. My grandparents from my mother's side, they were from Blitzstein family, B-L-I-T-Z-S-T-E-I-N. My grandfather was a dealer in chinaware. He had a very large wholesale store in the city of Galatzi, G-A-L-A-T-Z-I, on the Danube River shore. It was a very big operation, and they were quite well off. He married my grandmother last century sometime-- can't give the exact date-- and they had six children. [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] My mother was the eldest of all. My grandfather passed away a year after I was born, so I didn't know him at all, but only from photographs and stories. My grandmother lived longer, and she died in Bucharest, in the '50s. 
INT: Did your family have a long history in Romania? LF: Yes, both families, actually. From a family tree which my father drew to me, and my mother also from her side, they show that they were established there since the 18th century. From my father's side, they were living in the town of Vaslui, V-A-S-L-U-I. From my mother's side, from Galatzi, as I said. The story with the family of my father, my grandfather, [? Leba ?] Fliss, married also last century. Betty was his wife's name, my grandmother. They were quite religious, and my grandfather actually was one of the earlier Zionists, but an unsuccessful one. He tried three times to settle in Israel-- actually which was Palestine in those times-- and harder he tried, he never managed to establish himself, and came back. And the last time when he came back, he actually came during the First World War. He was taken to the army, he fought against the Germans in the First World War, got sick of typhus, and came at home very sick, almost dying. And when he saw that he would be a burden for his family, he took his life by shooting himself with the same weapon that was given to him for the front line. [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] My grandmother then had to sustain the whole family of six children.  INT: Tell me about your schooling, Lyonell. LF: Well, my schooling started during the war, so there were a lot of events which happened in this period of time in Romania, and actually in the whole Europe, in those times. My schooling time started in 1941, when I was six years and three months old, four months old. In those times, the Jews of course went through a very traumatic time a year before, and their lives were in great danger. All kind of laws and regulations were issued, and the Jewish children were not allowed, in the whole country of Romania, to attend public schools. They were banned from the public schools. I do remember, while passing with my mother in front of a public school, and ask her when I'm going to attend the school. And she said, unfortunately, you're Jewish. You're not allowed to attend this school. So the Jewish community in Iasi-- I have to say that it was almost 50% of the whole population of this town was Jewish, like many other towns in Moldavia. The Jews were living generally in towns, and the Christians either in towns but mostly on the countryside. So the Jewish community organized the schooling of their children. So I attended the first three years of my schooling in a makeshift school in a synagogue, where the synagogue hall was divided in four squares without any partitions in between, and there were four classes, like standard one, two, three, four, in the same hall. It was of course a little bit difficult when four teachers were teaching simultaneously, but this were the conditions where we learned the first years of schooling. 
INT: Were you aware of anti-Semitism? LF: Yes, very much so. Actually, Iasi was called the capital of anti-Semitism of Romania, where the Iron Guard had its strongest establishment. And the members of the Iron Guard, they were wearing green shirts to be distinguished from others, and they were very proud of this, and big fur hats like shepherds. And the way they were treating the Jews, I wasn't aware, because I was always protected by my parents. But I still heard of beatings of Jewish students, before they were banned from the Iasi University, one of the oldest university-- if not the oldest university-- of Romania, with a long cultural tradition. And the Jewish students were beaten to pulp by this Iron Guard legionnaire called [? Der ?] [? Koligs. ?] This was the cultural center of Iasi.  INT: Did you witness any incidents? LF: I didn't of this sort. I wasn't-- I was too small, and when I grew a little bit up, there were no Jewish students anymore at Iasi University. They were thrown out just before the Second World War.  INT: Lyonell, was your family religious? LF: My grandmother from my father's side was very religious. From my mother's side, they were, I would say, less. But the generation of my parents, they were non-religious. They were [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] celebrating, keeping the big-- the high holy days, Pesach, Yom Kippur, Rosh Hashanah, the Shabbat lighting candles, but this was about all. 
INT: Lyonell, did you know about the death trains in Iasi? [SOMETHING BEING DROPPED] LF: Well, [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] the death trains were related to the totality of events, to the pogrom, which took place in Iasi, so cannot be separated. So if it's going to discuss the death trains, we have to discuss the whole event of the pogrom of Iasi. And let's talk about this subject, that I think is the focal point of my memories. [PAUSES FOR 7 SECONDS] In the month of June 1941, [PAUSES FOR 5 SECONDS] when Romania is in full summer, it's very hot, it's pleasant weather, in good times-- what my father used to call normal times-- people go to spas, holidays. The German army invaded Romania. I cannot call a proper invasion, because Romania became an ally of Germany. It is disputable. Some people say that Romania was forced to become an ally, but in any case, with the approval of the government, a very large German army came into Romania. Some of them, probably, from the occupied Poland, which was conquered in 1938. So we're talking three years after this event. So the German army was at its peak. They were preparing themselves with the Romanian army, and you could have felt in this town movement of large numbers of German soldiers and Romanian soldiers, like preparing for something that is going to happen. I was a child, so I saw soldiers, they looked great to me. Soldiers, particularly the German soldiers, very well-dressed and neat. Romanian soldiers. And-- but I knew that my parents were very worried about all this. And all of a sudden, on the 29th of June, 1941, in the morning, we had shootings in the street. We were living on the central street, on the second-- on the first floor of a block of flats. There were shoutings and people crying and rushing and running here in the street. And my mother said, there is a pogrom. I didn't know what the pogrom is, but this was what she reckoned that is going to be. [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] The first measure she took, she locked the front door of the flat. We were living in a two bedroom flat with a little lounge. And the three of us-- my father, my mother, myself-- we went under the bed to hide ourselves. [PAUSES FOR 5 SECONDS] It didn't pass longer than half an hour, and strong blows on the front door came. But the door was strong, it didn't break. And all of a sudden, we heard blows like an ax, and the door was opened then. The three of us were in hiding under the bed with a bedcloth above. A man rushed in, and he was Enache, E-N-A-C-H-E, the caretaker of the block of flats. He was the one with the ax, who broke the door. And swearing around, [SPEAKING ROMANIAN], it's where this bloody Jews run away. Because he couldn't see us. But he want probably just to kill us with his ax and loot the flat. And he was very upset that he couldn't find us to split our skulls with his ax. But he was just a petty criminal. He was quite happy to take the cover sheet off the bed, to fill it with clothes and with the silver cutlery and everything what he found there, and he was quite happy with this. And took all his loot and disappeared, leaving the door open. 
INT: My name is Linda [? Burr. ?] The date is March 1, 1997. I'm interviewing Lyonell Fliss in Johannesburg, South Africa. Tape two. Lyonell, will you carry on telling us about the pogrom? LF: Yes. [PAUSES] While [? Inaki ?] was trying to break through the door, and we were hiding ourselves under the bed, I was six years old. My mother begged me, asked me not to speak and not to cough. In this way, she saved my life for the first time in that day. [PAUSES FOR 7 SECONDS]. But after [? Inaki ?] left with his loot, [PAUSES FOR 6 SECONDS] Germans started to climb the staircase of the first floor to round up the Jews as they did in Poland or in other parts of Europe. They weren't petty criminals like [? Inaki. ?] They were professionals. And when they penetrated into our flat, the first place they went, went to the bedroom to the bed. They turned the bed up, and the three of us were facing a couple of German heroes, fully armed. I can't explain until now why they didn't shoot us. We were on the floor. They could have done. So one of these glorious soldiers asked us to get up, go through the door, and to follow his instructions. [PAUSES] My father was in the front, I was in the middle, my mother in the back. And this I still can remember, blond, young, powerful, pushed my mother with the butt of his rifle down the staircase. [PAUSES] She rolled down a full flight of the stairs. She broke the knee. And for the rest of her life, she suffered from this. Then he directed us to the street. And the three of us, with the hero in the back with his rifle, with hands up, we were herded to the concentration place. [PAUSES] It was quite a long walk, I would say about half an hour. And if somebody tries to hold his arms up for half an hour, will realize how difficult it is. What about a child of six? From time to time, the German soldier, if you can call him a soldier, was shouting at me to keep my hands up. And my mother-- I didn't understand what he was saying-- my mother was telling me, hold your hands up, [PAUSES] because otherwise he will shoot you. [SPEAKING GERMAN] This was my first lesson of a foreign language, learned and the hard way. I saw many years later the photograph of a child with hands up in Poland. The only difference is that I didn't have the honor of a German artist to take my picture. [PAUSES] But was no difference.
[PAUSES] So in this way, we were driven to the assembly place, which was the main police station of Iasi. As we were coming closer, more and more people were herded into the same place, the same direction from various streets, generally by German troops who were practicing on us for what was going to happen a couple days later in Russia. And we were aligned in a long, winding queue. It was like a long snake, like a serpentine. And we heard shootings in the courtyard of the police station. It was a wall. People were taken by the tens, put against the wall, and machine gunned. And the queue was progressing. The line was shortening, but it was a long, long line. And there were Romanian Christian [PAUSES] [CLEARS THROAT] Iron Guards taking the dead bodies and piling them up in huge piles. I saw people there who weren't properly killed, and they were thrown like this, still alive. [PAUSES] When my mother saw this, we were guarded on the queue by Romanian army officers. The Germans, they took only the pleasure to round up the people. They left the dirty work to be done by the Romanians themselves. They didn't want to dirty themselves with blood and-- [PAUSES FOR 9 SECONDS] Next to us was a young Romanian officer. My mother kneeled in front of him-- she was 28-- [PAUSES] kissed his hand, and asked him, officer, sir, I beg you, take this child and adopt him. He's intelligent. He will love you. Please take him. Kill us, but take this child. [PAUSES] The officer said, Madam, [PAUSES] please don't be scared. [PAUSES] I'll protect you. And what he did, as the queue was winding, he took us from the position where we were and put us at the end of the queue to give us another chance, to prolong our life. [PAUSES FOR 6 SECONDS] And this was the second time when my mother saved my life in the same day. [PAUSES FOR 5 SECONDS] Probably this officer was a man who had some sort of conscience, some soul. He saw a young woman with a little child being exposed to such a terrible death. [PAUSES FOR 5 SECONDS] Our good luck was that this mass execution wasn't organized by the Germans. It was organized by Romanians. If Germans would have organized this, everything would have gone according to the pogrom. But Romanians are not that precise as the Germans, and probably the ammunition ended, was finished. So until they will bring new ammunition to finish off the people, an order came to let women and children leave the queue. [PAUSES] So immediately my mother and I went off that place. And we ran to my grandmother's house. [PAUSES] The men were all cramped in the basements of the police, and they were locked up there. For a number of days, we didn't know what was the fate of my father and others. [PAUSES] So actually what happened was that out of the thousands of people who were there, [PAUSES] about 2000 or so were taken to the railway station and squashed in cattle [PAUSES] wagons. The rest-- because there was no room in the train for all the thousands who were there-- were left to go home. [PAUSES FOR 6 SECONDS] I didn't experience directly what happened with-- I read afterwards the terrible thing what happened when these people were suffocated in those wagons. Amongst them was-- there were two of my uncles and other relatives. [PAUSES] And they were taken for seven days without water and very little air and lots of rotten bodies in the big heat of the summer. And most of them, they died the most terrible death possible. Some of them, they lost their mind. And fortunately, my uncle, David, who now lives in Argentina, survived together with other couple of hundreds out of the thousands who were there. [PAUSES FOR 5 SECONDS] All in all, I was told by my parents that about 14,000 people were murdered on that particular day and the days after in the train. [PAUSES FOR 6 SECONDS] My memories are very sharp and clean from these days. [PAUSES] And I can say one thing, that in one day, I matured. [PAUSES] I understood what it means that you have to control yourself to hide, to protect your life and the life of others at the age of six. [PAUSES] And I saw-- at the age of six, I saw death, executions, blood, piles of bodies. [PAUSES] It's not an experience for a six-year-old child. [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] So this was the story of that black Sunday. 
INT: What happened after that? LF: We didn't dare to go to our house anymore, because we were scared that we'll face [? Inaki ?] with his ax. [PAUSES FOR 5 SECONDS] We stayed in hiding together with the rest of our family in my grandmother's house, hardly having anything to eat for weeks. And then my father returned, and the situation somehow improved. Law and order started to be applied somehow, better than grab a Jew and kill it. And slowly my father opened again his shop, but he had to move from that terrible place. And we moved into a very small house close to the synagogue where my school was. [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] And then we started to spend year after year in war conditions.  INT: You went back to school? LF: Well, I started school after the pogrom. The pogrom was in June, and the first day of school in the synagogue was in September. [PAUSES FOR 6 SECONDS] Memories from the school, they are very scant actually. The first winter came, and the synagogue was very cold. Was no heating. So eventually, we put a makeshift tin stove, a small one. And every child was bringing a piece of wood every morning. [PAUSES] And the recognition for good marks was to be responsible to keep the fire alive in the stove. And I was very proud when I got this prize. It was written in my school report book that I was appointed as a supervisor of the fire in the stove. It was the highest recognition. 
INT: Did your parents ever think of leaving Iasi? LF: It was impossible. This was during the Second World War. People weren't allowed to move anywhere. There were rules and authorities, which were totally anti-Semitic. They wouldn't let anybody move from one place to another. You were stuck to your place and report to the local authorities. In [PAUSES] June next year, [PAUSES] [CLEARS THROAT] as the Germans started to implement their Final Solution, the Romanians, [CLEARS THROAT] some people say under pressure, some of them, they say voluntarily, started to have a census of the Jewish population, what they called population of Jewish blood. Not of Jewish [CLEARS THROAT] religion, of Jewish blood. Because there were possible people who converted to Christianity or had only half of their parents of Jewish origin [PAUSES] who could have passed as Christians. But it was specific in their law that anybody who has Jewish blood needs to be registered as such. Now it was a big dilemma for my parents when they receive the forms to fill in, if to register me there or not, or to keep me in hiding. Eventually, [PAUSES] all of us, we were registered. And I kept this certificate of my [PAUSES] Jewish affiliation. Probably the intention was if things were going well with the German conquest of Russia, to finish us off in one of the extermination camps. But things went differently. So we had a relative quiet life in Iasi after the pogrom. I could go to school, albeit it was a bad location. But the school was good. The teachers were good. We could go occasionally to a restaurant to eat. So more or less, the life was quasi-normal. 
INT: What was the attitude of the general population to Jews? LF: I wouldn't say that it was [PAUSES FOR 6 SECONDS] [CLEARS THROAT] too vicious. They weren't friendly with us. Some of them, they were legionnaires. They were [PAUSES] extremists. But the general population was mild with us. [PAUSES FOR 5 SECONDS] Generally we could survive there. And we survived. And I couldn't complain that we suffered after the pogrom as people suffered in other countries. We still had enough food, and my grandmother was a fantastic cook, was cooking for the whole family, and was preparing for the winter with all the jams and preserved fruit and vegetables, pickles and everything, and growing chicken and the geese. And it was a reasonable life. From this point of view, I can say that the Romanian population wasn't bad to the Jews in general, with the exception of the Iron Guard.  INT: Were there any more anti-Semitic incidents? LF: No, but actually I read in some publications that something really awkward happened, that the local Jewish community managed to bribe the Iron Guard, which is typical for the Romanian mentality, to be corrupt. But to such an extent that an organization like the Iron Guard to be bribed by the Jews, that show quite a lot. [PAUSES FOR 7 SECONDS] I was spending most of my time with [PAUSES] [CLEARS THROAT] school. My mother-- my mother's ambition was to become a pianist, which didn't occur, because I didn't have the talent. But she insisted a lot. We had a piano. She was playing piano and was educated by her family as a good Jewish girl that she must play piano and speak foreign languages, which actually helped us with translation she gave me from German-- from the German hero. And [LAUGHS] we had a piano, so I had to practice and play. So I did it. When things went bad for the German army in Russia, and this started in 1943, and they got the big beating at Stalingrad, and everybody heard about this, and the Germans started to think twice if-- to [PAUSES] act against the Jews or the Romanians who were even milder than them, [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS], everybody was thinking of running away from Iasi to avoid the fight, which will probably occur between the Germans from Romanians and the Red Army, which was a great offensive. So then we started preparations for leaving Iasi. [PAUSES FOR 5 SECONDS] The situation in the country was havoc, because thousands and thousands of people of refugees were leaving the eastern part of Romania, which was at the border of Russia, to the south and the west to avoid the coming of the Russian Army. And we were amongst them, with one difference, that we were Jews. So first priority in the refugees' trains, which were overcrowded with lots of Christian refugees, [CLEARS THROAT] were sometimes [PAUSES] unavailable for the Jews. So the Jews, they started with their normal tactic, bribing to get some place, secure a miserable little place for-- a compartment for 20, 40 people in a train, a crowded train. [PAUSES] And this is what happened in the spring, March of 1944, when we managed to get a compartment for the whole family in one of the crowded trains through sheer bribery [PAUSES] of Romanian officers, because the trains were under Army control. 
INT: Where were you going to? LF: To Bucharest. Our next destination was Bucharest.  INT: My name is Linda Behr. The date is March 1, 1997. I'm interviewing Lyonell Fliss in Johannesburg, South Africa. Tape three. Lyonell, can you tell me about your journey to Bucharest? Who was with you? What did you take? What did you leave behind? LF: The Iasi railway station was full of thousands of people trying to hang on the trains heading to Bucharest, and we were one of the few lucky ones who managed to get into the train under the escort of the Romanian Army, through the bribery to one of their officers. So we were put, the whole family, Fliss family, in this tiny little compartment for eight people. Probably, we were like 20. And from the outside, there were the Iron Guards shouting and screaming. And a decision was made that none of us should show their faces at the window because they may be taken as Jews, and the Iron Guard would throw us out from the train, with my exception. They decided that I don't look Jewish, and actually, I should stand in front of this window to show the Iron Guards on the platform that it was a Christian compartment. At the end of the coach, we saw a terrible scene when my teacher, my school teacher, who was red-haired, a man in his 30s or 40s, was dragged by the Iron Guards and thrown away with shoutings of 'Yid' and beaten up and left on the floor of the platform. He was actually lucky because they could have been waiting for the train to run and throw him from the running train. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] The trip took about three days, but we were equipped with food, boiled eggs and bread and water, so we reached Bucharest. There were many stops and stations and the lines, which were letting military trains with troops to go, and trains with wounded soldiers and mobile hospitals and you name it. The train was full, including the roof of the train was full of passengers. And we reached Bucharest. This was by the end of March 1944. [BEEP] Can I stop? So we arrived safely in Bucharest, which was already flooded with thousands and thousands of refugees from Moldavia. The only address that we had in Bucharest was my uncle, my father's brother, who moved in Bucharest before the pogrom. Maybe he had a feeling that is going to happen, something ugly in Iasi. They were living, he, his wife, and my cousin, in a one-bedroom flat. So the whole Fliss family of Iasi landed in this little place, and we stayed there with them for about two weeks, about I would say 20 people sleeping on the floor to the despair of my aunt, who was a very fussy person.
Eventually, we managed to get a flat. We arrived in Bucharest with one suitcase, the three of us. So we managed to get the flat. My father bought a bed, which was the most important thing to have for the three of us to sleep in, all three in one bed, and one table-- no chairs. The situation was very poor because Romania as a German ally was taking a big beating from the Russians. So not even a month passed, and the big bombings-- American and British bombings-- started in Bucharest. Large fleets of aircraft of bombers came from Italy, from the front of Italy, to Romania because Romania was the main supplier of fuel, of petrol, to the German army, and the source of this precious [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] commodity was 60 kilometers north of Bucharest, in Ploesti, P-L-O-E-S-T-I, Ploesti. And while bombing Ploesti, they were also bombing Bucharest. The first bombing of Bucharest, which took on the fourth of April, 1944, so a couple of weeks after our arrival in Bucharest-- took the lives of about 10,000 people in one hour. [PAUSES FOR 5 SECONDS] A hail of bombs was dropped over the civilian part of the town because the tactic of the American and the British Army was to terrorize the Germans, to terrorize the Romanians in order to get them to surrender. So this was the first blow in the morning, 10 o'clock in the morning of fourth of April. But in this respect, Jews or non-Jews-- they were equal. And I can say also, to the defense of the Romanian population, that after this morning, there were some public aircraft shelters in the basements of high rise buildings, and the Jews were accepted as equals with the Christians in the same shelters, whilst in other places and other countries, Jews would have been left to die in the street. They gave us the same accommodation as they had for themselves, and this was very much appreciated. Well, the bombings carried on day and night, day and night, without any respite for [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] four months, solid four months, from April to August, with victims and so on. After two months of not sleeping in the night and not sleeping in the day, and everything being destroyed, and no food, no water, nothing, a lot of people decided to leave Bucharest and to go to the countryside. And we moved to the countryside. My father's brother had a connection, and they moved to a village about 60 kilometers south of Bucharest. I still remember the name, Stanca. And we were safe there. And to my amazement, the local peasant population of the village was very friendly to us. Actually, we had the one-- like children, they had a wonderful time being taken fishing in the carts and going with them through the fields with peasants' children and playing soccer with them. And it was like normal life. And this life ended in August, when Romania capitulated, and we returned to Bucharest, and the war in Romania finished on the 23rd of August. The new Romanian government arrested the old one. They caught part of the German Army, and they passed them to the Russians. And then we became safe. On the 23rd of August, or 26th of August, maybe, the Russian troops entered Bucharest, and I saw them and many others, particularly Jews, as our saviors and liberators. What happened afterwards, it's a total different story, but at that time, they were our saviors. And Stalin-- we didn't know what he did before and what he was going to do afterwards-- was regarded like the savior, the image of the savior. 
INT: Did you come in contact with the Russian soldiers? LF: Not at all, but I was in the street with thousands of people who were throwing flowers to the Russian soldiers who were marching or on the tanks entering Bucharest.  INT: Had the rest of your family survived the bombings? LF: Yes. Most interesting is that in that interim period, my father went back Iasi to save some of our belongings. And amongst other things he brought in a truck was the piano, which survived the shelling of Iasi. The whole house was destroyed, but the piano, by some miracle, was intact. And with the broken things and amongst them was a plate that I still have it here. Don't know where it is.  INT: We'll show it. LF: There. [POINTING] Was the piano, which also was a survivor, and he brought the piano to Bucharest. We didn't have enough room in our small house, so we moved the piano in a block of flats, a flat of one of our relatives. And during the bombing, the block of flats was totally demolished, and the only object which survived was the piano, to my regret because I wasn't a great piano player and fan.  INT: What had happened to your father's business and your grandfather's business in Iasi? LF: Simply was left there. It was a store full of fabrics. He managed to save some of them when he went with that truck and to bring them to Bucharest, some of them. But there was lootings, and nothing was left. 
INT: Were you able to continue with your education? LF: Yes. Well, after this August day, the liberation day by the Red Army. [PAUSES FOR 6 SECONDS] In September, school starts again, so I was enrolled to a Jewish school. In Bucharest, they had better conditions than in Iasi, so we stayed there for learning in the synagogues. They had a couple of Jewish schools, which were overcrowded, but still, they looked like schools. So I was accepted in the fourth class. The first three I spent in Iasi, and the fourth in Bucharest. To my amazement was that in spite of the hard conditions that we had in Iasi, [PAUSES FOR 5 SECONDS] my education in this new school when we started was colleagues who were educated in a proper school in Bucharest. My level was very similar to theirs, which showed to me for the rest of my life that not the walls are making their [? vocation, ?] but the teachers and the pupils, and of course the parents. [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] So after four years, which was called the primary school, I went to the intermediate school, which was called a gymnasium, a different name from other places. It wasn't the high school. It was an intermediate school for another three years, which I spent to a proper government school called [non-English speech]. Of course, I was very proud about this because it was one of the leading schools of Bucharest, and it was named after one of the kings of Romania 500 years ago, 400 years ago, the great and the brave Michael. 
INT: Lyonell, what was the political situation in Romania at the time? LF: Well, between the end of the war and 1948, it was a turmoil. The country was occupied by the Russian troops. The communist party became very active and was supported by the Russian troops. The other parties-- some of them were considered collaborators to the Nazis, and the democratic parties, the liberal and the peasant party, were very weak. We had also a king there. The king was very brave. Actually, I think that the Jews owe their salvation during the war through the balanced policy that the king conducted in Romania. And in this respect, I must be grateful for the King. And the king survived for a while all the pressures against him, and he managed to oppose a role switchover imposed by the Russian Army, which occupied the country-- not only liberated the country from the Germans, but occupied the country for their own sake. And in 1948, the king abdicated-- was forced to abdicate. He didn't want to abdicate, was forced to advocate. And he was expelled from Romania. Actually, he was lucky that wasn't executed. [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] And he went into exile to Switzerland, where he lives until now, and wasn't allowed until a couple of years ago-- he went to visit Romania. In this sort of political situation, there were Jews who took advantage and became big exponents of the communist system, and others who simply didn't want to collaborate with the communists, which was the case of my father and my family. Some members of my family became prominent members of the communist [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] party, but they can blame them. I can't blame them at all because the communists during the war were the only forces who fought against the Nazis, and for Jews, it was only one way to fight the Nazis, through the communist party. [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] One of my uncles, a brother of my mother, became a member of the communist party. He was caught by the collaborating police of Romania, was totally in touch with the Germans and so, and he was sent to jail, together with other communists. The fact that he wasn't executed is due to, I think, the valiance of my father, who went to the place in Galatz, where the trial of this communist took place. It was a very courageous, I would say [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] unthinkable gesture, to take a train during the war from Iasi to go to Galatz and to find a lawyer for him and to pay for the lawyer. And having a lawyer, he managed to get life in prison, something like this. But what was worse was that the rest of [non-English speech] family was arrested. My grandmother, and together with the three daughters, who were unmarried, and they were in their late teens and were taken to [PAUSES FOR 7 SECONDS] concentration camp, where they were subjected, these young girls, to rape for many months. Two of them, they lost their minds. They weren't the same, and they suffered. One of them ended in a asylum and died there. Another one is in Israel, also in very poor mental conditions after being abused there. [PAUSES FOR 9 SECONDS] So this was the period until 1948, when the king was expelled and the communists took proper power in Romania. 
INT: And your education? LF: After I finished the three years of this gymnasium, the [non-English speech], I went to the last four years, which were the proper high school. [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] I had a tradition in my family, on my mother's family, of engineers. So they advised me to go to a technical school, technical high school, and I listened to them. My inclination was also technical. I like mathematics, and I liked physics, and I wanted always to copy one of my mother's brothers, was for me an example, who is an electrical engineer. So I went to a technical school for architecture, where I studied for four years. And at the age of 17, I became a qualified architectural technician. I had a [non-English speech] there. I passed the [non-Enlish speech]. And then, I went to the technical university for civil engineering. It was a normal followup.  INT: Had your father started a new business? LF: He couldn't start a new business after 1948. He started a new business after we arrived in Bucharest in 1944. So from '44 to '48, he had [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] a wholesaling store for fabrics in Bucharest, which was nationalized in 1948 when the communists took power.  INT: And what happened then? LF: Then, he became an employee, like the rest of the country. Everybody was a government employee. Private business disappeared totally, including doctors' rooms, for instance. It was nothing but government employment.  INT: My name is Linda Behr. The date is March 1, 1997. I'm interviewing Lyonell Fliss in Johannesburg, South Africa. Tape four. LF: I would like to come back to a story during the war in Iasi. After the program, new rules and regulations, anti-Semitic, and in line with the Nazi policy, included the wearing of the yellow star for the whole population of Jewish blood. The stars weren't supplied by the government. And the only thing that they published was the standard dimension and the material to be made of. Of course, this was to the task of the women in the families to produce these yellow stars. I still can remember what they looked like. It was a round patch, black background, and two triangles of yellow fabric sewn on top. And to hold this in a straight position, it was a piece of cardboard, a round piece of cardboard, on which the black material was attached. There were various patterns of this yellow star. The only thing it was the dimension, it needed to be of a certain size, around the size of a [non-English speech]. Quite big, particularly for a boy of six. The sizes were-- it was only one size for all. And I felt very proud to have such a nice decoration on me. Looks like I was on the front line and having the decorations similar to the Iron Cross. And my mother excelled in producing very, very smart yellow stars for the whole family. Actually, she made the black background out of velvet. Very smart. But this still didn't help. They needed to be sewn every day on various shirts or jackets. It was the instruction that they must be sewn, not to be taken and put in the pocket, and put again, and taken off. They must be there, fixed properly. And this was in the winter. And my father built me a very smart fur hat, a caracole, fur hat. And I was very proud of this. And walking in the street outside of our house, there were big piles of snow in the street. And I was playing, making snowballs there. And all of a sudden came a group of older children, Christian. They saw me playing there. They saw my yellow star. They pushed me in the snow. They beat me up, and they stole my fur hat. I was smashed. Not as much from the beating, but from the fact that I lost my smart fur hat. 
INT: Lyonell, can we go back also, and can you tell me, did you have a bar mitzvah? LF: Yes. The bar mitzvah took place in Bucharest. The synagogue was called the Athena Synagogue, like Athena, the capital city of Greece, because the street where the synagogue was called Athena Street. I prepared for this bar mitzvah. I had a teacher for a year. He taught me the Hebrew alphabet. He taught me how to read from the Torah. He taught a big speech for thanking my parents for what they did for me. It took place in the morning. And my parents organized, after the bar mitzvah, the proper bar mitzvah, organized snacks, and drinks, and cakes in the entrance hall of the shul. I was taught how to wear a t-fillin. I was given a tallit and t-fillin, which I put them for a month. That was all. And we did have a dinner dance afterwards. That was all my bar mitzvah.  INT: Was your whole family there? LF: The whole family attended. And what was interesting-- this was in 1948, when people were scared to have religious functions or religious affiliations. But my father didn't have any doubt that I should have a bar mitzvah. Others, who belonged to the Communist party, they didn't dare to bring their children to the Torah. So I had a proper bar mitzvah.  INT: Can we go back to your university education? Can you tell me more about that and those times? LF: Yes. After I finished at the age of 17 the high school and had the metric. I had to pass an examination. It was an exam, an admission exam, to the Institute of Civil Engineering. I passed in the first 10, this exam, out of 500 candidates. And for five years, I learned civil engineering in parallel. Because I had a lot of affinity with mathematics and mathematics was my hobby for many years before I started the University, I learned in parallel at the University of Bucharest the Faculty of Mathematics Applied Mechanics. So practically, I graduated simultaneously in two fields. Things went from bad to worse in Romania in those times. The Communist Party was taking control over the private lives of everybody. I was like most, the great majority of students. I was a member of the Youth Communist Party section. And they organized all kinds of meetings in the interest of the policies, which the Communist Party was promoting in Romania. It was important for them that people will declare what was their parent's profession and political affiliation before the war, or immediately after the war. And those youngsters whose parents were considered bourgeoisie, like my father, who was a shopkeeper, or had the private business, were excluded from universities.
They were not even allowed to be accepted for the examination. I lied. I declared that my father was an accountant that didn't have a shop. Otherwise, I couldn't become a student. Doesn't matter what marks you have or anything, you were excluded from the university on the grounds of social origin. And like me, there were many others who hid their social origin, in order to be able to study. In the last year of university, the Communist pressure became unbearable. They started to check the validity of the curriculum vitae of all the students, to see if they told the truth or not. And in our hearts, we were frightened that they may discover that some of us lied. They didn't find that I lied. They didn't have a proof. But they found that one of our colleagues, through he was denounced by somebody else, by sort of a collaborator, a Communist collaborator, that his father owned cafeteria. He declared that the father was an employee. But actually, he was a partner. It was like a bakery, producing cakes and this sort of things. Immediately, a big meeting with the 200 students of our year was organized. And denunciation speeches were given. And we were asked to expel our colleague. It was put for an open vote. And with the exceptional of a few, nobody voted for this. This was a slap in the face of the local Communist boss. Immediately, they organized a better meeting where they took people and they started to blackmail, in order to vote. And I was one of the top students in that year. And they asked me to vote against this colleague of mine. And if not-- this was just a couple of days before graduation. Normally, the top students were taken as staff at the university. And if I would not vote, not only that I would not get in the university as a lecturer or assistant, but I won't get a job any close to my town. And the same blackmail went to most of the people. They put it to vote, and there was very few exceptions. People didn't vote. I didn't vote. I couldn't do this, in spite of being on their list. The result was that they expelled this colleague of ours from university, when he was about to graduate. So he didn't graduate. All those years were lost for him. And when I graduated, they send me to a country place. It was like exile, about 700 kilometers away from Bucharest. That's the punishment. But I have to say that, except for this incident, I was treated as an equal in the university. I never suffered from anti-Semitism or bad treatment. And I was always friendly with most of my colleagues, except for those who were real hard core Communists, which, in many cases, were former Legionnaires who turned Communist overnight. 
INT: Did you ever have to go into the military? LF: Yes. It was a general rule. I did my military service in the form which was organized for us students. It was during the five years of studies, one day each every week, and one month every year. The one day every week was in the form of studies at university, military studies. I was in the engineer's corps. And the month's training was a large distance from Bucharest. And we spent a full month training in proper uniforms, armament, and so on. Then I became an officer in the Romanian Army.  INT: What was your duty as an officer? LF: I didn't practice anything. I just got the grade, and that was all. And this was actually a result of my following action after graduation. I graduated in 1957. And I couldn't stand the Communist system, simply couldn't stand the Communist system. But it was impossible to leave the country. The whole country was a jail. And we were behind the iron curtain, which was impossible to cross it, to go to the Western Europe. So in the autumn of 1958, a year after graduation, while I was working on one of the construction sites in Bucharest, all of a sudden-- I can't explain what happened-- it was accepted that the Jews can apply for leaving the country to go to Israel. So Romania had a large Jewish population, even after the war, after the program and other things which happened. Apparently, before the war, the Romanian population exceeded half a million-- Jewish population exceeded half a million people. After the war, probably, they were left 253,000 people. And one of the main centers was Bucharest. So after this rumor spread that Jews can apply for passports to go to Israel, long queues in the front of the main police station of Bucharest of Jews started to take place. They were standing in the queue for day and night. I, my father, and my mother, we standed on this queue for two days and a night to get the forms for application for us to immigrate to Israel. And sometimes, when so many Jews were standing in a queue-- there were still this iron guard people alive around. And I heard some comments from them. Said, what a good job a machine gun would have done with this queue, having probably the memories of what happened at Iasi. And we applied in 1958. The immediate result was that I was declared enemy of the regime, together with my father, of course. And I was thrown out from the youth organization of Communist Party, of course. I had to return my membership card in a not so pleasant meeting where people spoke against my betrayal. And of course, I wasn't considered eligible for the Army any more, in spite of being an officer. And I was thrown out from my job, where only government jobs exist. And I stayed unemployed for about six months. The only thing that I could do was to learn bridge. That was my activity. Eventually, they released the tough regulations. And I was allowed to get a job as a civil engineer in a place where nobody wanted to go, somewhere close to the border. But not having any choice, I had to accept it. And I went there, and I worked, but with a feeling of being under punishment. I applied time and again to get a passport. And it was impossible to get one, because they let out of the country, generally, people without professions, or very old, who were a burden for the country. But young people, like me, and with a good profession, they wouldn't let out, by any means. And I was paid a fraction of the salary of one who didn't apply for immigration. And I was given the most menial engineering jobs possible. But I knew that I did this on purpose. I knew that I took the chance on my own, so I didn't complain about all this. After a couple of years, in 1961, I managed to get a job, also not so well-paid, below the average in Bucharest, in a design office, government design office, where I worked until 1969. And now, if people remember, in 1968, it happened in Czechoslovakia what was called The Springs of Prague, when the Dubcek took command and tried to liberalize Czechoslovakia. Between Springs and August, the Russians who didn't accept this sort of liberalization prepared to stop this movement. And in August, 1969, the Russian troops occupied Czechoslovakia. We, in Romania, felt very insecure, because Romania took, at that time, the side of Czechoslovakia. And we were scared that the Russians will do to Romania what they did to Czechoslovakia, a full occupation. But it didn't happen. So a year passed. And then, I planned my escape from Romania. There were already 12 years since I applied for my immigration with all the frustrations, and the demotions, and ill-treatment, and blackmail. So I decided to take my life in my hands and to escape from this big jail. 
INT: My name is Linda Behr. The date is March 1, 1997. I'm interviewing Lyonell Fliss in Johannesburg, South Africa. Take five. LF: I met my wife at the same design office where I was working in Bucharest. She was a drafts woman there where I was an engineer, but different sections. It was a huge share government company, about 1,500 people working for industrial projects of the steel industry. [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH] Her name was Lillianna Weiner of Jewish Transylvanian origin. Her parents were speaking Hungarian in their house and of course Romanian. We married in 1966. And since we married, we had in mind that one day we may be so lucky to be able to emigrate from Romania. The opportunity came in 1968, 69, when the turmoil in Eastern Europe happened with the occupation of Czechoslovakia. Her father was a manager of large hotels in Bucharest and at the sea resorts. He was speaking a number of languages. He was a very interesting. He's still alive in Bucharest, Franz Weiner. He had the a life that many people would be envious to have stories like this to tell. During the war he was involved in an espionage network for the allies. And he escaped from Romania during the war, went to Istanbul, and held there a pub where all the spies of various sides were meeting. It was a meeting place for spies from England and America and from Germany and Italy and Japan were coming in his pub. And actually his story is partially told in a movie, which was shown on the television. It was called And his pub was also shown there. His name, Franz Weiner. He was decorated after the war by the Marshall Alexander of the British forces. But this was his bad luck, because when the communists took power, considered him that he was a British spy and put him straight into jail, not considering that he was a anti-Nazi fighter. This was their interpretation. And he suffered many years from the harsh treatment in jail. But when he came back from the jail, through his very good background in the hotel industry and in the restaurant industry, he proved that he is a valuable asset for the Romanian tourist industry. So he was put in charge of large hotels and restaurants. Through this type of activity he managed to get contacts with people who were dealing with issuing passports in Romania. So probably through bribing or other reasons, he managed in the year of 1969-- so a year after the occupation of Czechoslovakia by the Soviet army-- managed to obtain for Lillianna and I passports to visit Czechoslovakia. This wasn't considered a very big deal normally, because it was still inside the Iron Curtain.
It was from one jail to another jail. But in terms of Jews who applied for immigration from Romania and who were considered enemies of the regime, Lillianna and I couldn't get even this sort of passports. So through her father we managed to obtain these passports. And now we heard various stories about people who managed from Czechoslovakia which had a common border with Austria, which was considered the Western world. People managed to escape. So in our minds immediately we made the plan. And we managed to save and buy a small motorcar in Romania after many years of waiting in a queue for buying such a commodity. And with the passport, which was valid from Romania to Czechoslovakia via Hungary and back, to be returned, and through a certain defined route, which needed to be watched, we prepared ourselves. We filled the car with food and all what was necessary for a trip of two weeks. And without telling anybody about our intention of escaping-- particularly we didn't tell our parents because they would have been in a state to know that we risk our lives or our freedom. The minimum sentence for such an attempt to escape was five years in jail, or, if you tried to do this in a more adventurous way, trying to break through or to go through the Iron Curtain, you can be shot dead. But we planned our escape. We arrived safely to Hungary from Romania. And it was a possibility that we can escape from Hungary to Yugoslavia. Arriving through the Hungarian Yugoslavian border my wife, who spoke Hungarian through her parents, asked the Hungarian guards if there is a possibility to try to visit somebody in Yugoslavia, not telling them that we intend to go. And she was lucky to find somebody who understood what we intend to do to advise her not even to dream to try such a thing, because the border is sealed. So it was second time after the first time in Iasi when my mother saved my life with knowledge of a foreign language, that a foreign language looked to be very useful, sometimes saving your life. So we went on our route to Czechoslovakia. We arrived at Bratislava And there is the border over the Danube River to Austria. I was very hesitant to go straight to the border. I wanted to stay, to spend a couple of days in Bratislava to see what the situation is. It was a state of uncertainty at that time. But sometimes I came to the conclusion that women, they have a sixth sense. And Lillianna said we have to try now. Let's try right now instead of spending time around.
So we headed towards the Iron Curtain zone with our little motorcar. The Iron Curtain actually is not an Iron Curtain in the shape of a wall. It's a full zone about 2 or 3 kilometers wide, full of land mines. It used to be-- now it doesn't exist the Iron Curtain. Full of barbed wire and all kind of military installations. And it was a preliminary border posted. The entrance into this zone where you enter, nobody asks you anything. But it's a one-way trap. Once you enter this zone, you can't get out without their permission. It's like a mousetrap. So we went through. Nobody said anything. But you can't get out. After a couple of kilometers, the road stops to the real border post of the Czechoslovakian Austrian border. Now there were two possibilities, that the guards were either Russians or Czechs. If they were Russians, they would have stamped out passports with their stamp, sent us back, and when you have to return the passport in Romania, you have this additional stamp, which sends you straight to jail. Or the other possibility, they will be Czech, Czechoslovakian border guards who may be more understanding. So we took a 50-50 chance. We went there. And to our relief, there was Czechs guarding the border at that particular time. Now we weren't speaking Czech. They didn't speak Romanian. And we didn't have any common language to discuss the matter. So we took our passports, which were valid for Czechoslovakia only. We had no business to be there. And we handed the passports to the officer. He took the passports into their gate house. And it took about 10 minutes until he came out. And now I can tell you that 10 minutes, it's a very long time. For me, for us, it was like 10 years. We were counting seconds. He came out, didn't say a word. He gave us the passports back. And asked us to open the [INAUDIBLE] to see what's in. He opened the [INAUDIBLE]. He had a look. I was shivering. My wife was pale. We didn't know what happens. So we entered into the car, and we didn't know what to do. He didn't say a word. So we started slowly moving the car towards the barrier. It was 50 meters away was the barrier from the Austrian side. The guard at the barrier opened the barrier. And we slowly moved under the barrier, just moved about 10 meters beyond the barrier. We were in no man's land. And we heard a shout from the back, halt. Now I had two options, either to accelerate the car. But I was sure that a bullet is faster than a car. Or to stop and come back, and we were so close to freedom and so far from the freedom. So I decided to leave the car stationary in that position and come back by foot, and with my wife in the car. My legs were jelly. I walked this 10 meters. It was like a marathon. And the guard showed me that the lid of the [INAUDIBLE] was open. I don't know how I crawled back to the car. And I started moving so slowly. The Austrian side opened the barrier. And I didn't recall anything. I fainted on the other side. My wife was stronger than me. She was still able to stand. So then we were there. And straight from there we asked where the Israeli embassy is in Vienna. We drove to Vienna after I recovered from the shock. And it was simple from there. Almost simple, not that simple-- we stayed for two weeks in Vienna. And one night we decided to go to the Prater. Prater is the entertainment park of Vienna. We parked the car which had a Romanian number plate. We went to see a movie. When we came we so a character standing next to our car and inspecting our number. It was like a character from 'Thriller' in a black leather raincoat asking us what we are doing there with a Romanian car in Romanian. Immediately we realized that he was a member of the security services on the Romanian government, and the role of these people was to catch people who escape and to murder them. Normally there were a number of occasions where there were Bulgarian members of the security service with umbrellas with poison needles injecting people who they wanted to get rid of them, or simply taking them to a dark place and shooting them. It was like being there and not being there. Eventually we managed to get rid of him. It was a place where there were lots of people and through the crowd managed to escape. From there we went to Israel where we spent six years. 
INT: How did you to get to Israel? LF: The [non-English speech] organized our travel to Israel. We had with us one suitcase.  INT: Had you been be able to contact your family in Bucharest? LF: We sent a cable from Vienna to Bucharest that we arrived safely. They didn't know. They saw that we are on holiday in the Romanian mountains. And they couldn't understand what's all this. Eventually they understood. Because we didn't tell them a word. So they found out from this cable that we are not in the mountains. We are-- we were scared that they will suffer from our defection. But actually nothing happened to them. And my parents-- this was in October, November 1969-- in April of 1970 my parents also emigrated to Israel.  INT: How did they manage to emigrate? LF: They were old. They have pensions. They had a flat. The flat had to be donated to the government. The pensions were cancelled. All my father's lifetime was taken away. They were already old enough for them to get rid of them.  INT: Tell me about your life in Israel. LF: In Israel I worked as an engineer in a number of places. Of course I spent the Yom Kippur War on the front line, on the [non-English speech]. After the Yom Kippur War I couldn't find employment. The economic situation was very poor. Particularly the building industry was affected. And I tried to get a place where I can practice my profession. And the place was South Africa, where I found employment with one of the major civil engineering companies, [INAUDIBLE] [? Roberts. ?] And since then I still am with this company. I'm now their chief civil engineer. And I managed quite well. I had regrets that I had to leave Israel. But on the other hand everybody's life is organized by himself. 
INT: How was your reception in Israel? Did you feel welcome? LF: It was mixed. I felt welcomed by friends that I knew. But by the locals and by the [INAUDIBLE] and by the people established there a long time ago, the reception was very cold. I was disappointed. I came with very patriotic feelings and ideas. I was disappointed, for instance, that in the army, I wasn't considered for any single [INAUDIBLE] in spite of being trained in engineers corps, which is one of the dangerous military professions, dealing with mines and landmines and other installations. And I was used only as a guard at a kibbutz. I don't say that it's not important to be  a guard there, but I saw that they didn't give me the right recognition when I arrived in Israel. I was also quite unhappy in my work there. I couldn't get satisfaction in my work and what I was doing. I had in the past in Romania was involved in large projects, which were a professional challenge for me. And I was always a challenger. And I found that this possibilities of large, industrial projects for which I learned so many years, and I practiced, and I dedicated my best years, I find here in South Africa better opportunity.  INT: And tell me about your life in South Africa. LF: My life I would say was a happy life here all these years with the exception of some tragic events. 10 years after we arrived here my wife, Lillianna, who was a tower of strength and who was an addict bodybuilder, going to gym five times a week, and all of a sudden she developed lung cancer without any sort of signs, warning signs before. We had just returned from holiday in Europe, happy return, nothing happened to her. And all of a sudden she developed this lung cancer, and in six months time she was dead. I was very, very depressed for a long time. Then meeting through friends Anita, I remarried after three years. 
INT: And how did you feel in South Africa? Was it more like home? LF: Yes. Actually I managed to get familiar with the South African lifestyle. I have to admit that the local population, Jewish population and not so Jewish population, and particular Jewish population, didn't welcome me so much when I arrived here. And it took a long time to create ties, friendly ties with people. But this didn't bother me too much.  INT: Have you for being back to Bucharest or Iasi? LF: The first time I returned to Iasi was when I was living in Bucharest after graduation after each the 1958 application for immigration to Israel when I was sent to Iasi in way of punishment. So I came back to Iasi for the first time after we left during the war as sort of a punished person.  INT: How did it feel going back there? LF: It was difficult. I avoided to go in the area where we were marched to death. I couldn't do this. I lived in a totally different area, and I was busy day and night on the construction site. And I was doing the things which didn't bring me the memories of the place. I survived. I think that I didn't feel too much about what the past brought to me. LINDA: My name is Linda Behr. The date is March 1, 1997. I'm interviewing Lyonell Fliss in Johannesburg, South Africa. Tape six. You went back to Bucharest-- LF: I went to Bucharest five years ago to a reunion of the university. It was after 23 years of leaving Romania. I found the same friendship that I left there with my former colleagues. It was very emotioned. I will repeat this trip this year when I will celebrate 40 years of our graduation. My wife Anita, former [INAUDIBLE]. I met some friends and we spent already nine years together. Nine happy years. Which took me out of the depression and the pain of the days of my first wife. And we tried to conduct a normal my life in South Africa. Under the difficult circumstances this country is going through. My main occupation is still civil engineering. And I try to excel in what I'm doing. And to my satisfaction, some of my works were recognized. I look back into all my trip in life, which spanned over six decades, and I think that I am qualified to draw some conclusions. From my childhood through the tragic experience that I had with the Germans in the first encounter, and thinking back what ordinary German soldier is capable to do to a child, I came to the conclusion that the German nation, as a whole, it's one of the biggest failures of this world.
There may be individuals which are different, but morally, the German population, the German nation, it's a shame for humanity. In my opinion, they must be isolated at this moment, because I don't believe that anything changed in this period since the world-- the Second World War, and let either live in a quarantine, not to propagate this sort of inhumane morality. The fact that many people are misled by the fact that their country is clean and they are very precise doesn't mean that they are proper human beings. If a soldier like that one, which I called the brave German soldier, which was nothing special, can do what he did, the whole nation is infected, and need to be kept apart from the rest of humanity. There is no excuse for them. And when they talk about reconciliation with their victims, I do not believe one word. They misled us so many times, and they proved to be the biggest liars of the whole world. They are the ones who produced Goebbels. They produced Hitler. They produced all their SS and the Nazis. But more than this, they produced the German nation, which as a whole, is a shame for humanity. Not long time ago, I attended a reconciliation meeting organized by the Goethe Institute of Germany. I heard what was said there. I wasn't able to express my opinions, because the meeting was too short. It is a cultural organization, Goethe Institute. If they wanted to have reconciliation with the Jews who brought culture to Germany-- and they can't deny this, that their culture is mostly a Jewish product-- they shouldn't have a Goethe Institute, they should have a [non-English speech] Institute. And I'm not so sure, I'll check if they do have an Einstein Academy. Their Academy of Sciences, I do not believe that it's called the Einstein Academy. The greatest genius that the humanity produced until this time. If they still ignore this fact, it shows that reconciliation is not there. The German nation, if they wanted to have reconciliation, they should have a Yom Hashoah as there is in Israel, the same day. This is what I would have asked them as a minimum, and to educate their children into Judaic studies, to make them understand what Judaism, the values of the Judaism, the humanity that was spread over the whole civilized world is, and what they did by burning the Torahs, by burning the people who produced all this. So this is the reason that I'm very pessimistic about the capacity of the Germans to be able to reconcile. And we shouldn't forget ever what they did, and how they misled us so many times. My message to the rest of the Jewish people is not to forget what happened to us in those times. 
INT: Thank you very much, Lyonell. Lyonell, who are these in the photograph? LF: They are the grandparents from my mother's side, the Blitzstein couple. Jacques Blitzstein and Sophia Blitzstein.  INT: And when was the photograph taken? LF: Probably in the last decade of the last century, 1890-something. It was taken in Galatzi. As you can see, very smart, very confident, and very good-looking. Here it's shown my grandmother, Sophia Blitzstein, with three of her children. On the right hand side is my mother, Adela, with two of her sisters. In this photograph, you can see on the extreme left my grandmother, Sophia Blitzstein, and on the right, her mother, my great-grandmother. In the center, between the two of them, is my mother, Adela, and around, the other children of my grandmother. Here it's in the center shown my mother, a year before her marriage to my father. On the right hand side, the two boys are her brothers. The extreme right is Harry, and the one next to him, Philip. And there are three cousins. Max, on the left hand side, he was a fighter in the Haganah and was killed in action. The wedding photograph of my parents, [? Lupo ?] and Adela, in the house of my mother's parents in Galatzi, 1934. A picture taken during the happy days of a holiday at one of the Romanian spa resorts, Dorna, in Bucovina. [PAUSES FOR 5 SECONDS] The two families, Fliss and Blitzstein, went together with all their children, just before my mother got married to my father. They were still engaged. My mother is on the second row, in the center. My grandfather, Jacques Blitzstein, [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] short before his death, which occurred a year after my birth, in 1936. Myself in the pram, equipped for the first winter of my life, in front of my father's shop in Strada Bratianu, Iasi, with my parents. On the laps of my mother on the balcony of our first house, Strada Vasile Alecsandri, Iasi, age one. From Strada Vasile Alecsandri, we moved into a new flat in Strada Bratianu, one of the central streets of Iasi, where the photograph was taken from the balcony on a sunny day, 1939, without even guessing what will happen in the same place in two years' time. Next to me, the baby, Bertina Grossman, with her mother. She was meant to be my future wife. In 1939 I was four years old, and following the good tradition of stuffing with lots of food, my mother took me to the Gura Humorului spa, famous for its good food, mineral waters, fresh air, hotels. My parents always wanted me to be very smart, smartly dressed, so they bought me a nice caracal hat for the winter of 1941.
Unfortunately, because of the anti-Semitic rules, I had to wear a yellow star. And walking with the yellow star, and with this hat, some older children caught me, beat me up, and stole my hat. I was very cross. This was in 1941, when there were rumors that the Jews may be deported to Transnistria. And for this reason, my parents shaved my head to prepare me for going to a concentration camp. In 1942, when the Germans were very busy implementing their final solution to the Jewish problem, in Romania started preparations for the same thing. So the first step was a census of the Jewish population, to know the numbers and the names with whom the local Nazis and the government shall deal with. So a form needed to be filled in with the name and the address of every person having Jewish blood. It wasn't a matter of Jewish religion, it was Jewish blood-- indifferent of the proportion of blood, Jewish blood, to other kind of blood. It was a pure racialistic act, and my parents hesitated a long time before they submitted this statement, because of course they were scared that based on this, I'll be also collected and sent to extermination camps. The statement, it's signed by my father. I was a minor. I was seven. And fortunately, the extermination or the deportation of the Jewish population didn't take place. This picture was taken '42 or '43, when I was a pupil in the primary school in the synagogue in Iasi. [PAUSES FOR 9 SECONDS] In spite of the harsh conditions, we tried to keep clean and smart and disciplined. Immediately after the war, after moving to Bucharest, in the summer, in the hot summer of Romania, everyone was spending couple of cool hours at the beach. There were big lakes around Bucharest with nice warm water and sand. And here you can see myself in the center, my father on the left. On the right, my father's brother, my uncle David, who is a survivor of the death train of 1941, Black Sunday. He himself survived because he was a very strong young man. Very good looking, tall, Johnny Weissmuller type. A photograph from the training camp of the Romanian army. As an officer in training in 1953, myself on the right hand side, at Deva in Transylvania. In front of the magistrate court in Bucharest, with my first wife, Lillianna, at our civil wedding. Behind us, between us, in the second row, her father Franz. On the left side, that's my mother, and behind her, my father. And left of my mother on the second row, that's Lillianna's mother, [? Annie. ?] In Israel, at the border to Lebanon, at the Russian [? Ikra, ?] a popular touristic place, my mother.
Next to her, my uncle David Fliss, my father's brother, who now lives in Argentina. And next to him, my father. A friend next to them. 1972. Myself as a soldier in the Israeli army in 1971, [PAUSES FOR 5 SECONDS] when I served until leaving to South Africa in 1975. If I'm a survivor of the Holocaust and of the other events which followed, this plate, it's a survivor and a half. It survived the looting of [? Anike ?] in the pogrom there. It survived all the damage done by the German heroes in our flat. It survived the Russian bombing of Iasi. It survived the American and British bombing of Bucharest, and it arrived intact into the little luggage that my parents took with them when they immigrated to Israel. And from there, in my suitcase to South Africa. It is the last remnant of the great chinaware empire of my grandfather, Jacques Blitzstein, who gave as a present the whole set to my parents, on the occasion of their wedding. I would like now, in the end, to introduce my wife, Anita, who through her experience with me for a number of years, and her experience with the Holocaust issue through the Zionist Federation, may pass to you her message. ANITA FLISS: My name is Anita. I was born Cohen, and I was born in Capetown, South Africa. And therefore being a very protected western European, I really feel that going through the travels of Lyonell makes me feel very inadequate, compared to the protected life that I have led. And it has really shown me what some people have really gone through and have really survived. And I think it's a wonderful gesture that this foundation has given us the opportunity to express our feelings and sentiments and gone through a nostalgic ride. It is a wish that I wanted to do, myself, tribute to Lyonell, to perhaps have written his autobiography, perhaps when we were retired. And you have given us this particular opportunity, and saved me all the time and the stress, and to put it into words and to reality and to bring it into a very special meaning. LF: I would like to conclude by giving my thanks to the foundation for enabling me, for the first time, to put my story together, and to keep this as a document of what human people can do to each other. But is difficult for me to call human those who created the Holocaust. And my final thought will be an optimistic one, is that we still will survive in a moral society. I think that all of us, we have to be very, very careful when we judge people who went through all the Holocaust on one or the other side, and to make sure it will never do an injustice to those who saved lives of innocent people in these terrible times.