INT: Survivors of the Shoah Visual History Foundation. Date is May 7, 1997. Survivor is C. Leon Kawer. Interviewer is Dina Cohen. City is Silver Spring, Maryland; country, USA. Language will be English. My name is Dina Cohen. Today is May 7, 1997. I will be conducting an interview with C. Leon Kawer, in Silver Spring, Maryland, USA. The interview will be in English. Could you please state your name and spell it? CK: My full name is Camille Leon Kawer-- C-A-M-I-L-L-E, Leon-- L-E-O-N, Kawer-- K-A-W-E-R.  INT: And the name you were born with-- what was that? CK: Was-- the name I was born with was Kalmen Arye Kawer.  INT: And could you spell Kalmen Arye also? CK: K-A-L-M-E-N, Arye-- A-R-Y-E.  INT: And were you known by any other names? CK: Lately, everybody calls me 'Lay-on' or 'Lee-on.' Any other name when I was a baby-- my parents and relatives called me bebe, a diminutive for baby.  INT: And what is your birth date? CK: Birth date-- I was born on June 27, 1923.  INT: And where were you born? CK: Born-- I was born in Koenigsberg. This is East Prussia. Koenigsberg, it spells K-O-E-N-I-G-S-B-E-R-G.  INT: And how old are you now? CK: When I was born?  INT: No. How old are you now? CK: Oh, right now I'm 73, very soon 74-- I hope.  INT: And did you grow up in Koenigsberg? CK: No, absolutely not. I was there for the-- actually, my mother was there for the purpose of giving birth. I didn't have anything to say in this matter. But after a few days, say, she left Koenigsberg-- the hospital-- and rejoined my father and family who were at the border of East Prussia and Poland, in a little town called Suwalki-- S-U-L-W-A-L-K-I. 
INT: And do you recall anything about Suwalki? CK: Suwalki or Sulwalk, like in Yiddish. Yes, I do recall, but not when I came there first. I recall Suwalki a few years later when my parents were already in Vilna. And we came back to Suwalki in summer for vacation and to visit the rest of the family. Our relatives were living in Suwalki. And as a youngster, tender age four, five years old, I distinctly remember some of my relatives and certain pictures or landmarks-- quote, unquote-- of Suwalki.  INT: What do you remember about it? CK: Well, the most pleasant memory was a park-- a beautiful garden with flowers-- summertime, of course. And it smelled so good. It was very enjoyable, even for a little boy of four or five years old, to look forward to go to the park and look at the beautiful flowers, and smell the beautiful flavors that-- the scent. The second best memory was my Uncle Ben Zion Gosdsik, who, at that time, was my favorite uncle, because we were living on one of the main street, or if not a main street, a important street. And across the street where we're-- from where we were living was a pastry shop. And practically every day my uncle took me by my little hand and crossed the street and said, what would you like? And I gorged myself with pastries. And I liked my uncle for it very, very much. I also remember that on the street that we were living, a little farther down, on the way to go to the park, it was a Kaserne. A Kaserne is where the soldiers were-- like barracks, but instead of being barracks, it was a very big edifice-- a very big building. And of course, inside I never knew what it was, but that was, at that time, the Polish soldiers were residing there or having their place. Also, a little farther-- not far from this military edifice-- was the jail from Suwalki. Apparently, though it was a very small town, it was important to have a jail. And I remember that every time I passed by, especially going to the park, I was a little bit afraid knowing that the people who are in jail are not very nice people. And I was a little afraid. 
INT: And could you describe your immediate family? CK: Well, the best thing I can remember, naturally, is my mother and father. And I was a only son, though my mother had a previous experience of birth giving. But the child was born still. And I don't know it. I was told much, much later in life that my mother used to have a-- another child previous to my coming. [PAUSES FOR 6 SECONDS] And I remember my mother being with me all the time when my parents left Suwalki for Vilna, and also going to the gardens and parks. And we had a nanny. But my mother always took me, if not in the morning, in the afternoon to the garden, where I could play with other children until I was old enough to go to kindergarten. And at that time, I don't remember exactly if my mother took me there or my nanny took me there, but it was no more gardens or parks or playing around. It was serious matter in kindergarten. We had to do certain work, like pasting things on paper, and singing songs, and being attentive, and-- and listen to the teacher.  INT: And what were your parents' names? CK: My father's name was-- in Hebrew-- [HEBREW]-- Rachmiel in Polish or French or English, for this matter. My mother's name was [YIDDISH] in Yiddish or Hebrew, but we called her Ida and-- or 'Ee-dah', in Yiddish. And she was born Grodner-- G-R-O-D-N-E-R. I imagine Grodner comes from the city of Grodno, and-- as far as I know. But she was not born in Grodno. She was born in a very small little village or a very little town near Grodno. 
INT: You mentioned moving to Vilna. How old were you when you moved there? CK: I cannot remember exactly, but I would say I was between four and five years old, about-- that time. Because very shortly after moving, after playing around in-- in the parks and gardens, I went to kindergarten. It was a private Hebrew kindergarten, and I remember that. I remember also where it was situated in my mind, but I don't remember the name of the street anymore.  INT: And where did you live in Vilna? CK: Vilna, we lived on the-- Polish name-- [POLISH]. That's [POLISH] is German, [POLISH] is street-- the German Street-- one of the prominent street in Vilna. We lived in number 8 of [POLISH] Street, in an apartment-- in a very large apartment-- with my grandparents-- my father's father, and my grandfather's wife, who was my father's stepmother.  INT: And what kind of a religious upbringing did you have? CK: It was strictly orthodox. It was the only religion that I knew of, and-- but it was not fanatic. We were-- well, at least my parents were very modern-- and even my grandfather-- modern orthodox Jews-- nothing fanatic, 'cause they we are not Hasidim. And they were not extreme. Like, we call it today ultra orthodox. They were just plain orthodox. And that's all. It's was not-- it was not known to have any other religion at that [LAUGHS] time, anyhow.  INT: What do you remember about the Sabbath or the Jewish holidays in your home? CK: Oh, I remember vividly a lot of things. I mentioned where we were living on-- on-- in [POLISH]. In Yiddish, people called it [YIDDISH]. It was a significant landmark in Vilna, because number 6 of the [YIDDISH]-- we lived in 8-- number 10 you did not have any entrance. It was commercial. And number 12-- in other words, number 6 [YIDDISH] and number 12 [YIDDISH], when you went in there in the back was the famous Jewish ghetto in Vilna. As a matter of fact, when you entered from [YIDDISH] number 12 and walked a very small block, on the left-hand side was the house of the famous Vilna Gaon. We could go from number 8 [YIDDISH] to [POLISH] through the back of our house to the ghetto, but we had a gate that was, most of the time, closed. So if you had to go to the ghetto where you had mostly the synagogues, majority synagogues of Vilna, and you also had a mikveh there-- I was told. And it was [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] practically very few private residences, but the first floor of most of the ghetto, if not all of the ghetto, were synagogues, where you could pray all day long.
And Vilna was a very Jewish city. As a matter of fact, the majority of the resident in Vilna were Jewish. And at the time when I was in Vilna, it was at that time Polish territory. The Poles took it away from the Lithuanian in 1921, I was told, or at least I learned that in school. And the Polish were maybe 30%, 35% of the population. Lithuanian, who did not live to stay in Lithuania, were maybe 10% or 12%. And the rest were [? Bielorusses, ?] [NON-ENGLISH] and-- and other ethnic minorities. But the big majority was over 50%-- I would say 55% of a city at that time-- was about 100,000 inhabitants-- were Jewish. So if you liked it or not, you were brought up in a Jewish atmosphere. Because I remember perfectly on Friday evening before Shabbat, everybody was closing their stores, and-- and very pious Jews were chasing the vendors on the street to go home and do whatever they had to do, and stop selling. And though shabbos wasn't yet for an adult to us, but they were very strict about it. I also remember most of the time, if not all the time, when I was really young, going to shul to synagogue with my grandfather. I preferred to go with my grandfather than with my father who was praying-- curiously enough-- in another shul. The shuls in-- in Vilna mostly were made up by profession. In other word, the tailors went to the tailors in shul, and the shoemaker went to the shoemaker shul, and different things. And [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] you prayed. I know-- I know you prayed all the time. You-- you always said a minyan. That anybody had to say Kaddish, you could go from one shul and another. You would have had a minyan to say Kaddish. Also, we had a-- the big synagogue, the great shul, [NON-ENGLISH] shul, in Vilna, where, at that time, in the late 1920s, a very big cantors, [NON-ENGLISH], came to give concerts. And I remember one incident when I was very, very small, going on a Friday night from shul with my grandfather, going home, I saw a lot of people congregating in front of the big shul, the big synagogue in Vilna. And like a little boy of six or seven years old, I was very, very curious to find out what happened. And I let go the hand of my grandfather and ran another short distance to the-- where the people were gathering and trying to go in. But I realized right away that people couldn't go in. It was too many people, and-- and the entrance was-- was blocked. People-- the overflow of the people were outside on the street or other in the ghetto. But-- well, we had streets there. And since I was so little, I could go by-- between the legs of the people in getting there. To make a long story short, in a few minutes, I was not only inside the synagogue, but I was up front where, at that time, I didn't know, [NON-ENGLISH] was officiating, chanting with the choir. And all of a sudden, I found myself front row center, standing, listening to [NON-ENGLISH]. It was so marvelous that I was spellbound-- and listened to him singing. And I learned later on that this was one of the great, great [NON-ENGLISH], Moshe Steinberg, who came to give a-- if not a recital, at least to officiate in the great synagogue of Vilna. And-- and naturally, it was packed. So I stood listening to him, and all these great [NON-ENGLISH] like-- like opera singers, have a tendency to stretch out the services. And not knowing, not knowing the time, it was very, very late when he finished. The only thing beside his name that I learned later that I remembered was the melody-- one of his melodies-- that is still centered today in Kedusha. A Kedusha is a very short prayer that can last five minutes or-- at most-- or so. This [NON-ENGLISH] stretched it out to 15 or 20 minutes, to tell you, he gave a recital. And that stuck in my mind till today. And when I came home-- my father was away most of the week and just came Saturday night for Sabbath to be with the family-- looked at me-- didn't say [? son-- ?] got up the table, took me by the hand in another room, and gave me a spanking on my posterior. That was the first and last spanking that I remember my father gave me. And my grandfather [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] intervened, of course, and said, let the boy speak. Where was he? And finally, my father asked, where were you? And I said I went to the shul, because I-- where the [NON-ENGLISH] sing, and it was so beautiful-- thing like that. Well, like I said, it was the first spanking that I remember my father gave me, and I don't believe he gave me any others, as far as I can remember. So I have some very nice [LAUGHS] souvenirs from Vilna. 
INT: What about the school you attended? Could you describe that? CK: Well, I went for a year or two in kindergarten. I don't remember exactly. And then also it was a Hebrew school-- [NON-ENGLISH] gymnasiums, they called it; and first-- first grade, or whatever the grade was, to start. I must have been by seven years of age at that time. And I wasn't one of the best students, because I did not pay much attention and wasn't very much interested in the subjects they were teaching at that time. It didn't appeal to me. But I did have private tutors. I had a Hebrew tutor who taught me how to read Hebrew. And-- and I had a violin teacher, because at that time, it was-- I don't know. But it was, if not fashionable, that a-- a Jewish child should know some music. And since the apartment-- though it was a large apartment, but two family lived there-- was-- didn't have enough room for a piano. I imagine a violin-- you always find room for a violin. Later on I had a private-- later on, when I was 8 or 9, I-- I imagine-- a private tutor in Hebrew-- a rabbi-- a very old man. And I had to go to the shul for him to teach me. At nine years old, when I remember-- at nine years old, I was very much advanced in religious studies. And if I remember correctly, at that time, the rabbi started to teach me [NON-ENGLISH]. That's Jewish code of law of a-- a certain interpretation of rituals and et cetera. And if I remember correctly-- I'm not sure-- started [NON-ENGLISH]. That's a commentary for a very great rabbi who lived in France, and was writing in Hebrew, but he had this specific autograph. In other words, each character in Hebrew were different than any others, so it was a little difficult-- without punctuation to it. But to tell you that I was advanced, because this is a subject that you are studying, I would say, at a college level in this country. [LAUGHS] And I was only nine years old or so. And I couldn't pursue it very, very long, because when I was 10, we left Vilna for Paris, France. 
INT: And why did you leave? CK: Well, the-- in all that I learned that later, because a nine-year-old child does not project or think about certain questions. He's got a daily life. He's got a program. He's got a schedule. He has to go to school. He has to listen to his teachers. He has to listen to his parents or mother. The economical situation in Vilna on the late '20s was a very-- a-- a crisis. It was a crisis in all Europe. And my father, who during the First World War used to be a businessman, had very great dealings and was a merchant that handled very big, big business. And after the war, a lot of his clients owed him money. And we moved to Vilna, mainly for him to collect everything that was due for him from previous transactions. And [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] since it was no future economically speaking, and the tight-- the situation with the Jews in Poland was not very, very of the best-- Vilna, like I said, had a majority of Jews-- my father decided to join his brother, who was a-- well, was an associate of his-- actually, a partner during the war-- and who had a very flourishing business in Paris, France.  INT: We'll continue on the next tape. CK: Mm-hmm.  INT: May 7, 1997, interview with Leon Kawer, tape number two. We were talking about your move to Paris in 1933. What was life like in Paris for you? LK: Well, it was strange, not to say anything else. I did not know the language. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] So-- and of course, it was a different culture. We were not living among Jews. We were not in the majority, like in Vilna. And life was completely different. You were living with Gentiles, very nice Gentiles. But nevertheless, you were not used to it. And since I was, at that time, 10 years old, I had to go to school. And also, one incident in the beginning was that the-- the French school system, at least in Paris at that time, was Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday. Thursday was off. And then you continued Friday and Saturday. It was five days a week with a break on Thursday. Being the nice little Jewish boy coming from Vilna, brought up in an orthodox style, I did not want to go to school on Saturday. And for the first six weeks, I did not attend school on Saturday till a letter from school from the teacher came to my parents, asking for a interview, asking for an explanation. And my father brought me then with-- to the teacher, [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] not knowing French enough to explain myself.
But my father, who came two years ahead of us, spoke fairly good French and explained to the teacher that I was brought up in a religious faith, that [PAUSES FOR 5 SECONDS] obeys the laws of Shabbat. And she didn't know what to answer. And she sent me to the principal, who is called the director. And in the office of the director, when he listened to our story, said, well, it cannot do. The law is that you have to attend school. And if you are not going to attend school, I'm going to write a letter to the mayor. And the mayor is going to put you in jail because you are breaking the law. Well, of course, I was only 10 years old. And who want to go to jail, remembering that in Suwalki, only bad people were to jail. So it wasn't my place to go there. I reluctantly came to the-- to the fact to go to-- to school on Saturday. It was a-- a little shock. But you have to obey the law of the land. [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] For four months or so, I was in the first grade, or last grade-- I don't know, depending how you count. And it was very boring because you had to learn the A and B and C's. And after a while, when they started to [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] get a little more advanced and be able to go to mathematics, quote, unquote, like 2 and 2 is 4, I was very, very strong in that. I could add. I could subtract. I think I could even multiply and maybe divide, too, to the point that I skipped four grades with one step. I was too much advanced for the class already. And my French was still poor, but I caught up with it. And within a one year time, I forgot my Polish that I spoke beautifully and started speaking fluently French. And after two years in France, nobody could distinguish me from a foreigners or from a native. I spoke French like anybody else in Paris, or almost anybody else. [LAUGHS] So that was one of my few experiences when I came. And then after you are 12 years old, you are getting already in junior high. And the subjects are more interesting. I started to be serious and became a very good student, because-- and the teacher and the subject were more appealing to me. And up to that time, even Vilna or the beginning, of course, in France, it was nothing that she could teach me that was so thrilling to-- to learn. At that time, I remember when I was 12 years old and I started to go to junior high, I started to take my subject [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] seriously.
And in France, they have a system to grade you every month, not only by grading your work, but the highest percentage was number one in class, two, things like that. And I was among-- I never was the first one for one good reason. But I was among the third first one in the class. Reason I wasn't the first one because two students doubled up the class from the preceding year. And they knew everything ahead of time. So it was so easy for them. And naturally, they took advantage of it. So I was very pleased till I-- I went to high school. You change-- you change schools from junior high or from elementary to high school. You have to pass certain exams. Because at that time in France, you had a choice to go in three different high school-- general, commercial, or industrial. And I-- so I-- I choose commercial. I was always fascinating-- fascinated by commerce, business, figures, bookkeeping, or anything that has to do with business. And I passed-- I passed the exam in a very high level. So I could choose my high school, my preference. And I went to high school till 1939-- actually, till 1940. In 1939, the war started between France and Germany. And in 1940, the German invaded France. And at that time, though being very young, I went away from Paris with a few other millions of refugee, going from north, from Belgium, from Holland. And they were all going south. Where exactly, I don't know. But they were-- they were running away from the Germans. And at that time, I was with two boyfriends of mine with bicycles on the roads of France. And we left Paris exactly maybe an hour, an hour and a half, before the German entered Paris. The German entered Paris from the north gates, and we left Paris from the south gates. And for three or three and a half days, we had an hour or an hour and a half ahead of the German army. After three days, three and a half days, they caught up with us. And-- but before catching up with the refugee, their planes were bombing mostly bridges, but also [PAUSES FOR 6 SECONDS] fire-- how do you call it-- [PAUSES FOR 5 SECONDS] ah, they were firing on the civilian population. It is true that the civilian population was mixed with the French army, who was going south, too. And since they couldn't distinguish one from the others, they didn't care. They were firing from their planes, flying very, very low. You actually almost could touch them. And a lot of people got hurt. And some died from the bullets.
I was very lucky. My two friends, we-- I remember distinctly one time actually diving from my bicycle into a ditch and while the planes were firing on-- on us. And after a-- a couple weeks on the roads going south, though the German were ahead of-- all around us, we stopped maybe 400 or 500 kilometers from Paris in a-- a place, in a farm. And we were exhausted. We were asking to-- permission from the farmer to sleep in the barn. And-- [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] and that when we stopped running away from the German, though I continued even farther, another 150 kilometers-- that's roughly 100 miles-- to Ile d'Oleron, where I knew one of my cousins was who left Paris much earlier from me with his car and was spending time over there. And I've went to see-- to try to see him, find out what to do, things like that, because I was separated from my parents. My parents, at that time, if I remember correctly, my father gave me a hundred francs. Maybe-- maybe it was $100, if you want to. But you couldn't do anything and buy anything with that because all the shops were closed. People were running away, the shops were-- [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] when people loot, took away especially food stores during our refugee run away-- exodus, what we called. And you couldn't buy anything for money. Only later on, when you had to go to the farmhouse, they took advantage of the situation. And when you wanted to-- when you asked for a glass of water, they wanted to sell you a glass of water for the 15 francs or equivalent, for instance, of $15. That was outrageous. I remember that our food ran out in a day, a day and a half, whatever we took with us. And the rest of the time, somehow, we were very lucky. The French soldiers who came along with us, or we went-- came along with them, many times were giving us, knowing that the refugees didn't have anything, cans of meat, or cans of vegetables, or all kind of whatever they could spare. And once, I remember. I saw some people coming from a side road, a fairly small road, and with a lot of food in their arms. So we went away. And we saw a little chateau. It was a very big house. And people were coming out, not so much from the upstairs, but from the basement. And we went to the basement. And we saw so many things that these people put away for the war-- all in conserves, all kinds of eggs, and cans of peas, I remember distinctly, asparagus, and wines, and all.
So we-- we had only our arms. And we loaded up as much as we could. And we didn't have any bread. And bread in France is a very important item. A Frenchman without bread is-- is lost practically. He eats everything with bread. And it was very difficult to adapt yourself to eat your meals without bread. The first few days, when we had food, mainly cans of peas, we had peas for breakfast, for lunch, for dinner, no snacks in between. And this continued it for several weeks. And after we came back to Paris, and I couldn't see one pea in front of me. I couldn't think about it. For years and years, I didn't eat any peas, because that's all we had to-- to eat on. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] After a while, I came back from Ile d'Oleron because my cousin, when I came, the ferry took him. And he left to go to Paris. And I was waiting to let room for the car. I didn't know it was him. I wasn't curious enough to look. And when I went on the ferry going on the island, the address, the person where he was, said he just left. So they gave me-- they gave me dinner. And they gave me a room. But I couldn't sleep in the bed because I wasn't used to it. For two weeks or so or more, was sleeping on the ground. So after an hour or two, I had to go on the floor and sleep on the floor. And I slept very well. The next day, I took the next ferry back and rejoined my two-- two friends in the farm. And we were talking about joining our-- our parents back to Paris. But it wasn't so simple, because the German didn't let the refugee go whenever they wanted and with what they wanted. The German, for one things, were very organized. And at that time, the trains were not running, or very, very few. So the priority was for the old people, for people, for women who were pregnant or with small children, thing like that. We were 17, 18 years of age and we were students, so we had-- we were the last priority. And we came back to Paris when-- several months later, when the German allowed us to-- to go up with the train. And we worked at the farm. And it was a great experience for city boys who never made any hard labor. And it was very hard labor. You had to get up early in the morning and work till night and was very physical. But we learned a lot of things.
And-- but we ate good. It is true that most of the time, the community-- we were about a kilometer out of the city-- but the community organized to give two meals to the refugees. So we always had something to eat and was good. But many times, the farmers invited us, especially at the harvest time. It was the time of the harvest. And we help them. And a curious thing-- in France, like the Amish here, all the neighbors come to help. So you always have six, seven families, immediate neighbors to-- and every-- reciprocate. Everybody reciprocated. But beside that, the French men in general, or French farmer, [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] when you come to help, you come to help with the whole family. And everybody brings a meal. This one cooks meat, this one vegetable, this one bakes, and things like that. So it was six or seven families. And at the end of the day, everybody, all the food were put on the table. So you had six, seven meals to eat. How can you eat six, seven meals? I mean, it's-- for city boy, it was impossible. Well, the French farmer found a solution. They have a liquor called calvados. It's made from apple. It's-- if you think that hot cider is strong, it's-- it's for babies. It's nothing. This is a 100 proof, or if not more. And when you eat a full meal, or a meal a half or two, and you cannot swallow one more thing, you pour yourself a glass of calvados, like a 10, 12 ounce glass. And you drink it in one gulp. And this calvados miraculously acts like a plunger, you'll excuse me. And everything you ate, somehow you are emptying. You can continue. And that's a way you can eat six or seven meals in the evening. It's a lot of fun. But I think I went up to three or three and a half meals. And I gave up. So it was very instructive. And we learned a lot of things, because we were teenagers. And 1940, almost at the end of the summer, we came back to Paris and our parents, respective parents. And somehow-- I don't remember-- I didn't want to continue and finish up my high school. I don't remember the reason. But I went to a private school, what they call commercial school, business school, that what I could do in this private school in one year, the public school would have taken three years. So since-- I don't know. I was in a hurry to learn or somehow, I don't remember exactly. But my parents decided to pay the tuition in a private school and-- and went, enrolled in this school.
And that lasted-- [PAUSES FOR 5 SECONDS] anyhow, I graduated. And I had my diploma of a bookkeeper and all kind of different other stuff like typing and shorthand and-- and many other things. And then came 1941. At that time, the German got organized and started to implement their rules and regulations, and mainly, the law of Nuremberg against the Jews. Everybody was aware of it. And at that time, if I remember, or even before-- I think in 1939-- the book written by Hitler itself, was quite thick, was translated in-- in French. Because I couldn't read German. And I looked through it, because it was too hard for a 15-, 16-year-old boy to understand everything he wrote in there. But the gist of it, especially against the Jew, we understood very, very well. And a few things that I could read were not very pleasant and not very promising. So with my friends from high school and school-- we were very close, five or six boys together, going out together, sticking together-- we decided, or at least we make plans. It was wishful thinking more than plans, thinking what are they going to do with the-- with-- to implement the law against the Jews, that he cannot-- we cannot do that. We are going to be restricted. We are going to do-- things like that. How is it going to come? Because if he did not give any detail in his book or at least I don't remember, and I'm sure he didn't, we didn't know how things will come about. And we didn't know if he'll-- he'll put on-- in the paper, saying that all Jews have to do certain things or not to do certain things, or put a ad in the radio, or put-- in France was, at that time, very-- that was normal to have that kiosk in the streets. And they put some fliers, mainly for theaters and places and things like that, or political gatherings, things like that. We said, maybe they're going-- but we didn't know. So we decided-- and we were 16, 17 years old at that time-- that as soon as one of us will note of something that is not good, to tell the adults and to run away from Paris. Where to run away, how to run away, we didn't know. But we knew that we wanted to run away. We were decided-- and personally, I was very strongly decided-- not to give in to the Germans' stupid things against the Jew, I mean what-- I happen to be Jewish. But I mean, it was ridiculous. We didn't like it, especially when a youngster is brought up in his tender age to be the slogan of liberté, fraternité, égalité-- I mean, French motto. Everybody is equal. Everybody is a brother. And so we made plans. And if we didn't swear to each other we'll do it, at least we-- you know, we meant it. To make a long story short, I was the only one to implement the plan. 1941, the German were rounding up Jews or asking them to come to a certain point, like police stations or different other places of gathering. And I didn't know what they meant by that. But is one thing I knew, that I'm not going to go. And I'm not going to cooperate with them. And I'm going to do everything. First, they were my enemies-- I mean, France against Germany. Secondly, they want to kill the Jews. They want to harm the Jews. I am Jewish. I am not going to let myself taken to the-- I didn't know, slaughter. But I mean, whatever it was, since my tender age, my primordial or most important thing is-- or was-- it still is-- justice. Since I was a little baby, justice, the truth, is the most important thing for me. That's maybe a lesson from my Jewish upbringing, my religious upbringing. But that was with me all-- all my life. And what the German are trying to do is not justice. So I was against it. And like I said, in 1941, we were living at that time in a private house, what we call a pavilion. We shared the pavilion. The first floor was a good friend of my parents, a single lady, 29, 30 years old, something like that. We were having the upstairs, second floor. And one-- we had her for lunch and dinner quite often since we were friends, not only neighbors. And she said, this young man has to leave Paris. He cannot stay here. The reason she said to leave Paris is at that time, France was divided in two zones. The occupied zone were the German. And also the Vichy zone, the south of France, was divided roughly from the Switzerland, Lake of Geneva, going roughly with the [FRENCH] and coming back southwest to the Pyrenees. And that was what we called Vichy France. 
INT: We'll continue on the next tape. LK: OK.  INT: May 7, 1997, interview with Leon Kawer, tape number three. We were talking about your leaving Paris for the free zone in 1941. LK: Yes. That was just about Easter, Passover, 1941. Like I said, neighbor from downstairs and good friend-- still good friends up to now, she's still living-- [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] told my parents in no uncertain terms that I had to leave because the situation was getting a little uncomfortable, not to say anything else. And she said since my brother-- she had a brother who was living in Vichy, France, in the other side of the demarcation line-- [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] she would like very much for me to join her brother, who came from Poland also 1937. And I was very friendly with him, though he was seven or eight years older than I am. And she said, as a matter of fact, I intend to go there very shortly. And I'll take him with me. If I remember correctly, I was 17, 18 years old at that time. And even if you think that you are somebody at 18 years old, you're not quite ready to go and smuggle borders and be at-- in a dangerous situation that you were not before-- I mean, going away from home, being on your own, and especially going to the unknown because you didn't know what. But we went shortly after Passover. And the reason our border was in the free zone or Vichy zone was that she was a businesswoman doing very big business and she wanted to have a safeguard for her money, not leaving it in the occupied zone. So once in a great while or so often, she would smuggle the border out to go to free France, French, Vichy France, and deposit the money in a bank or leave it with the brother. I didn't know that. But since this brother of hers was a friend of mine, I could stay with him. And it was no charge, as far as I'm concerned. It was fairly friendly. He, as a foreigner in France, was required-- a legal foreigner but required to work, because at that time. So he bought some-- he bought-- it's not an estate. But he bought quite a-- a house and quite a few fields around it-- I mean, that came the real estate-- and bought a car and established himself as a farmer. He was milking the cow twice a day and giving or selling the milk away. So he had a legal profession. And nobody bothered farmers. So I stood with him quite a few months.
And then another family, also friends of his sister, came to join us. And he graciously-- [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] he didn't give it away. I think they paid rent, because it was a whole family with two-- two children, two-- two daughters, the house. And he went to a little-- small, little thing to-- to sleep in there. And I slept with him or slept somewhere else. And we lived a very good life there. Nobody bothered us. We had an agreement with a [FRENCH]. That's a restaurant mostly, also rent rooms. But we didn't need the rooms. And we had breakfast, lunch, and dinner over there. And my friend, Pierre-- that's the border's neighbor-- was very familiar with the gendarmerie and friend with the chief of police of this little town. And it was all right. Nobody bothered us, anything like that, till we started to have some news or rumors. People were coming in the Vichy zone. Or people were writing or telling or calling and telling story, what happened in Paris. And the situation with the Jews in Paris aggravated itself to a point that the German and the French police were going systematically from one section of Paris to another section, especially where the Jews were gathered in big numbers and practically rounded them up, taking them away. And it was kind of serious, and knowing, putting them in a internment camp. That's the ways they call it, camp d'internement. When I heard that-- and my parents were in France, in Paris-- I said, I'll have to bring them over. Because it's no use. So at that time, the German authorized all to write from one zone on another with postcards so they could read right away what it is. And the postcard was pre-printed, saying, I-- I'm well. I'm sick, I-- certain other things that-- and the two last lines were left blank so everybody could write anything they wanted. So I wrote that-- to my parents-- that [? Kami ?] is going to visit them on such and such date. [? Kami ?] wrote me that he is going to visit you. [? Kami ?] the name of my cousin who was on the island, [FRENCH], who everybody called him [? Kami. ?] And he told me he will call me Leon, not to confuse each other. And they would understand, because they know that [? Kami ?] is in Paris. And so I waited about three weeks, thinking that the card-- postcard will reach them. I thought it will last a week, 10 days. I gave myself enough time and went up to Paris with one of the daughters who were living in my friend's house, or renting in my friend's house. Because the-- her father had a mother in Paris that was left, a very old woman. At that time, she was 80 or 82 years old. And he figured that if I have to go and see to get my parents, bring them, why not bring his mother also? Wanted to save as many people as we could. So-- 
INT: Just when was that, when you-- LK: That was in 19-- end of 1941, and 1941, at the autumn, fall of 1941.  INT: And what was-- LK: October, November.  INT: And what was the name of the town in the free zone that you were in? LK: Free zone, we were in a beautiful little town, a charming little town. It's a-- a thermal spa called La Bourboule. It's in the center of France in the Massif Central region mountains. And we were 2,400 feet elevation. And we-- during the winter, of course, it was snowing. We went even a little farther, another 600 to 700 feet to ski on Mont-Dore. And at that time, we were isolated from big cities. And we had a-- people there had pleasant life, because the-- the city was geared for tourists, and especially for-- how can I say-- patients who had to follow a diet and drink the water that was awful. Oh, the water was-- everything was beautiful [INAUDIBLE], but not the water. And people were very friendly. But another thing happened in La Bourboule, that in 1939, the Rothschild family, who had banks in Paris, evacuated all their employees to La Bourboule. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] Because La Bourboule had a lot of hotels and a lot of places that were geared for, if not tourist, mainly for patients. And they had enough room to put everybody. So a lot of employees from the Rothschild Bank, several hundred, were living in the-- in La Bourboule. [PAUSES FOR 5 SECONDS] I-- to come back, we went to Paris. And I have to say one incident. We had the addresses of [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] the smugglers. But we didn't call them smuggler. We call them [? passeurs, ?] the one who pass-- pass-- passes-- you have passage from one place to another, from one zone to another. That was mainly farmers that were living on or nearby the demarcation zone. And they told us they knew when the Germans' patrols were going by, when they had the dogs, and-- or they were spying on them once the-- the soldiers went by. We waited 10, 15 minutes. And then we went by. And that's the way we-- we crossed the line. Of course, we had to pay them for the-- their services. But it was worth it. So once, with this young girl, who I think was older than I was-- but it didn't matter, we were 17, 18 years old at that time-- passed the demarcation zone, the border, we were caught by the Germans, a German patrol. And they said, what are you doing? We made it ourselves that we couldn't understand German.
We didn't know-- French. But one of the Germans spoke a little French, enough to understand. So we explain it to them that we are living nearby in a town here in occupied France and that we were going to visit our grandmother, who lives in the Vichy zone. But we got lost. And we don't know. So we are coming back. We got lost. We don't know where we are. Oh, he said, don't worry about it. Go to the [FRENCH]. That's where the German authorities, military authorities, are there, and ask for a [GERMAN], a [? laissez-passer, ?] a permit to let-- to cross the zone. In other words, if you ask the German permissions, they'll give it to you. Of course, don't tell him you're Jewish. But I said, fine, beautiful. Where is the [FRENCH]? She said, over there. That's not far, a kilometer. You'll find it. So I said, thank you very much in French. They went one way. We went the other way. And we went to the first train station. And we started laughing. We started laughing. I had, at that time, such a nervous laugh that I couldn't-- I started laughing. I couldn't stop. And the-- the-- the-- the trip to Paris lasted, I don't know, four or five hours at that time, roughly. Believe it or not, I left for four and five hours. And the whole compartment in France, the people or the other passengers, were so contagious, they laughed. They didn't know for what they laughed. But they were laughing. And I couldn't stop. And when my-- my friend, my girl-- the girl what I was with-- said, Leon, stop, stop, the more she said stop, the higher I was laughing. And-- and it was a state of [? nervosity. ?] And-- and it happened several times during the war, that I could not master myself or stop laughing in a-- a very tragic situation, was a serious situation. But it was also comical. So finally, we arrive in Paris. And we-- she goes to her grandmother's house. And we decided that in three days, we are going to-- at such and such time, we are going to meet at such and such place, regardless of what it is, and see what's what and-- said, fine. So I go to my parents' place. And I knock at the door. It was a very big gate going out, a wooden gate. So-- and I knock at the door. And nobody answers. Nobody answers. And I didn't want to say, open the door, it's Leon, because I didn't want the neighbors to hear or things like that, and say-- so they knew that I wasn't there.
All of a sudden, I'm here. I mean, it's-- wasn't very kosher. So I remembered that when we were in high school, when one of-- not only one, but any of my boyfriends wanted to visit or wanted us to come down or-- instead of-- we didn't have any telephone. And instead of going up or things like that, they whistled a certain tune. And when you heard the tune, said, yes, I'm coming down, or things like that. You open the window, said, wait a minute. I'll be right down. So I whistled this tune. And I kept on whistling this tune. And after a few minutes, I heard a door open inside the house and come. And finally, I hear my voice-- the-- my father's voice on the other side of the gate. Who is it? I said, it's me. He opens the door right away, lets me in, close the door. He said, what are you doing here? I said, what do you mean, what I'm doing? I wrote you a card that I'll be here such and such date. I'm on time-- never received the card. The next day, the card came. Anyhow, I explained the plan, saying that it's too dangerous for you to stay in Paris. Eventually, they are going to take all the Jews from Paris and everywhere else. Over there, we are relatively safe. I said relatively, because you never knew or things like that. Nevertheless, we're safe. We didn't want to think about anything bad. And I said-- I said, well, it's a very good plan. But I-- and I said, I would like for you to come with me, come back in three, four days. And I explain it to him that I have a friend that-- with the grandmother. And we are going to go back as soon as we are ready. So he said, no, he cannot do it. My father was still doing business. And he said, you are with a friend. It doesn't cost you a penny. It's wonderful. We have to-- we'll have to pay for our food. We'll have to pay for our rent, et cetera, et cetera. He said, I have to realize the stack of merchandise and sell it. And I cannot sell it in one shot, little by little. Because one shot, said, fellow will-- going to understand. He's going to give him $0.10 on the dollar. So he said, it will take a little time. Give me a week, 10 days. I said didn't like it. But I said, fine. PS, the week, 10 days, lasted three weeks. But finally, finally, he-- he sold everything, realized, and made some liquid cash that we needed.
And [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] see, we are almost ready to go. But a few days before going, [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] a friend of theirs, they said, our son came to take us to the Vichy zone, said, oh, he's going to the Vichy zone? Look, I have my son-in-law that escaped from a-- from a prisoner of a camp in Germany. He just arrived in Paris. He was walking for weeks and weeks. I mean, you know-- could you take him with? My father said he doesn't know he can. So when they told me the story, I didn't like it very much, because bad enough to take your parents, but somebody else that I didn't know. Find out. I said, well, I want to meet him and see what's what. He was a young man, older than I was. He was maybe 28-- 28, 29 years old, very good looking. And what I liked about was that he was dressed like a real Frenchman. I mean, it was not a city boy with a tie and-- but kind of like a-- a broker, you know? That-- that time, here, jeans are fashionable-- at that time, say, blue things. And it wasn't. Anyhow, I said, look, we are going to go in such a way. My parents are going to follow me. I don't know them. I got other-- another name. They have another name. I don't know about you. We made up things. We talked over things, how we are going to handle and deal with any situation that we thought will-- might arise, or things like that. But since we had several days yet before we had to leave, I started to look out and stake out the train station. Paris has at least five train station going in different direction. I had to have one-- one station, train station, going southwest. Cause the system in Paris is everything goes through Paris from all direction. And you leave from Paris in all direction. That's the way it goes. So [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] so when I went to stake out and things like that, I saw too many security men, too much police, too many civilian-- civil clothes-- I mean, plainclothes men, and asking papers right and left. Metro even, when you had to transfer from one line to another in the middle of-- I was stopped quite a few times. And in general, it got very, very serious as far as security is concerned. I said, that's no good, because they will give one look at my parents and not have to talk. It's-- it's gone. We-- we are finished before we start. So I devised a plan to leave Paris by different ways.
And though it-- it seems simple now and maybe ingenious at the time, you had to think about it. And somehow, it hit it on the money-- I mean, not only work it out or plan it, but everything should come out right, like in the movies, I mean. [LAUGHS] So I decided to take a local bus and go out from Paris, go to the suburbs, from the suburbs, take another bus that goes from small cities to small cities. And from the small cities, when we will be 100 kilometers of Paris, I figured that the security and the police and whatever it was-- I don't know if it was Gestapo or things like that, but secret police, all kind of stuff-- would-- wouldn't matter. And I was absolutely right. And I want to say one thing, that I was only, like I said, 18 years old. But I was thinking the right way. And-- [LAUGHS] and I was very lucky to-- to-- to think the right way. So I go-- I got in touch with a friend that had to join us, the-- the escaped prisoner of war, was a good friend of my-- a son-in-law of-- of my good friends of my parents, and explained it to him. I said, you have to get dressed in such a way like a French workman with a [FRENCH]. It's a little thing that you've got your lunch and you know? And I'll be-- I'll be-- I'm a youngster. I'm a teenager. So I'm not a big thing. And my parents will just follow and I made up-- and I-- make my parents certain signs that without being close to them or talking to them, things like that, like for instance, give you an example. One of the sign was that if I bend down to attach my shoelaces, regardless if I have to or not, that will be a sign of danger. In other words, they don't know me, and they should go in a different direction. If I do a certain thing, so take off my hat several times or-- it's fine. Everything is all right. Things like that, we had to do it ahead of time, not to be disappointed and sometimes not knowing what will happen. So we tried to-- we tried, of course. But it, like I said, worked out. OK. So we did that. We took the buses. Everything was fine. We took another bus that took us another 50 kilometers or so. And finally, we arrived at a very small, little town that had a train station. And it was already [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] late in the day, about 4 or 5 o'clock.
And it was getting dark already. And at that time, it was the war. And any, not only commercial, but even private residence had to blacken the windows not to let the light escaped outside for the planes to see or anything else. So you had to have very heavy drapes. And commercial thing just blacken their windows with paint or whatever it was. And we came-- oh, I had to coordinate to find out the schedule of the buses and thing like that and catch the certain train at a certain time in the evening. So-- so the police don't like to walk at night during the middle of the night to check papers, I mean, all kind of stuff that, you know, you try to think ahead of time. And it was true-- not always, but it was true. [LAUGHS] And-- and it worked out fine. But we arrived an hour-- at least an hour, if not more, ahead of the scheduled train that came from Paris and stopped. Had a stop-- was a local. Had a stop 50, 60 miles away, or I don't remember how many. And what can you do? Stay on the platform of the-- it's suspicious. I mean, you know, four people. And so we went into the cafe that's-- went into the cafe. And we opened the door. Of course, it's starting to get dark outside. And inside, it's illuminated. And instinctively, when you are inside a place and somebody opens the door, all heads are turning toward you, look who's coming in. That's natural. I opened the door. I was the first one. What do I see? German officers, SR troops, SS troops-- it was very easy to distinguish. The SR wear-- had yellow uniforms. The SS had black uniform. And everybody turns their head and looking at me. I was the first one. Said, what am I going to do? Close the door and not enter? [LAUGHS] too dangerous. So I made the second step and looked at the table. And my friend followed me with-- and my parents followed also and sat at a-- two, three tables far away. And we all got a beer, or wine, or things like that. My parents [INAUDIBLE] offer a coffee or things like that, you know? I mean, normal thing-- elderly people drink coffee. A youngster drink beer or wine. And that's all right. The curiosity they saw was in. And they didn't look at us anymore. But they looked at me. I looked at them, [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] not-- not letting them know that I was scared. And we waited 45 minutes or so when the train arrived. And naturally, they went on the same train, same [LAUGHS] than we were. But I-- we didn't care. We got our tickets. And we went to [FRENCH]. That was the main stop. And then we had to take a-- a local transportation, like a local bus, to go to a far farm. And we went to the-- another farmer from occupied zone, telling them that this one send us to him. And would he be kind enough to let us-- to let us in the zone libre in-- in Vichy, France. So I think we had to sleep over a night in a hotel, because we came very, very late, around 11 or 12 o'clock. And at 5 o'clock in the morning, we had to go. And the hotel at that-- it was a very cold fall, like a very strong winter, was so cold-- no heat. And we were sleeping in our clothes, because we were shivering. 
INT: We'll continue on the next one.  INT: May 7, 1997, interview with Leon Kawer, tape number four. We were talking about your return to free France with your parents. And you mentioned that you had a different name, and they had different names. Did you have false papers at that time? LK: Yes. At that time I had false papers, because somehow it was safer to have French-icized name that will not attract attention than another name, though Kawer might be, if not foreign, abnormal. It's not completely French. And what I said-- foreign-- Jewish. Might not be sound Jewish-- like Abramovich or Goldberg or Isaac or many other things-- why tempt the devil? I mean Mercier is so French that one thing I learned in my, my young life, in these few years-- that the police, especially undercover people, were not gods. They were older than I, older than I was, and certainly more professional than I was, and most of them knew what to do or what not to do as far as their job is concerned, but they were not gods. So they didn't impress me so much, and I wasn't scared of them. And the less attention, and the less you pay attention to them, and the less you answer questions, you were better off.  INT: How did you get the false papers? LK: Well, at that time, at that time, some-- I don't remember what exactly-- [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] like I said, my friend, Pierre, who resided in the town before I came and made friends with the authority, like the Chief of Police and the gendarmerie by being friendly with them and by buying them aperitifs and a glass of wine here and there, every time they meet, that paid off. And when we needed a favor, like having a false identity paper to travel, I went to see the Chief of Police, and we told him that we need for somebody-- of course, he saw the picture, so it was no secret-- but we appeal that his generosity to help any charitable fundraising that he has in mind, and including whatever it was at that time. And he said thank you very much for the charitable organization that he put in his pocket, and that's the way we got the false paper. But that was only false paper. Later on-- and I'll tell you all about it-- I was involved to making true false papers, and I'll explain how things worked it out. Anyhow, like I said before, we, we went over the demarcation line from the occupied zone to the free zone, to the Vichy zone, zone. And like before, this time we were caught by the French authorities.
We were caught by the French army. They were patrolling the border on horses. And they came on us from a band, all of a sudden. It was no way to hide or escape. And we didn't want to escape. We knew we were in free France. And I recognized the uniform of these French soldiers as being the 16th Regiment of Chasseur. That was the regiment of General de Gaulle, who was in London. And General de Gaulle, for quite a few people, were a, was a hero. And when I saw them and recognized their insignia-- because their uniforms and their berets were in such a fashion, in such a way they were-- and number 16, especially-- that I yelled, right away-- oh, the regiment a de Gaulle. So that broke the ice already. So he said, where are you going? So at that time, I explained to the officer in charge that we are coming from the occupied zone, and these are-- I didn't say we are Jewish, but you know, he didn't have much to understand what happened-- that we are taking-- I live in the zone-- I came to pick up my parents who live in Paris for safety reasons, security reasons. And this is a good friend of mine who just escaped a prisoner of war camp in Germany. So of course, naturally, all that appealed to the patriotism of the French, especially when you are a soldier. And just said-- allons, bon, ca va, allez. Fine, as long as they say ca va and allez, I'm very happy, and that was fine. We took the, the next train station, we took the train. We arrived in La Bourboule, and at that time we looked to have an apartment for my parents. And of course, I moved in with them, and life was quite quiet, and under the circumstances, pleasant, because we were not bothered by anybody. And local police didn't have any orders to maltreat us and didn't bother us. At that point, a lot of refugees came from Paris and other big cities to go in a small, little town. And you know, I think there are people hear from one another that La Bourboule is a good place, a nice place. It's civilized, and we had a movie theater, We had a lot of things. And you know, that in many, at our little, little villages, you don't have that, and mainly because they heard that some Jews live there. So you know how things are, I mean, certain things appeal to you. And so now, we are already 1942, in like, Spring and Summer, and I had my, my-- how do you call it-- I wouldn't say gang, but crowd of friends that we played cards with or did so many things.
We are young teenagers-- tried to get-- since I'd mentioned that we had a lot of secretaries from the Rothschild Bank-- young, young, beautiful-- and some are very beautiful girls. And Saturday, Sunday, say, you had to entertain them-- like dancing and things like that. So we gathered some records, we gathered a place. We got, you know, we had a few drinks, and we invited girls to dance with us and have a good time. So at that time, I remember once-- oh, in between, the Jewish community, when the high holidays, organized to have services and things like that-- and one day, not, no, not doing anything, and you didn't have anything to do there, you were making walks or going to the train station to find out who was coming and where and what and when out of curiosity, mainly looking if any good, nice look-- good-looking girls came. And one day, we, I went. Or I think I went with my friend, Michelle, who became my [NON-ENGLISH] to the train station. And we, arriving there, we heard some-- if not yelling, a very high voice, strong voice, raising Cain with somebody. But what intrigued us was that the French spoken was with such a heavy German accent-- I said, who can be so loud and speak with such a German accent and raise Cain against that. So finally, we looked over the-- somewhere in which room, and it was two beautiful, blonde girls, very good looking, raising Cain for one good reasons-- they didn't get their luggage yet. They just arrived a few days, and some of their luggage got lost or whatever. And one of the girls who was Lilli's younger sister was speaking with, like I said, a very pronounced, heavy German accent. And I was a little shocked. But we made a mental notice that these girls have to be entertained eventually. and being us, for the surprise party-- what we called then-- some were Saturday or Sunday after-- Sunday afternoon. And we left. We didn't meet them at that time. But like I mentioned before, we had our Jewish holidays, and we had the-- one apartment in one place-- services with quite a few Jews attended. And I attended, and the girls, if they did not attend the services themselves-- itself, went on the street, wear a dress, like a holiday, and things like that. And you socialized, things like that. But they were far away. We were far away. Nobody introduced us, so we were a little shy. And so one of these days, much later on, maybe a month or so, I'm walking again-- going again to the train station, find out what kind of good things will happen.
And I see one of the girls, Lilli in this matter, going the opposite way on the opposite side of the street. And all of a sudden, diagonally, she starts crossing the street, coming to my direction. So she crosses the street and comes to me, and said, excusez-moi, monsieur, I know you are very serious. In French, serious is mature. I mean, and I would like you to-- invite you to-- I said, anything you say, anything you want, I'll-- I'm ready to-- She said, you don't know what I'm going to ask you. I said, it doesn't matter. For you, I'll do anything. I'll-- I'll-- I'll swim the deepest ocean, I'll climb the highest mountains. But anything you say, you say it, I'll do it. And she said, I want to invite you to, to join a study group. So I figure, that she calls it study group, I call it maybe something else. Why not, she's a beautiful girl. I mean, what can you lose? She said, I would like to have your help. I know that you are here for a long time, and you know quite a few other people. And whom do you think should join us. It's a Zionistic group. We would like to have a study group, and we'd like to have a small circle to get together. And do you think that you can help me with a few other members? So I said-- I promised, oh, yes. And we established in a few days, a few weeks, our study group. We were six boys and six girls-- somewhere about a dozen. Very interesting group, because when we met the first time, we introduced ourselves. We, practically everybody, knew each other, but not-- some not too well. And we, since it was mostly a Zionistic group and Jewish-oriented, we told everybody in our introduction what kind of upbringing we had and what political inclination we have and which way we are looking-- if not the Jewish question, at least the Zionistic question. And like she said, three Jews, four opinions, we were 12 Jews, and we had 13 opinions. But the fact is that we had 12 different political affiliation or different directions-- from left to extreme right. We had one fellow who was a rabbinical student, who went to the rabbinical school in Paris. And he was not good looking, and he was very dull when you were spoke, when he spoke. I mean, it was, everything was a stroke against him, but what when he opened his mouth to tell you something, it was so interesting that everybody really not only listened, but appreciated what he was telling, because he told things that we didn't know.
And so anyhow, at that time, she introduced a stranger in our group who was a little older than we were-- not much, by four or five years, maybe-- we were all in the 19, 20 years [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] range of-- and his name was Jacques Clausner, a very important name that we'll find out later on. And he said he's coming from Holland. And he's here to organize certain study groups, because eventually Europe is going to be, if not closed-- we are, we didn't think that we are going to be massacred. I mean, we are going to survive the war one way or another, but not stay and live in Europe-- that eventually we are going to make our way to Palestine. And his purpose was to encourage everybody to know as much as possible about the history-- Jewish history in general, speaking-- Zionistic history, and everything that comes-- to prepare us to have a better understanding of our future. And his-- naturally, his French was very, very bad. But he spoke well enough to make himself understand. And somehow, later on, much, much later, I found out that the Zionistic movement by itself-- not the Jewish, but the Zionistic movement by itself-- had an underground. And the leaders of the underground were called Chief Executives-- so Executives-- and it was five Executives for the French Legion, mostly Vichy. I learned that much, much later. And Jacques Clausner was one of the five Executive people. And one of the ways-- he used to start slowly with the study group and things like that and eventually do certain things to help the Jewish community and the Jewish population and with whatever we can. And at that time, I remember we were meeting at least once a week, if not twice a week. But in between, like I said, we were very idle. We did not work, and he-- this fellow, Jacques Clausner, taught us how to play bridge. It was very fascinating. And we were beginners, but he taught us, with his broken French, how to play bridge. And at that time, Lilli was one of the few, if not the only one, who had a part-time job. She was a babysitter. I don't know if she told you in that-- in her interview. But she was helping care a Jewish family-- a doctor and his wife with a child, a baby. And she could not attend the bridge lessons. And she wanted to play bridge, too. So as a concession to her and a favor to her, when she was working in the evening-- like, when the parents went to visit friends or went to the movie or things like that-- we went over to keep her company.
And Jacques Clausner will continue teaching all of us, including-- [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] I'm sorry, not all of us-- it was Simonne, Michel, and I, mainly. He taught some others, too. But mainly, but Lilli wanted to be also part of that. And taught us how to play bridge, and well, we caught on quite fast. And one evening she's babysitting-- the little baby is sleeping, and we are all five-- at this Dr. [? Jagodnik's ?] place. And he's explaining how to play bridge-- certain rules and regulations. And it was about 9 o'clock at night, 9:30 or something like that. And we got a knock at the door. Well, even we were in free France, so-called Vichy, France-- 9 o'clock, when you don't expect anybody-- knock at the door, you don't rush to open the door. As a matter of fact, we all froze. And interestingly enough, was that Jacques Clausner, who came from Holland, didn't have any papers. I was, at that time, legally a legal resident or La Bourboule and of Polish nationality. [PAUSES FOR 5 SECONDS] Michel was the only one-- he was not born in France, but he was French, was naturalized. So knocking at the door, and you have to make a decision-- because you knew that he saw some lights, he heard some voices. So it's nothing to deny that we are not there. So I took command, and I said Jacques, you've go in the last bedroom and go under the bed. I'm going to stay at the door between the bedroom and the living room where we were playing cards. Michel, you're the Frenchman, you open the door, because you never know. And the girls. So that was the way it was decided, and all that was decided in less than 15 seconds. And he opened the door, and two people in civilian clothes are opening the door. Dr. [? Jagodnik? ?] He's not here. He looks. Where is he? In the movies-- told her to. What are you doing here-- looking at us. So Lilli said, I'm babysitting to the baby. What else are you doing? They keep me company. I mean, it's only normal, because he saw two young boys and two young girls-- beautiful girls-- and it was the truth, anyhow. So he looked at us, and he said, bon-- very well, don't leave, we'll be back in 10 minutes, and he closes the door. So we had to make a decision again. 10 minutes, I said, he's not going to find us. So I called Jacques, and I said, let's get out of here. We get out of-- let's get out-- where, what, and when, we don't know. But let's get out. They went to [? Jagodnik, ?] and they saw us. And why should we be there? I mean, we, we have nothing to do with the police. So we are going outside. We are-- it's an apartment building. We go outside, we see the whole city was dark-- 9:30 in the evening, illuminated, during the war-- curfew, dark. All the lamps are there. Everything, it was illuminated, the whole city is illuminated-- a little town, but I didn't like it. So when we reached the street, and I saw that, it was a shock. All of a sudden, you see on the left side, some gendarmes-- because you recognized them-- they had rifles on them, and they had helmets-- coming from the left, coming down, because don't forget, it's a, it's a Italy town, it's in the mountains. And some other gendarmes from the right side going up-- we were in the middle. And where do you go? We think that the left is better than the right. I have to explain you one thing-- La Bourboule, on the bottom, at the end in the valley is flat. But as soon as the first street-- it's a mountain surrounding-- the roads are going-- how do you call it? They don't go straight. See-- 
INT: Curvy. LK: You have to go curving all around. And we were, at that time, or Lilli was, babysitting in a place on a hill that the roads were curving. And one road perpendicular to another, or parallel to another, between one road and another, the residents of the town put some stairs. Instead of going to the, all the way to the end of the block or the road and making a turn to, in order to go-- they put stairs in the middle-- in other words, to save time, to save steps. Of course, cars had to go through the road. But people on foot-- I mean, pedestrians could take the stairs, especially going down. So I said, let's go. All of a sudden, decided, and went to the stairs that were not far away. And we went down the stairs, and we were already on another street. It was illuminated, but no gendarmes, no police-- or at least if they were, they were on the corner far away. So where are we? We are on another street all of a sudden. Simonne said, my parents live here. Wait a second. I know that his parents, her parents lived on another street somewhere else on the other side of town. At that time, the Jews started to get smart, because they knew what was going on. So they had two residences-- one legal residence recorded with the police or the gendarmerie that that was their place, and one the residence that was black, or unofficial or illegal, not recorded. Nobody knew. You paid two or three times the amount of rent not for the-- for the owner not to declare, because there are no responsibilities to declare, to record with the police, and have another residence to at least sleep at night, because the danger was at night. So they came at night, you don't have any escape. During the day, you can see from far away. You know what's going on. You can hide. You, you can maybe run away. But during the night, you sleep in your bed, and if they come knocking at the door, it's no escape. [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] So she knocks at the door, and nobody answers, because nobody's supposed to know that is-- so-- mommy, mommy, it's me, Simonne. Finally, so she opens the door-- gevalt, you got three more boys, what's going on? They didn't know what was-- Simonne went to see Lilli. They don't know that three boys are coming-- besides it was not their business, I mean, at all. So she let us in. The-- they see that the street is illuminated, the whole town is illuminated. What's going on? So we explain it to them-- that we were there, taking bridge lessons, the mother shouldn't think that we did anything [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH] bad. And police came, and they said that we shall be back in 10 minutes, to wait for them. Well, we decided not to wait for them, and we are here. And we are going to wait for them to go away. I mean, how long are they going to stay? And so with these two decisions making-- that we are going to leave Dr. [? Jagodnik's ?] place and to make the decision to go right instead of left and take the stairs-- somehow, I mean not, not plan. You couldn't plan in advance, because all these decisions were made in seconds. They were the right decision, the right place. I started laughing once more. And believe it or not, I laughed all night long. And they should, they begged me-- they were all laughing with me. They start-- Leon, stop, don't make so much noise, you'll wake up the neighbors. So people will, will come, saying Leon, you laugh, they'll arrest us. And the more they were talking to me, the more I had this-- this awful, nervous [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] laugh, and I couldn't stop. And I knew it was not-- and I couldn't stop. And the more they were begging me, the more they were asking-- enough, it's enough-- I start. And when I calmed down, I gave a look at them. As they gave a look at me, I start. All night long, I am. So we are hiding, and we spend the night laughing at Lilli's and Simonne's parents illegal second domicile residence. 
INT: We'll continue on the next tape.  INT: May 7, 1997. Interview with Leon Kawer, tape number 5. We were talking about the night in Lilli's parents' secret home in La Bourboule. Did you leave La Bourboule after that? LK: Well, not quite. I have to give you a little anecdote in there. We spent the night. And of course, my parents and Michel's parents didn't know where we were. They knew that we left the previous evening. Where and what, maybe or maybe not. But that was not unusual, because youngsters stay with youngster. So finally, word-- got word that we were with the Golds and that police were still there. We learned that later that 150 gendarmes and plainclothesmen were in town. Now, we don't know it was French police or Gestapo. The plainclothesmen were Gestapo or-- but 150 for our little town that has three gendarmes and one police officer, you know, it's quite something. They we're looking. They we're going practically from house to house to get the Jews. In other words, there were houses that they were-- [INAUDIBLE] officially in the regular-- regular regiments. And we were hiding, because nobody knew about it. And since my mother didn't want to impose on Lilli's mothers, and Mrs. [NON-ENGLISH], that the mother of Michel, didn't want to impose too much on the-- so they sent something to eat for us. So everybody's saying-- they're called a lokshen kugel. And for five days or four days that we were hidden, because the police stayed there for three, four days in town somehow, we were eating lokshen kugel. Also, one incident-- I mean to tell you that things are not as bad as you thought during the Holocaust. But, finally, after four or five days, [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] we heard or we were let know that the police is gone, and only the local is there. And it's quiet again. But not knowing when they are going to come back and not knowing if they left two or three-- excuse me-- plainclothesmen, you know, to-- you know. So I was very cautious. Excuse me. And said, ach, can we leave town? I'm afraid, because La Bourboule was situated in a-- in a-- in a-- in a-- I mean, 800 meter, 2,400 feet in the mountains. But the train is a small little train going only two stations. And you had to transfer and get on the main line. It was on a sideline, going to two stations, La Bourboule and Mont-Dore. And if it will be safe to change at this-- you know, it was only about 6 mile, 10 kilometers. It will be safe that police is not going to wait for us and-- you know.
So we didn't know what to do. So I decided to go to the gendarme over here and ask them if it's safe to leave town, if police is still checking and what. And I told my friend Michel. I said, I'm going to go to the gendarmerie. In the afternoon, the gendarmes, there are four gendarmes. One stays always home to answer the phone and do some bureaucratic thing, I mean paperwork. Three are on-- in patrol with their bicycle. That's the way the French gendarmerie operates. And most of the times they are in pair or sometimes by themselves they go. Like here, the squad cars, they go by bicycle and go a-- they go a certain mileage or whatever. And then they come back. So I said, I'm going to go in, and I don't know who it is. But I know them all, so I'm going to ask them if something-- if I'm on the list that they have to arrest me or if they have orders to arrest me, it's very simple. The officers are on the left. On the right side is the-- the jails-- the-- what do you call it-- the rooms that they incarcerate the prisoners, holding cell. Holding cell is not locked with a key. But it's locked with a latch, outside latch. In other words, they put somebody disorderly conduct or a drunk or whoever it is they have to hold for a few hours, so-- or give to other authorities, you know, they put the latch on and that's all. And half of the time it was summertime or it was warm already, late spring, the gendarme is in the office, falls asleep. I mean, you know, he doesn't-- I said, I'm going to go in ask him. If in 10 minutes, you don't see me, go in very, very carefully, and go on the right-hand side. And any door that is locked with a latch, open. I'll go out and we'll run away. So he said, bon, I'll do that. And Michel, eh. So I went in, talked to the gendarme. Hi. How are you doing? What happened? So much police, and et cetera. And so we made some small talk. I said, how's-- how's it looking now? Are they still around? Are they still looking for-- He said, no, they are gone. I said, are sure that we-- I would like to go out of town. And I don't know if I can go and make a transfer to take my connection. Oh, he said, you can go. Nobody's over there. And they knew. So I said, well, thank you very much. Was nice talking to you. And I walked out in-- within three, four minutes.
And Michel saw me there coming out. And I said, fine, the coast is clear and fine. At that time, Jacques Clausner still was with us. And when we left the family, the Gold family because it was no danger, I took him to my room with my parents. In other words, my parents had a small apartment. But they had a little room across the-- the hall. And he slept with me, because he was afraid. I mean, he didn't have any papers. I said, you stay with me. So at that time, he said, well, we have to leave. You cannot stay here. It's no future. It's too dangerous. Police came. Who knows when they are going to come the next time? And you know, police is like anybody else. They're stupid, stupid, stupid. But they get the experience and they get smart. I mean, you know, you learn by experience. So he said, you'll have reach the Italian zone of occupation. And he gave me a name and an address in Grenoble that was in Savoie and Italian zone of occupation. And we had to reach La Savoie, in other words, go through the Vichy, France and make connection with the train that goes in-- So when we told that to our parents that we have to leave, it's too dangerous, Michel said, I don't leave if Simonne doesn't come with me, because at that time he fell in love with her. And he said, unbudging, he said-- so how can you-- a 18-year-old boy and a 17-year-old girl leave-- go away in the world, not only in the world, but not being concerned with you. You cannot do that. I mean, after all, decent people, nice family. So after begging and imploring Mama Gold. And Mama [NON-ENGLISH] begged Mama Gold, please, let your daughter go. I mean, sake of my son and after all. So we decided that the boys are going to go first. And somehow, we could communicate-- I-- yeah, we could communicate between the Italian zone and Vichy. And when it's all right, that it can-- we'll let go both girls, that Lilli's going to accompany, so it'll be a chaperone. And I mean, half a loaf is better than nothing. [LAUGHS] So we decided. We agreed. Michel went with us, and we successfully crossed to the Italian zone. And when-- in the train, when we saw the Italian soldiers, I wanted to kiss him, because it was such a contrast between these arrogant German soldiers, their attitude, the ways they were talking even. You know, the German have a very guttural accent or voice or whatever it is. The Italian are easygoing. They talk like Frenchmen, so, so Latinos-- I mean, Latin.
And it was something that we missed, because it was closer to our affinity, to our culture than the other one who were the real enemy. We didn't care about the Italian being our enemy. We didn't count them as enemies. We came to Grenoble. And the first thing I did-- the journey lasted a long, long time, a day and a half or two days. Course we-- first thing we did was to go to barber shop, have a hair cut and a shampoo and a wash and a shave to refresh ourselves. [LAUGHS] Then we asked where the public baths are, of course. And finally, we asked direction for such and such street and we went-- I went by myself to see a certain person that Jacques Clausner gave me the address. It happened to be a lawyer. So I was introduced to his-- in his cabinet, in his office and came and never saw him in my life. And I introduced myself, say, I'm coming from La Bourboule, and Jacques Clausner gave me your name. And I explained to him what happened, the city, that the-- the whole city was occupied by 150 policemens who are looking from door to door. We escaped. And he-- he sent us over here. We don't know. We, we came, period, not knowing anything. Ah. He said, would you mind repeating that to another person? And he-- from another room he-- he called in somebody else, who was much younger than he was, but much older than I was. And he introduced me Simon Levitte. Simon Levitte was the chief of the Israeli-- Israelite Boy Scouts in France. And later on, also later on, we learned that he was one of the five executives in the underground, in the Zionistic underground. And he was in the-- the chief, the head of the Boy Scouts. And believe me, they did a terrific job. The Boy Scouts and-- and the Girl Scout, what they did during the war that we learned later, because we didn't know at that time. It's always you learn later or during or rumors or stories. But you cannot check it out because you don't know if it's true or not. But you want to believe, because makes you feel good. They did remarkable things, youngsters from under 20 years, somewhere-- the elder, the chief-- I mean, the-- were over it. But still youngster, what they did, what kind of courage, what, what work for the Jewish community. And all that, I learned it much, much later. So Simon Levitte starts to ask me question. And somehow, his questions were in such a way that I felt something-- if not fishy, something out of the ordinary.
And I sensed something. I said, look, Jacques Clausner told us to come over here and things like that. I don't know for what purpose. But if I can be of any service, I'm most willing to do anything. He said, you are? So he asked me another few questions, things like that. He said, I want you to do me a favor. I said-- we were in Grenoble. I said, can you go to Chambery, that it's maybe 30, 40 kilometers or miles, I don't know, from Grenoble-- miles, and deliver a letter to somebody? He said, of course, I-- why not? I mean, what's the big deal? It cost $3.50 to go to Chambery. And I'll do it. Anything to help out. So he said, wait a second. Give me a letter. And he doesn't-- how do you call it?-- seal it. He just put the, the thing in there and he gives it to me, a long envelope. I said, fine. When should I-- he said, the first train. And give her the letter. You can come right back. He gave me the letter. I go to Chambery. And I go to the address. And the address is organization of the Jewish General-- UGIF, Union Generale des Israelites de France. In other word, it was-- was the Jewish community officially that were-- that was working with-- officially with the authorities, whoever they were, Vichy or whoever would want-- that was the official-- [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] I don't know what to say. But that people, I mean, on a higher level of government, things like that, they're working with them. And was a lot of-- a lot of offices there and a lot of typing machine. And I asked for-- I don't remember her first name, but last name is [? Metzger. ?] And I was introduced-- I mean, showed to her-- her office. And she was the head of the Girl Scouts, Israeli Girl Scout in France. And I told them I have a letter for her from Simon Levitte. And I gave her the letter. And not knowing what's what, she looked at the letter. She looked at me. She looked at the letter. And I think-- I don't know. I couldn't see anything that was written. And I thought that they were testing me. It's very easy. In a thing like that, you take a hair from your head and put it in there. If you open and want to find out what's what, the hair will fall out and you'll find out. So it was a signal with them, I thought. I mean, it's just wishful thinking or at least speculation. I don't know.
But I am certain that nothing was written in the letter. And she said, very good, very well. OK. I said, OK what? Don't you have an answer? And she says, no. So I said, well, I-- he told me to come take the next train and go back to Grenoble. Was what, 45 minutes, all? So I did that. And I came back. And I came to see him. But this time, he was in another building. He was not in-- at the lawyer's office. And it was a official building. I don't remember what it was. But among this official office and things like that, a few rooms were off-limit to anybody. But Simon Levitte was there. And I saw other people that I knew. Later on I learned their identity and things like that. And I said, yes, you know. And [INAUDIBLE]. He said, very good, very well. How would you like to go and work in-- you don't have to stay in Grenoble. I said, I don't care where I stay. Would you like to work in Chambery? Chambery-- and he gave me two names to see, see her, and it was another name. And I said, certainly. So I talk to Michel. We are going to Chambery. Going to Chambery, and I had to go and see a certain Toto. Toto, Toto is a surname of somebody like Dede, Toto, I mean-- So finally, 'til I reach Toto, it was some doing. But I got a hold of him. I said, Simon, Simon Levitte told me to here. I explain it to him and he listens to me and things like that. And he said, yes. And he was a third executive. I think he was-- I don't remember, he or not. Or maybe not. I don't-- Anyhow, he was a-- he was the head of what we called Physical Education. That was the codeword, the name [NON-ENGLISH] of false paper operation. But it was not false paper, because at that time in-- it was 1943 already, the French officials, the French authorities, the French police, and the German police learned from their mistakes. It's not because you are going to be called Mr. Smith or Mr. Dupont that you are French. We want to find out if you are recorded from where you were born, what kind of background you have, not only a piece of identity that anybody can forge. And a lot were forged. A lot were forged, thank god. But other substantial documents, like food stamps you had to have. You had to have stamps for, for the clothes. You had to have stamps for shoes, all these things. And all these things they give you if you do have the proper identification to begin with.
So it was a little more difficult and a more-- more sophisticated. But since the police learned of all the tricks-- because most of the time, you would write down that you were born in a little place like in northern France, where it was bombed by the German in the war and the whole village or city was destroyed or didn't have any records left in the city hall, things like that. Sometimes you got away with it. And sometimes you didn't get away with it. At least it was-- this time, we wanted to make some real false paper, genuine recorded, not falsified. What happened? And he explained-- he explained me the scheme. You are going to go for the small villages, very small village. Small village have a city hall. In France, the small village has a church or more, but at least one, because they don't need two, and a city hall. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] In order to find out if the mayor is sympathetic with the resistance or the-- not a collaborator, not pro-Vichy or pro-German, you cannot go to the mayor to ask him, what's your political conviction. You go to the priest. Go to the priest and you say, Father, you are doing a certain things that has to be secret, like if you would be in confession. You want to ask, you are working for-- to save Jews-- don't tell him you're Jewish-- save Jews. And you want to find out if the mayor is sympathetic, if he'll be able to make some false real identification pieces. I got the pictures. The only thing to put down and to put the stamp half on the picture and half on the identity card so you should be same. So that was my job. And he told me, well, the priest sometimes said, oh no, no, my son. No, no. No, he's-- he's pro-Vichy. He's-- he's a collaborator. Get-- I took the next train, went to the next village. Then sometimes, that the-- the priest will tell him, oh, yes. He's a very nice fellow. He'll do it. Some-- one fellow told me, you tell him to do it. Tell him I said so. The priest told me to tell him. And priests and mayors are antagonist in France, because one is religious and one is secular. So it was a funny situation. And you were in the middle, so you didn't know. So I did this business for quite some times. And I was moderately successful. I say moderately because you couldn't win all the time. I mean, some people were sympathetic, but they were afraid. They were scared. I mean, I couldn't blame them.
It was dangerous. A thing like that, if-- maybe not the French authorities, but if the German had a hold on that, they'd put you against the wall and shoot you. Then they ask questions. I mean, that was-- it was too dangerous for anybody. And not everybody had the guts. But some people had the guts to say, anything we can do against the German, not so much for saving Jews, because some people didn't even know what a Jew was. And you'll be surprised that I went in certain little cities in North Savoie that are just at the border of Italy in the-- in the-- in the mountains of the Alps and saw in the little streets named like Samuel, Jacobs, thing like that. They were Christians. They were Gentiles. And these names are coming from the Middle Ages, that people were-- and of course, they didn't have to convert. They assimilated. But then they kept their names. And in France, it's very common to have your family name on top of your business. And many of those, not only in one but several villages, like I was astonished. And many times, I-- that city was or that little village-- well, it was a little town was a little bigger, and I had to go to make some research and all kind of stuff. I did-- my parents' false paper was very difficult to-- I want to make it real. I had to look up for a certain age range. I wanted to look up that they shouldn't be French-born but naturalized. I chose Belgium, because Flemish don't speak too well French. I was very successful. I could find. But it took me days and days and days to find the right name and person. Actually, these people exist. I just borrowed their names to make-- And after staying three or four days in the-- in the same city all to make research, because they had official book of the-- all the laws that passes in the French Assembly in the Parliament-- official [FRENCH]. One fellow-- they all were suspicious. But the first days he didn't say anything. Second day, they didn't there. But third day, they-- finally they came and they had enough courage to come, what are you doing here? What are you-- So I said, I'm a student in University of Grenoble and I'm looking-- I have exams to pass. I have to-- to-- I don't remember what, finals or whatever. And I have to look up certain laws that are pertaining to my-- Ah, bon. Very good. I gave him a satisfactory answer. So it was fine and things like that. And I copied every-- how do you call it?-- names and address and all relevant information and data, and got my parents' pictures and went in a certain little village that the-- the mayor was sympathetic, then made the-- made the pictures for Michel and Simonne and Lilli and people that I never met and I never knew.
So that was [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] my life for a certain time. The only itch was that I disburse myself for the expensive, like train tickets and eating in restaurants. That's all, eating, hotels. I had to sleep over. Well, how much money do you have on you? 2,000 francs, that was a phenomenal sum at that time. And once you spend it, you don't have anything. So the people were not-- the organization were not very prone to reimburse me, though I said I need money. I need money. And I had to go to my father, said I had to borrow some money 'til I get reimbursed. Finally, went back to the UGIF in Chambery. And at that time, we had a also a very good friend who used to be in La Bourboule and came and was a big, big [NON-ENGLISH] or whatever it is, she-- a woman in the Jewish community. And once the big shots or the big, big were in session or at their meeting, she called me in and she said, this man is doing such and such a job. He disburse his own money for expenses. You should be ashamed of yourself. Not only that, he risk his life, et cetera, et cetera. But there-- he, he doesn't have any more money. He had to go and borrow from his father. He cannot-- he has to stop doing what he is doing. He's saving lives. So see. I don't know how reluctant they were, but they gave me the money, thing like that. I didn't have any problems at that time. Every month or so I had my few thousand francs or whatever. I had to do that. So that went 'til the-- [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] I would say, the High Holy Days in 1943, roughly. At that time, my parents were in-- also in Brides-les-Bains, also a terminal station in the Italian zone, in the Alps, where, near Albertville. A few years ago, they had the Olympics in there. That's where they were. And I figure that a good son, a good Jew that I always was, I'll go and visit with them for the High Holidays. And I came for Rosh Hashanah, on, of course, my false identity, because my regular identity, I didn't want to have it anymore. And somehow, they had an apartment and they had a little room. They had a cot in there. It was more a closet than a room, but enough for me to sleep over. And of course, Mother's cooking was most welcome. Eating in restaurants during the war, believe me, it was-- that was-- that was for the birds, because so much they gave you. I came over there. And I met the few Jews that were over there. And I said, look. You are like in a cul-de-sac, a 'cull-de-sack.' The train didn't go anymore. It couldn't go. It was the mountains. And it was the same-- almost the same thing that La Bourboule, from Albertville-- Albertville they could go only to two stations, to Brides-les-Bains, because it was the mountains. And I spent Rosh Hashanah with my parents and said-- well, since I was my own boss, said I'm going to wait 'til after Yom Kippur. And then I have an interesting story to tell you. 
INT: We'll do that on the next tape.  INT: May 7, 1997, interview with Leon Kawer, tape number six. We were talking about the high holidays in 1943. Before we go into that story, could you tell me something about the relationship that the Italian authorities in the-- in the Italian occupied zone had with the Jews? What-- what was that like? LK: Personally, I didn't bother them, and they didn't bother me. Italian authorities didn't persecute the Jews. Italian authorities were occupying all the Alps to the Mediterranean Tunis, all the section from Switzerland from Lake Geneva, all the Alps and Alps are going up to the Mediterranean. And though I was only in Grenoble and Chambery in their occupation zone, we heard some stories or rumors that certain pressures of the French authorities, because of the German pressure on the French authorities, against the Jews to do certain things, to gather them, to intern them, to deliver them, to do certain things. The Italian authorities would it be military, or administrative, civilian, refused to do it. And in many instances, when French authorities did certain things, they came and [INAUDIBLE] all that all [INAUDIBLE]. Now, like I said, it never happened to me. And these are only-- they are not facts that I could verify. It was told to me. It was-- rumors were flying all during the [INAUDIBLE]. Interesting and curiously enough, most of the rumors after the war, when you look back like a Monday morning quarterback, were true, most. I wouldn't say all. It's impossible. So [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] at that time, I wasn't surprised. Because the Italian per se, the type of individual that he is, is a contrast with the German. You have certain types that are very, very easygoing, the Italian. And you are a type, the German, were so hard and rigid and so indoctrinated in such a way that any one who has one simple rank above them, they'll click their heels and pay to attention like you would have been, if not God, at least somebody that is nothing, is not much. [PAUSES FOR 5 SECONDS] So with my French background or upbringing-- because don't forget, I mean, Polish upbringing lasted with me mostly religiously about Jewish education, things like that. Polish influence, didn't have any Polish influence much. I know about it. But French influence, yes. Because I was living in-- in teenage years and things like that-- was easygoing Mediterranean style, Italian style, not like-- so anything that was too rigid or too authoritarian, things like that, I was against it right away. It's in my nature. So with the Italian, I felt very comfortable. As a matter of fact, I bum cigarettes from them.
They was-- the-- the-- the cigarettes, the-- the German cigarettes that we could get, I mean-- because they were selling German cigarettes in the French stores-- were [INAUDIBLE]. They were a little bit of tobacco and whatever they had. It was no good. Italian cigarette, like with the French one, it was tobacco. You smoke that, you-- [LAUGHS] it's like having [INAUDIBLE] gefilte fish. I mean, you know? It gets to you. But beside that, they were very simpatico generally speaking. It was no antagonism between the Italian occupation soldiers and the general French population, Jews included. But the Jews didn't play such a big role, only when pertinent to your question that-- they-- the little that I know they intervened to counter all that certain French actions or Germany later on, because German occupied. It's-- like I said, I mean, it's a-- you have a certain type of people that will act a certain way. Not that it's no SOB with the Italian. Everywhere you have some. But generally speaking, we didn't find it. We were very, very comfortable with them. In other words, we felt safe. So we were comfortable. So to come back to Brides-les-Bains, Rosh Hasbanah passed. And I enjoyed a visit with my parents that I couldn't see very often and especially my mother's cooking. And [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] the day before Yom Kippur, the day, the morning before Kol Nidre, I was still sleeping. And I hear a knock at the door in my cubicle, in my little closet, and-- early in the morning. I don't remember, 8 o'clock or whatever. And my father opens the door. And I hear voices speaking in German. And my father answers in German. He knew German. He-- and I couldn't believe. I said, who's speaking German and things like that? And I sense something, because one part of the voices were very guttural, very authoritarian, very sure of themself. And my father-- [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] I wouldn't say implored them, but was in a-- in a-- milder tone of voice. So finally, I could tune in and understand a little bit. And they said that you have 24 hours to leave town. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] So my father humbly said, it's impossible. He said, what do you mean impossible? He said, it's a Holy Day. It's Yom Kippur. We have to pray. We have to be in the synagogue tomorrow all day. Ach, that's baloney, I hear. [GERMAN]. Translation-- the good Lord died a long time ago. You don't have to pray. You have 24 hours to leave town. Silence. I'm in my little cubicle. If I would have had a gun on me, I would have taken out-- I would have opened the door.
And at that time, I understood who it was. And I would have killed them. I don't know what I would have accomplished, but-- [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] [? see-- ?] silence. I opened the door. What happened? Two of German officers in uniform-- and I asked my father to describe the signs. And he told me so. One was [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] a captain, and one was a colonel, I think, with the signs that-- because we knew. I said, what's going on? Why you? Why here? I mean, and my parents lived way up the street. [INAUDIBLE] other people before. I couldn't understand. But in these instances, in these days, you did not want to understand anything too deeply. You were facing facts. And when you were facing facts, you had to attend to it. In other words, you had to adjust and act upon that, whatever the facts were. Here, it's a cul-de-sac. The train is not going, only two trains a day in morning and afternoon. You are practically isolated. The only way is Italy proper. And you have to climb the Alps to go on the other side. And we were, [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] I cannot say exactly, but by 80 to 100 Jews there in this little town. [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] I took it very seriously. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] And I started to tell the people I know what happened. And, of course, nobody wanted to believe. Why your father? Why your place? What do you mean 24 hours? We didn't have any official thing. I said, what do you think? They're going to write you a letter [NON-ENGLISH]? [NON-ENGLISH] is official-- [NON-ENGLISH] is when you write a letter that it's-- she knows. In the post office, you write. It's registered, registered, registered letter. I said, they're not going to. That's what happened. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] I said, I'm going to call Chambery and see what we can do. I called Chambery in the morning. I explain it to them. They said we are going to send somebody with some false card of identities, blanks. You need photos. We are going to send you stamps. And you have to fill it in. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] At that time, it was no question of real false paper. You had to have papers saying that my name is Du Bois, not Goldberg. My name is Dupont. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] I mean French names. And we didn't care about authenticity or real or not. It was a question of timing. By the time they send the man, by the time not only did they send the man, by the time the train was coming when he could come, it was already 5:00 or 5:30 in the evening.
We got in touch. He bought it to me. He was-- I remember a-- a rucksack, you know? And he had plenty of other thing, was filled up with blank identity card. And people were ready to go to Kol Nidre. It was getting time. Well, not everybody went to Kol Nidre with this kind of news. Because at that time, I let know everyone. We were organized. In a week or 10 days that I was there, I-- I organized the youth saying, look, I don't like to be completely isolated. It's a danger. They can come any time, and we are going to be taken. We are going to establish a two-hour vigil during the night to find out during the night when-- see, the road comes and, if you'll see some light, a car, to run to go to one-- one house to another to be on alert, to wake them up, to-- to-- to run in the mountains. Because we never knew it was going to come. And unfortunately, it came the last day or the day before Yom Kippur. And I told them. I said, anybody who wants false paper to have identity photos. And we'll do it. Well, to tell you a long story short, we started say Kol Nidre. At that time, the one who officiated was a [NON-ENGLISH], an old man that both of his son became [NON-ENGLISH] in France, in Paris, after they survived. He survived, too. And in my young age, in my young life, I went to quite a few Kol Nidres evening. And I know that the [NON-ENGLISH] is like a lamentation, a supplication. You start very slowly. And you go crescendo, higher and higher. The third time, it's higher. [PAUSES FOR 6 SECONDS] This man couldn't-- couldn't pronounce the first word. It stuck in his throat. It took so long to utter the word, to bring out the word from-- to his lips. It was so moving. Everybody-- and I'm saying everybody, men, not many women-- cried like little babies. [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] We had our-- our Kol Nidre service. We had our evening service. It was already 9:30 or 10 o'clock that evening. At that time, I said, I'm going to start. Because tomorrow morning, 8 o'clock, I want [INAUDIBLE] whatever the first train come. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] PS, I worked all night long making false paper with anybody who supplied me with the photos. And some people were caught, because they couldn't speak too well French, or the physiognomy was too pronounced Jewish, or they didn't answer the questions by the German, you know. Oh, the next stop from the train was the [NON-ENGLISH], the German [NON-ENGLISH], the military administrative point or whatever it is.
So they check the trains. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] And the only thing I did-- I didn't eat. I didn't drink. I was a smoker at that time. I smoked all night long. I was so nervous. But I didn't laugh, so that's some improvement. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] And I made false identity cards till early in the morning, 4:00 or 5 o'clock, I don't remember. And I told everybody good luck. And my parents, I didn't let them go with the train. It was too dangerous. I called a taxi. I called an ambulance and paid a fortune-- it didn't matter-- to take them to so-called hospital in Albertville, in the big city. It was 40, 50 miles away. And I said, I'm not going to take the first train, because skeptical. I was very cautious, you know. 18, 19 years old, but I was so cautious. I'm surprised myself thinking about it how-- how-- how cautious I was. I said, I'll take the train in the afternoon. [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] And that's the way it was. A lot of people went. And I heard already that certain people were arrested at the next station. And very few people took the afternoon train. Everybody was afraid and left or [INAUDIBLE] left. A lot of them escaped. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] Maybe because the train didn't stop so long as they didn't have a chance to check every identity card. Or maybe certain identity cards they said, [NON-ENGLISH]. I mean, you know? [? In ?] [? certain, ?] they didn't. I mean, that, look, the odds are not always in your favor. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] PS, I take the train around 4 o'clock or so on the afternoon train. I go to Albertville. And I expect to have my parents waiting for me at the train station or nearby or things like that. I go out from train, and I see my mother. So I go and look and see what's what. I smell nobody around there or things like that. And I say, [INAUDIBLE]. I go, where is Father? She said, Father? Father, when he got out the train, he went to the first policeman and asked where the synagogue is. He's praying in Albertville. I said, that's my father. So she said, I'll take you there. By the time I came, I came for Neilah. That's the last prayer on Yom Kippur. And of course, everybody-- 20 people maybe-- was very happy to see me. Because they knew already that I was left behind and not knowing if anybody will-- if I'll escape. You didn't know. And one family, a Hungarian family, took us in not knowing us.
You should see the quarters. You should see. I mean, I don't want to say anything bad. But it was to say elementary, it's an understatement. I mean, they were a large family, somewhere, I don't know, six, seven or eight people in one room and a kitchen. And they took up my parents and me. Imagine. Because you cannot leave somebody in the street. [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] We spent the night, took the train from Albertville to Lyon. I had an aunt in Lyon that's a famous-- that's-- famous, not famous. She was the wife of my father's brother who was partner with [NON-ENGLISH] who we came to see in Paris. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] He was taken by the French authorities, by the French police, never came back. [PAUSES FOR 6 SECONDS] They were living outside [NON-ENGLISH] in the suburbs. And I was with them for a little while, a few weeks when I traveled or ran away or in between places. And all of a sudden, knock at their door. Who is that? It's Leon. And Leon comes with his parents. What are you doing here? I said, we came here to spend the night. We have to go south or west or whatever it is. We don't have any correspondence. And we [INAUDIBLE]. You cannot stay here. I said, oh yes, we can. We are staying. She didn't want to let us in. She was afraid, I mean, things like that. But I put my foot down. And I was a smart aleck of 18 years old and things like that. And I said, yes. We are staying here. And she-- she knew that I meant it. So we spent the night [LAUGHS] in Lyon safely. And then we had to go to the train station. That's also, [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] well, I wouldn't say interesting story. But it was very difficult. It's like leaving Paris and-- with all the-- the security and all the things like that in a big city. It's the second biggest city in-- in France. In other words, you were walking on eggs very, very, very carefully. And somehow, I don't remember, I think my friend-- my parents said-- I don't remember if they had-- yeah, I think they had-- no. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] Yeah. They had the French, the false paper, in other words. And we went to [NON-ENGLISH], because a friend of my father sent his wife over there not only because it was a hamlet and no police for 20 miles around, but because it was farm land. And he was in the south of France in Perpignan under German occupation. And she sent them eggs from the-- that he sold in the black market.
And he could-- she's bought a egg for $0.05, and he sold it for $1. I mean, it was good profit. So he-- so he, they got in touch somehow, corresponding. I don't know exactly. It's too long to remember. But he said, why don't you join my wife in case of things like that? It's all right. He knows the mayor. It's fine. And he's going to close the eyes, and he won't say anything. So I said, fine. I mean, you know, when you're down, you-- you grab at a piece of nothing you have, you know, straw or whatever. So we spend the night in Lyon. And the next day somehow, miraculously-- I did not know the region of Lyon as well as I knew the region of Paris, knowing which bus goes here and there and get another and things like that. I took my chances, sometimes you had to, and went in a certain time-- I don't remember when-- finding out when the train is leaving for a certain direction where we wanted to go. And-- or somehow I think we took a local somewhere, stopped, and then take the other-- the next train that goes farther. In other words, so people will not be suspicious that we are running away from Lyon. Somehow, my intuition saw all my thing were, knock on wood, the right ones. And I put my parents there. They rented a house. [LAUGHS] The peasants, the farmers, were very happy to get some income. My father ate chicken that he killed himself. He learned himself how to shave it with a [NON-ENGLISH], with a [NON-ENGLISH]. [LAUGHS]. Because that's the only meat he would eat. I left them and continued back to the Italian zone to finish my business. Oh, in between, we were in [FRENCH], things like that. I'll skip that. Somehow we left. They arrested everybody there. Lucky, we were to another [INAUDIBLE] in south of France with the [FRENCH] with Simonne, Michel, and Lilli. I stayed only two, three days and left again. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] It was continuous movement, continuous thing. You couldn't stay too long in one place. What was safe last week wasn't safe now. What was safe now was not safe an hour later. You did not know ahead of time. Things were getting hectic. And finally, somehow, you had to run for your life. And that didn't take a day or two. It takes weeks and-- and months. So finally, I decided to join if not my parents [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] nearby, I said I'm going to go to a farm. Ask the farmer if he needed a helping hand for nothing, just room and board, even sleeping in the barn or anywhere.
And in between, Lilli had false papers. And her parents were in a place that couldn't accommodate her, because of many things. So I send her to my parents, saying that even with different names-- [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] taking a big chance, but knowing that it's no police authority, and the authority of the mayor things like that, didn't come for much. Because he wouldn't say anything-- if he would say, I mean-- saying that that's their daughter. And I went by four miles away in another farm, another hamlet. And the people were elderly people and were very pleased for me to-- with my offer to work for them or help them out and be with them, too. Because it was getting a little tiresome for them. And at that time, I found out that nearby in another hamlet, so in the woods, it was the Maquis, the French resistance. But I found out that they were communistic oriented. But I didn't mind. We were fighting the same enemy. And somehow, after a certain time, that it was no more suspicion between us, especially between them and me. Because I knew where-- who they were in a short time. But they never knew who I was. Got connected with them. And I mentioned that at that time an American captain, a parachutist, came down and was a liaison. I don't know with what. He couldn't speak French. I couldn't speak English. So I don't know what the liaison was. Fact is that we had orders. They had a shortwave orders and signals [INAUDIBLE] they had told us from London at that time. And we had orders to go and liberate Limoges-- no, Guéret. Anyhow, it doesn't make any-- Guéret, I think. Anyhow, I went with them. I said, I'm with you. I mean, I didn't have anything else to do. The farmer can do without me. [LAUGHS] I mean, [INAUDIBLE]. And I went with them. And interestingly enough, when we reached the main highway, we saw some debris on the road from the German army that had things broken or-- or-- or burnt or-- or that they abandoned. And we learned later on-- we learned later on, if not after the war, way after the liberation, that the German convoy that was going up north and that, we were tailing and that other partisans or-- or underground fighters were harassing them. And they were harassing the tail end of the convoy, because they didn't have the-- the strength to-- were the second SS Panzer division that came from the Atlantic wall from the Pyrenees to help out the German army in Normandy. And I'm glad to say that they never reached the Normandy front as a entire division. They were so weakened and so harassed and so mauled by the French underground and Maquis that they never, never were able to fight. And I don't know what happened. But this is also a small accomplishment that I was-- I mean, you know, [LAUGHS] that I witnessed. 
INT: We'll continue on the next one.  INT: May 7, 1997, interview with Leon Kawer, tape number seven. We were talking about your experience with the Maquis. Before we talk about that, the physical education group that you were involved with, could you describe that a little, its structure and composition? LK: Well, curiously, you didn't know much. I knew my immediate superior Toto. That was his nickname. That was his name that stood with him. I learned his last name, Giniewski, later on. I-- [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] also his younger brother, Paul, was in the same department, if I may say so, with a false paper. And he gave me a few leads, and, in many instances, [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] gave me some pointers, leads, in places that he went and things like that. So that was some help. And the less you knew [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] about anything else, the better you were off. Because we were-- should I say-- smart enough to know that the more information we have, the more names we have, the more things we know, if we are caught, we are going to spill the beans. Because there is no such thing that a youngster from 18 or 19 olds-- years old is going to keep his mouth shut under torture. And even older people cannot. It's-- it's impossible. So if you have nothing to say, if you don't know anything, you have nothing to say. It was very simple. I learned while in Grenoble, in Chambery, in our groups, and when we had so-called meetings or-- well, it was not meetings, actually. It was gathering on a Sunday to go out to sing Hebrew songs or to listen to certain important, if not-- not important, excuse me, people who had something to say that was very pertinent. We had other groups. And then we learned that one fellow was a rabbi, Rabbi [? Rene ?] [? Koppel, ?] was one of the executives in the-- in the Zionist underground movement. And this rabbi, after the war, he survived, married us. We insisted that he should marry. And in France, in order to get married, you have to go to the religious community called the [NON-ENGLISH]. They tell you which rabbi will officiate. They'll tell you which synagogue you are going to attend, at what time. And I told them, heck, not with me. We attend in a salon. We are going to have our wedding private. And we want to have Rabbi [? Koppel ?] officiating. What we want is your piece of paper like we go to the justice of the peace or the city hall to have the marriage license.
They have to give it. If not, it's not valid. Beside the French ceremony that you do, but you have to have the religious thing. So I had my way, because at that time, I was not going to take any [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] diverse opinions even from a rabbi or things like that. I was strong enough in my convictions after the war. And he knew that I was determined to do it. So that's it. So that was thing. We didn't-- we learned always things after the fact. Very-- you had to be-- it's a good very French word. I don't know how to translate it in English, [FRENCH]. [FRENCH] means, to the best of my translation, clairvoyant, knowing ahead of time to be right on the money. And it was not only intuition. It was common sense and-- and-- and experience and-- and-- ancient history, or back history, or what was, all that combined. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] So I didn't know much. You learned. You sense. You feel. You understand. But you keep your mouth shut. You don't want to know. You don't ask questions. [PAUSES FOR 5 SECONDS] It was a big joke at that time. People were telling jokes that the French bought the Nazi propaganda, the German propaganda. And they started-- French politicians started to talk against the Jews. So they were having their political speeches and things like that. And that's the fault of the Jews. And because we don't have enough to think, that's the fault of the Jews? So you had a voice in the background from the audience say, and the cycliste. Cyclistes are bicycle-- you know. So the politician continues. And he said, and that was-- that's because the Jews. That's their fault. They did it. Le cyclistes. So he got annoyed. He said, why the cyclistes? He said, why the Jews? [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] I mean, it's a joke. But it was so true. And that explains everything. So to tell you that the less you knew or the less people told you, you were better off, because the consequences. I can tell you stories. Unfortunately, that I heard, a very good friend of mine that got caught from the gestapo, also with false paper, in Nice. Had went-- he got caught in a raffle, in a round-up, I don't know, taken to headquarters. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] And he had false papers in his-- in his [NON-ENGLISH] in-- well, whatever he had and things like that. And he's interrogated by the gestapo, not the French police. Not-- the gestapo were real, super professional. Somehow, [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] they let him go. He gave them satisfactory answers. And he goes away. And as soon as he leaves the room, he remembers he left his-- how do you call it what he got? Thing that he puts the-- 
INT: Briefcase? LK: Briefcase-- there on the table. What does he do? He goes back, said, forgive me. I'm sorry. I left my briefcase. Oh, he said. Yes, let's see what you got inside. Well, he never came back. [PAUSES FOR 6 SECONDS] Destiny. Not even a faux pas. I mean, it's-- it happens, human nature, you forget something. Well, that cost him his life. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] Good fellow, I knew him. I didn't know what he was doing. I didn't know that he was in the-- the-- in the paper-- education physique. But I knew he was one of us. I knew a lot of people that were a lot of-- I knew that a lot of the-- the Boy Scouts and the Girl Scouts, what we called education physique, their intelligence called La Sixieme-- sixieme, the sixth. They had five department or five section, things like that. Every section had a certain goal in-- in-- in-- in their Boy Scout, whatever, the activities. Sixieme was the illegal thing. We knew that they were in La Sixieme, but we didn't-- didn't ask any questions. Didn't-- as a matter of fact, when we were to the hakhsharot [LAUGHS] in Lautrec, in the south of France, and-- and the head of them, he said, well, what were you doing? So I told him education physical. Oh, he said, we can use somebody and the other thing. I said, no, not this kind of education physique. [LAUGHS] It's something else. So they didn't even know the code for it. I mean, they didn't know. And like I said, the more modest you were, the better you were off. And I'm a fellow that I'm not a curious type [LAUGHS] in any-- [LAUGHS] in any event. I mean-- [LAUGHS] underground or over, [LAUGHS] I don't-- I don't want to know, and I don't care. But that time, you really didn't want to know. So like I said, the time element, the circumstances, the way things were evaluating, and you adjusted yourself accordingly. And sometimes you were lucky. I was lucky all the time, because I'm talking to you now. But we did a lot of things. Of course, once my very little experience with the Maquis, as far as 'fighting,' quote unquote, [LAUGHS] is concerned-- of course, the allies were in Normandy. And we were waiting patiently for the liberation of Paris. And once Paris was liberated, we started to make plans to go to Paris. We rejoined our parents. I tried to meet our-- oh, I made an appointment with her months and months ahead of time-- well, several months ahead of time-- to meet at a certain place, at a certain date, at a certain time. You knew if you are going to be alive the next day or not, but I made an appointment several months hence. And I was going to this appointment. And I was arrested by the French Maquis, by the French underground. And I'm not a communist or nothing. They were checking. At that time, they were more open. First, they were hiding in the mountains mainly. It started in the Alps. I knew. I knew it when they started. I saw them, because I approached one of the leaders and told them if they can rescue Jews, telling them that what I am doing, and-- and if I could send some. He said, we need fighting men. We cannot have any. And we were not in this department. We have other things to do. [PAUSES FOR 7 SECONDS] What was I saying? 
INT: You were arrested by the Maquis? LK: Yeah. Why? Because they stopped the train. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] Because they had some [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] idea- not idea. Somebody said somebody told them that a collaborator, a French collaborator-- matter of fact, who used to live in La Bourboule. And I knew him. I played chess with him, so imagine. And I beat him, a satisfaction-- [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] was on the train. Somehow [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] he was looking a little-- though he was older than I was, he was looking a little bit like I-- I was. In other words, a very-- with this front hair piece-- hair, glasses, my height about. And somehow, they looked the whole train. I didn't know what it was, because I was in the last compartment at the end. And they couldn't find anything. Or he wasn't there, or he escaped. And I was the only one looking like him, so they arrested me. So they asked me for my identification paper And I gave. That's a fake. I said, so what do you mean a fake? Nothing doing. It was a fake. They recognized. Because, you see, even you were a Gentile and a Frenchman, you had to change your identity piece every year, because you had to be under 17 years of age. Once you reach 17 years of age, the French authorities send you to Germany to work in the factories. That was the agreement between German and the-- and the French. So I had things done kosher, and nice, and recorded. But my birth date had to be changed. And I changed it, but the ink were not the same color than the other, my name and residence and other thing that I had to write down. So they recognized it right away, because they were looking for things like that. So I got arrested. And-- and our chef was a captain, a real captain from the gendarmerie. And to me, a captain from the gendarmerie, you have to be somebody. And he told me. And he said, what happened? So I told him. So at that point, it was after the liberation. I said, I'm Jewish. That's false identity and things like that. I'm going to-- where are you going? I'm going to meet with my fiance. At that time, I was in love with her. Ah, well. Oh, the next big town in Montlucon. Well, he didn't know. So I said, look, what I'm telling you is the truth. You are a gendarme. Please, do me a favor. Call up the gendarmerie in La Bourboule. Ask any of them. And I knew their names. I could tell him. You talk to any four of them and ask about Leon. They know. You describe me, you'll find out. That's me. So he did that. And but I had to sleep over. They didn't let-- they didn't have any train, did not, so I couldn't. So they put me-- they had a German prisoner of war, put me in the same-- in a barn, I said, I ain't staying with that German thing. I didn't want to. [LAUGHS] Anyhow, they gave-- stay in a room with them. And the captain gave me a laissez-passer in French that, but they said, so be marked-- laissez-passer, that's a-- how do you call it? 
INT: Travel pass? LK: A pass to-- to for me to-- to not to be stopped by any authorities. [FRENCH] and parentage, Juif, Jew and signed by the thing and things like that. So I had this piece of-- and I had picture of her that they looked. They said, who is that girl? I said, my fiance. Oh. They gave me a car escort to the next train. They gave me a-- oh, I think they-- they drove me to Montlucon, to-- and I kept the appointment that I made two or three months ahead of time. Such an optimist I was, not knowing if you'll survive the next day. And that was it. We came to Paris, to France. And we were talking very seriously to get married. And at that time, what happened was that [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] the Aliyah Bet started for Palestine. And they started to, especially, take the children from the camp and gather them in Italy and in France, in Marseille and have some boats to send them over. And since the English were still the master of Palestine, that was one concession that they let by officially to allow certain orphan and Jewish children to leave. And they approached Lilli and I at that time to be their escorts, to be a chaperone, you know, on the boat. And, of course, knowing our Ziontistic sentiments, we would jump ship. In other words, one-way ticket not to-- and we want. So we told our parents that we are going with the next transport, as a matter of fact, with the first transport of children from France going to Palestine. And we were on the list to go with them. So my parents, my father-in-law said, look, we went through a war, and we escaped. And we are all alive. And, now, we want to get married. We would like to have the joy to see you under the chuppah and be present. Could you wait a little while to get married, so we attend your [NON-ENGLISH] and then go to Palestine? How can you argue with him? [LAUGHS] Such an argument. So we stayed. And we got married. And of course, Michel and Simonne wanted to get married before us, because they were hot, hot, hot. [LAUGHS] I mean like in love maybe for us and-- and couldn't. And he was in the army or the Air Force. I don't remember. And he wanted to go to-- if you're in the army, you can-- you're authorized to get married in your uniform. So don't have to buy any other stuff, [LAUGHS] I mean, save some money. And-- but Lilli's parents didn't let, said, the-- the oldest first and then.
So two months later, also-- we were married in November. They were married in January. And a couple years-- that was in '45. Couple years later, 1948, the war in Palestine started. And we were married already. And we had already two small, little children. And [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] Michel volunteered to be a volunteer in the Israeli Army. And I volunteered, too. They took him, because he was childless. And I already had two children. They said, no, we cannot afford to take you. Because we'll have to pay your wife and support your children, so you cannot do that. I said, look, let me peel potatoes. Let me be useful. Like I said, in Grenoble, I will be useful. I don't care what I do. I mean, anything to help. He said, no. Later on, we'll-- we got your name and address. We know you. They never called me, of course. And-- But in 1949, [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] we were ready to go to Israel. At that time, things were very bad. I mean elementary. And they told us, don't come yet. It's not-- not conductive for you with two small children. We don't have much, not too much to eat. And the-- the-- in general, it was very hard. At that time, we corresponded with our family in the United States. And my parents-- my father had a sister. My mother had a twin brother, and sisters, and nephew, and nieces, and all kind of stuff. And after the war, we corresponded, said, hey, we survived. We are alive, things like that. OK. So we corresponded like that for a couple of years and said, well, it'd be a good idea to see each other. Because all these people were mostly from Suwalki, if you remember the beginning. Somehow, they-- they reached the United States way, way before the war, sometimes passing by Paris, too. And what about seeing each other? So the plan was that-- since my parents were semi-retired or, you know, not attached to any business, and they were all engaged in any-- in some business or working. And for them to come to see two people, even with a child or married child, will be a bigger expense than for two person to go and see the whole family. And that was very logical. They said, since you are going to save us some money, we are going to pay for your tickets. And that was an offer that they could not refuse. So at the end of January-- or at the end of December '49, my parents took or whatever it is to go and see the-- the family. And, of course, the joy and-- see the family that-- the [NON-ENGLISH] she didn't see for I don't know a long.
One aunt saw me being born, practically, and then left for the United States to join her fiance and got married. I mean, certain cousins I remember, because I saw them in Suwalki. And one of them came to study in Vilna and lived with us. So we were very close and very-- and somehow, she always was 10 years older than I am. When I came to the United States, she was 10 years younger. But somehow-- I mean, miracles happen. And what happened was that my parents come to-- to visit and it's-- and among other things, they went to Milwaukee and to Gary, Indiana, where my father I had a boy friend from Suwalki he had, or from other-- from-- from so small from kindergarten practically. But they corresponded. They were in touch. And somehow somebody told him that he had a cousin in Cleveland and-- a real cousin. And he called them up. And they said, we would like very much to meet you. Why don't you come? We have-- we are having a wedding. We are marrying our son. You'll be an-- our honored guest. So my parents said, fine. It's on their way to-- back to Washington. Why not stop to Cleveland and have a-- a-- wedding, I mean? So went to wedding. It was a real cousin they knew. They didn't know each other from. But she was a Kawer and, of course, married somebody else with another name. And, of course, they were talking after the wedding. They stayed a few days. And we are family. We have a son just got married. They have two children. Ah. And they looked. And they saw that the family in Washington was working hard, but very well off. I mean compared to Europe. And in Milwaukee, they were nice, and everywhere else. And in Cleveland, wonderful. I mean, all these people worked hard, but, you know, at least accumulated something, a lifetime savings and were, you know, very comfortable. So he said, you know, I-- my father said to him, you know, that would be a wonderful country for my son. He's young. He just got married with two small children, such opportunity. I think it'd be terrific. He said, do you think you can send him an affidavit? Because-- she said, I can't. Or if I do, it won't be so good. But my son-in-law, you ask him. He can. So-- so they talked to the son-in-law, who is a peach of a man. And not knowing me, not knowing my parents, but they spoke with him, not knowing us, signed the paper, affidavit. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] And in two months, I received an American visa.
And within two weeks, I had a maiden voyage of the French ship with also another cousin interfered to get a-- [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] a cabin or two. I don't-- no, two cabin. I had with one child, and she one. That's the only way we could travel. And in two months, I was over there. And not only that, but three months later, the people from Cleveland, [NON-ENGLISH]-- we came in July or August, end of August. In November, they are coming to meet us to-- to-- so we spoke in Yiddish, because my English was [LAUGHS] very poor. And we were talking, things like that. I said, I want to thank you for affidavit-- in two months. And people didn't want to believe us that it was things like-- But let me ask you a question. You didn't know us, really, I mean. And the stories that we heard in the few months that we were here-- that people came from Europe and had affidavits and said, I'm going to stay like that. You are responsible for me. You pay. I mean, cases like that [LAUGHS] was there. So this Sam Rappaport-- and I have to mention his name, the [INAUDIBLE]-- a distant cousin. He was the son-in-law of my father's cousin, imagine. She-- he said, I talked to your parents. And I said, I saw that they were such nice people. I can be the son different. And he signed it. Since then, we always were in contact. We called him. We wrote to him. He passed away, unfortunately. We're still in contact with my cousin, his wife, and the children, and the grandchildren. They are such a family that, see, we learned not only helped me, like refugee from Europe-- though, I don't consider myself a refugee, but I mean-- but a lot of other people. And not only from the United States, but in South America and anywhere to escape from Europe. I mean, you know. But they did it in such a way, with such delicacy, which shows such thoughtfulness, and so graciously that for an American born or an American, [LAUGHS], it was very seldom heard of. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] I mean, not that I want to criticize so much Americans, anything like that, but they were not so-- [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] delicate, to say the least. They were helpful, but not graciously, the way I see it. And that made us feel very good. And we said, well, we'll find out. We'll let it-- give it a try. I said I'll give myself five years. And I'll see if we can do something, accommodate ourselves economically or do something that we should be [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] comfortable economically and a future for the children. I saw that right away children will be fine. And then we'll go to Israel if-- oh, I said, and if we fail, if we don't like it or we cannot accommodate ourselves so things don't work out our way, we'll go to Israel. We always want to go to-- never wanted to go to United States, because my wife went to United States on the say so of my father. When they were visiting the relatives at the end of '49, beginning of 1950, he wrote us a letter. He said, if you want to taste something good, before you go to Israel, come here first. And she believed my father, because my father never exaggerated, never said the wrong thing, never lied. And she said, if your father can write a thing like that, let's go to United States. And that's the way we came over here. 
INT: May 7, 1997-- interview with Leon Kawer, tape number eight. You were talking about coming to the United States and the fact that you never really wanted to come to the United States. Now that you've been here almost 50 years, [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] looking back on that decision, what do you think? LK: Well, actually, if I may correct you, it's not-- it wasn't exactly we did not want to. We'd never considered to come to United States, because our focus was on Israel, on Palestine. And we thought that if we do have to leave France-- because we were very disappointed during the war with the French people, the ways they acted, the ways they changed our attitude [? to ?] [? our ?] quote unquote, [NON-ENGLISH] and to all the Jews, that we were very much disappointed. And we figured out why not have our country of our own and-- and have all the [INAUDIBLE] things cooking together? I mean, we don't need any Gentiles to tell us that we are dirty Jews. Well, we'd never consider to come to the United States. Facts in life is that sometimes you want to go right, and you make a left turn, I mean, somehow for one reason or another, or because it's marked do not enter, or it's marked that it's easier to do that, or-- why? You don't know. You do things in life that are sometimes insignificant and of no relevancy to anyone. And sometimes you're doing a thing that you think that it's not relevant, and it changes all your life sometimes. We came over here. Lilli knew a little bit of English from school. Actually, she could converse. I did not know but say good morning or goodbye and, like, door and window and table and chairs and maybe another few words. So it took a long, long time for me to [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] learn the language. And, of course, in the beginning, I could not choose any jobs that I would have liked to, because of my handicap of the language handicap. And little by little, I-- as a matter of fact, people told me that when I went sometimes for interview of certain jobs to better myself. And they told me you are overqualified with my knowledge, my background, with my sales experience, with everything. I mean, not only life experience. You know, I was still young. I was but 27 years of age when we came-- I came over here. And in certain places-- so then I started to understand the American [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] character and the ways they act or-- so on one interview, I remember the man asked me, what is your goal in life? Why do you choose to-- I said, because I want to have your job.
And that was the end of the interview. He didn't like what I said, but I told him off. I mean, it's-- why-- why do you want a job? I telling him I got a-- a wife and two or three children. I don't remember at that time if we had two or three. And why do you take a job? Because you don't have anything to do all day long? You need to make some money to buy food, to pay rent, to pay taxes, I mean, after all. It-- it was very, very hard. We came from a different background for a different culture. I actually-- [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] well, swimming against the current. The flow of water was going one way, and everybody was following the-- the-- the-- the flow of water. And I was swimming the other way around, because somehow I wasn't used to this lifestyle. I wasn't used to not shaking hands, even if it's a lady. I mean, it wasn't used to say you, second person singular, not-- because in French, we have the-- the singular and the plural. A-- a lot of things that were shocking, because it's a different manners, different culture, and different thought and took some times to assimilate yourself and to understand American, if not the way of life, at least background. I read a lot of, you know, [? history, ?] find out what's coming up. I learned quite a bit about the South and the Negro problem that I was unaware with details at least, and many other things, and attitude of the Jewish community, the way they were acting and, mainly, the ways they were not acting during the war and not pressuring the President-- in this insistence, [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] Roosevelt-- [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] for making a big noise [INAUDIBLE] and saving the [? Jew ?] in New York. But this is [INAUDIBLE] story. But when-- the more you learn, the more you become tolerant. And the longer we stayed here, the easier it became. You could speak and converse. And we made-- ironically, we made friends, Jewish friends, very few Gentile friends somehow-- I don't know why-- with American born. The refugees, though I-- once in a while I met them or knew that they had some association in meetings, things like that, didn't-- didn't clinch, didn't somehow. I don't know why. And [INAUDIBLE] all-- all our American friends were professionals, like lawyers and statisticians, mostly were if not all in higher position in the government. I felt a little out of place, because I didn't have the education that they had and certainly not the knowledge. But I could hold my own and argue with them, even with my bad English.
And many times politically or philosophically, we didn't agree many things. And I didn't give up my idea. And I guess they-- I don't know. I don't want say they admired me for that, but they appreciated it. Because after all, I'm my own individual. And I might be wrong, but I'll state my case. [INAUDIBLE] the children grew up little bit. We gave them a Jewish education, religious education. We want them to have knowledge of what was going on. But we didn't talk about the Holocaust. We didn't talk about anything that happened. And like I said before, I didn't compare to other people, good friends of mine. And people who came back-- I'm not talking about the people who never came back-- who came back, who suffered in the camps-- I didn't have any-- any hard time, per se. I mean, I told you a few anecdotes that I laughed maybe-- [LAUGHS] maybe the wrong way. But certain episodes were kind of comic. They were fun. I say, well, we were young. We were doing things. And many times, I was thinking later on when I got older and older. I said, god forbid if I think like the same situation should happen here or anywhere else and I'll find myself in the same situation. Will I be able to do the same thing what I did before? It's impossible. It's impossible with a-- with a clear head, with a intelligent head to-- to have a conception, [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] to react and do things to what happened at that time to everybody and to yourself. I remember the first-- the first weeks and months when we came to this United States, to Washington, as a matter of fact. We had some family over. Every Sunday-- they were busy six days a week, but every Sunday they came. They came at lunchtime to listen what I have to tell about my experiences during the Holocaust, during the war. Because my parents were first and they told them most of the things. They couldn't tell them everything, all the-- the details, because they didn't know, I mean. And I-- and I could see with a cousin of mine that was in Vilna, that was in Suwalki that knew me that said that she-- back when I was a baby, she gave me a bath. I mean-- I mean-- I mean, how more intimate can you be, eh? And we knew each other. And they were in Paris, France living with us. And I came over here. And I told her the few incidents among others that I told you, not adding anything, not subtracting anything, just plain what happened to me.
Not what I heard or not anybody told me, what happened to me personally or to us. And I could see that she could hear me. And she knew I was telling the truth. But I could see in her eyes that she could not conceive and understand what I'm talking and what I'm telling her. Because it was incomprehensible to understand things what happened. And I'm talking about [INAUDIBLE] I wasn't torture. I was not in a concentration camp, that no corporal punishment that people and good friends of mine had. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] Just plain facts-- a few years of my life when we had to run, when, at night, when the wind was blowing and the leaves of the tree were shaking, you thought it was all kind of monster noise or somebody was walking. You imagined that the German were coming to your [INAUDIBLE]. And then you realize that it was only the leaves of the tree. [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] But you never have the feeling what is shaking of the leave and the noise of the leave did to your heart, [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] what kind of fear you were. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] But, otherwise, hey, the German will take you. The gestapo will take you. They'll send you. We'd not-- we did not-- I did not believe that they had extermination camp. I knew that they have internment camps. They concentration camps to make you work. So I knew that-- that the German army was in bad shape, because we were listening to London radio, that the things weren't going too well on the Russian front. We knew that they had difficulties. And they knew-- and we knew that they took some manpower from all over Europe, because they are men and their-- their strength, their-- their military strength was on the front fighting. So they had to make the factories work. So if they have to produce and make the factory work, they make ammunition for their own to fight, why should they kill 6 million people? It's a waste. These people could have contribute to their welfare. Not 6 million, because a lot of women. Though, women worked already in-- in factories. Not many children, but-- or-- or old people. But most of the people, 3 million, would have contribute to the war effort. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] That doesn't mean that they would have won the war. But their benefit and their interest was for them to save them, to make them work, to give them enough to eat not to starve with a little soup, what they called soup. It was water with-- with-- I don't even want to-- to mention what they-- they gave in that once in the morning and once in the evening and a piece of bread that was-- well, anyhow. So what was the-- that was stupid. That's stupidity. And the German were intelligent. They were-- they were the-- I mean, I considered to be-- so here it is. Why? [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] And like I said in the beginning, because they wanted to get me, I did not want to play their game. And I did everything in my mind and [INAUDIBLE] physically, also, the little that I did, to fight them with any way I could. I didn't have a gun, but I had other means. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] So in a nutshell, that's all. And life was very, very good in the United States for us. Not that we became millionaire, not that we had everything, all our wishes realized. But we have three wonderful children. [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] Two finished college. One is a lawyer. One is a computer expert or whatever it is. One is a bum. But I mean, two out of three ain't so bad. [LAUGHS] No, I mean, he's a very good kid. He's got a very good heart. And he doesn't want-- he's got another philosophy [INAUDIBLE]. Because he didn't finish college. He-- half-- half of the college, he-- he had other plans. Anyhow, my daughter-- I don't know if I should mention it-- but finished Georgetown University, and 25 years later had a reunion with the President of the United States. Because they were classmates in Georgetown. And that was something for a so-called refugee from Europe coming with nothing, without any money. Or for a two-year-old girl-- no, excuse me, four-year-old. She was four-year-old French little girl, cute, speaking French beautifully, coming to this country, and shake hands with the President, and have a picture taken with her and many other things, and having personal Christmas cards every year. It's a gratification that not many people or refugee can say that from their adoptive country. That makes me feel so good. [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] Well, [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] we worked hard. We got our children through schooling, and two are married. And we have a grandson that it's the joy of our life. Now we are retired. And we are contributing to the economy of the United States by supporting doctors and pharmacists and hospitals and all kinds of different [LAUGHS] things that come with age. And this is my story. 
INT: Thank you. Is-- is there any message that you would like to leave for your children and posterity? LK: Well, the only message I can think of is [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] for my children and for my grandson. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] Always know where you are coming from. [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] And it will be so much easier to decide where to go.  INT: Thank you. LK: OK. Well, it seems to me that that's a picture of me about maybe one year old or so, maybe less. And I don't know. I can say I was-- I am very fond of it.  INT: So it was probably taken in Poland around 1924? LK: Must have been taken in Suwalki. [PAUSES FOR 5 SECONDS] Yeah. This is the girl I fell in love with. And to tell you the truth, this picture was made way before I knew her. But I fell in love with this-- with the girl and the picture. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] That was taken in Paris [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] shortly before the war.  INT: And the name of the girl you fell in love with? LK: Well, that was my future wife, Lilli. Or like we say in Paris, 'Lill-ee.' This picture I remember very well. If I cannot give you the exact hour, it was on November 11, 1945, the day I married Lilli Gold. But it was in the afternoon, so I'm very close. This is my very dear parents, Rachmiel and Ida Kawer, taken in Paris in 1946 or 1947 after the war. This is my identity card while I was-- well, it was done after the liberation of Paris, but showing that I was with the FFI, otherwise known as Forces Francaises de L'Interieur. And naturally, during the war, it was underground. And I do have in the next frame an attestation and confirmation that I was with the French military forces, though not-- yes, with the French military forces. This is a document showing that I was, once more, with the French military forces. But I was associated with the organization, the Jewish organization of combat. It's just like discharge papers, because it was underground and nothing official. But the French government, after the war, made up a special office and a department to give all combatants who were in the underground with any kind of organization any official pieces of paper showing that they were involved during the war. This wonderful picture is the occasion of our son Joel, our oldest son, bar mitzvah. And delightfully, the grandparents came. The uncle and aunt and cousins came from Israel to assist to his bar mitzvah. And getting from left to right on the back row-- Dorrit, who is the daughter of Simonne, and Simonne, the-- the sister of Lilli, Michel, my good friend during the war and my brother-in-law after the war, and, of course, my son Joel, and my wife, dear wife Lilli, myself. Then going clockwise in front of me, our oldest daughter and only-- only daughter, [? Judith. ?] And that's Grandpa Gold with the little Dana, the daughter of Simonne from Israel, Grandma Ida, and our son, youngest son, Phillipe. This is a real American. He was born in the United States. And if he wants to, he can become the president of the nation. This is a surprise photo. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] I say surprise, because it was made the 12th of November, 1945. 
INT: '95. LK: 1995, correction. And the surprise is that [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] Simonne and Michel, we saw them several months before, who came to visit us. And they made a special effort to come to celebrate our 50th anniversary with us. So you figure that with everything we went through during the war and, if the good Lord gave us life to celebrate happy and joyous occasions, they should be with us. Of course, naturally, they married two months later. So it is a double celebration 50th anniversary of the Kawer and the [NON-ENGLISH]. This picture also was taken the 12th of November, 1995 and with our beautiful little family. On the left standing-- our lovable quote, unquote, 'bum,' Phillipe, our daughter-in-law, Rose, with her husband and our son Joel. Next to Joel is [? Judith ?] with her husband, Jerome or Jerry. Sitting in the beautiful red dress with the flamboyant white hair, my lovely wife for 50 years and for many, many years yet next to our grandson, Jonathan, [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] who's more than a lovable grandson. And the old man is me. And [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] I enjoyed it. I enjoyed your-- our life. And I enjoy our family.