INT: Today is June 8, 1997. The survivor is Leo Bach, whose name at-- whose last name at birth was Silberbach. CREW: Turn. Turn it. Turn it. Now. Good.  INT: Do we start again? CREW: No, that's fine.  INT: OK. The interviewer is Merle Goldberg. We are in Cerritos, California in the United States of America. And the interview will be conducted in the English language. Today is June 8, 1997. My name is Merle Goldberg. And I am conducting an interview with Leo Bach in Cerritos, California, the United States of America. And the interview will be conducted in the English language. OK. First of all, Mr. Bach, can you tell me your full name, as you are called today, and spell those-- both names? LB: Today I am known as Leo Bach, L-E-O, first name, and B-A-C-H, last name.  INT: And can you tell me your full name as you-- as you were given-- as it was given to at birth? LB: My name at birth was Leon Silberbach. And when I came to United States--  INT: And spell it. LB: L-E-O-N, first name, and last name, S-I-L-B-E-R-B-A-C-H.  INT: And you changed it? LB: Yes. I shortened it. I shortened-- my aunt, who-- who lived in New York City-- actually was my mother's cousin-- she sponsored me to come to the United States. And she advised me that the name was too long, that I should either retain Silber or Bach. And since Bach was short to say, I retained the Bach, you know. 
INT: And can you tell me your full birth date? LB: Actually, I found out, from my birth certificate, that I was born on May 21, 1927. But after the war, I had no documents. And I believe that my birthday was May 22-- one-day difference. So I reported to all my present legal documents as May 22, 1927.  INT: And in what city and country were you born? LB: I was born in Poland, which is in southwestern part of Poland. Name of the city is Cracow.  INT: Were you actually born in Cracow? LB: Yes.  INT: OK. And-- or did you live in-- LB: I was born in Cracow. And I lived in it until 1943.  INT: So let's go back a little bit now. Now you're going to do all the talking, OK? LB: Yes.  INT: When we spoke on the phone, originally, I asked you to tell me a-- a little bit about your family and your ancestors. Do you know how long your family had been in Poland and how they got there? LB: Well, I knew my mother's-- my father's, excuse me-- my father's parents, because they were alive, and they were murdered by the Nazis during the wartime. But my parents, my mother's parents-- [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] her father died in 1920, which I never knew him. And I only heard about him from my mother was telling me about him. And her mother died in 1930. And I remember her very faintly. I was only three years old. I remember her very, very faintly. 
INT: Do you know their names? LB: Yes. My mother's parents-- the father was Jacob Wohfeiler, spelled with W, W-O-H-L-F-E-L-E-R.  INT: You don't have to spell. We-- we went through that on the-- just your name at the beginning. But if we ask you to spell everything as we go along, it breaks up the continuity of your telling the story. LB: Yes.  INT: Only if I ask you if I-- I'm going to jot some things down. But I'll ask you at the break. But rather than you give me spellings now, let's just move on with the story. LB: OK. All right.  INT: So your-- so your-- your-- your maternal grandfather, that's what you were telling me, his-- LB: Yes.  INT: --his full-- LB: His name was-- his name was Jacob Wohfeiler. And his wife's name, my grandmother's name, was-- I believe, was [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] was-- [? Ann. ?] I'm not sure. I'm not sure. I think it was [? Ann, ?] yes.  INT: And your father's family? LB: My father's parents-- his father's name was Israel [? Hersh ?] Silberbach. And his wife's name was Sara [NON-ENGLISH]. Her middle name's [NON-ENGLISH] Silber-- She came from the house named [? Wasserburger. ?] Her married name was Silberbach, yes.  INT: Do you know how long, though, perhaps each side of the family had been living in the Cracow area or were they Polish for hundreds of years? LB: Well, my mother's parents-- I know they lived in that area where we lived, probably since the middle 19th century. I don't know anything before that. My father's parents also lived-- they lived something like 20 or 25 kilometers south of Cracow, my father's parents, in a village. And I believe they also lived there since the middle of the 19th century. Now, where they lived before that, I really don't know. But just judging by the names, Germanic names, like Silberbach and Wohfeiler, they must have emigrated from Germany or Austria at some time, you know. 
INT: Now I want you to tell me about each of your parents, their-- their names and a little bit about them. LB: My father was born in little village about 25 kilometers south of Cracow. The name of the village was [? Wola ?] [? Radziszowska. ?] And he was there until the age of 14. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] After 14, he was-- he became an apprentice in a meat business in a nearby city, known as Wadowice. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] And there he was as an apprentice in the-- in the meat cutters' business or meat business until he was drafted to the Austrian Army during World War I. He was drafted, I believe, in 1915. And he served in the Austrian army. He was sent to Italy, to northern Italy, to fight on the Italian front there. And he was always reminiscing about his experiences while serving in the Austrian Army. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] When World War I ended, he was discharged from the Austrian Army. And since that part of Poland became Poland, and it-- before World War I, it was part of Austria. That's-- that's why he served in the Austrian Army. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] And that-- that area was for some 200 years part of Austria. Anyway, at the end of World War I, he was traveling back to Poland after he was discharged from the Austrian army. And as soon as he crossed the border to Poland, he was immediately seized by the Polish army and impressed to serve in the Polish army before he even could go see his parents. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] He was sent to eastern Poland, where there was that heavy fighting raging on between the Bolsheviks and the new-- newly created Polish Army. Because Poland just received independence at the time after 200 years domination by Austria, Germany. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] And he was in many severe battles, difficult battles. He was telling the stories at home, I remember that he miraculously survived those battles. But he always believed that he was watched by a good angel, because he went through the Austrian war and the Polish wars without a scratch, without having a wound. And he had seen many of his friends being killed and crippled by the war. But he survived without a scratch. And this made him a very religious person. He believed that somebody was watching over him. And he was a devout Orthodox Jew. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] Now, he had nine other siblings. He was one of 10. 
INT: You should tell us his name. You haven't told us his name. LB: My father's name? His name was Jacob Silberbach. [PAUSES FOR 5 SECONDS] he was one of 10 siblings. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] Well, there were-- well, the three children were from different mother. Because my grandfather's first wife passed away, [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] leaving three children. And my grandfather remarried again. So his second wife was the one that I knew, Sara [NON-ENGLISH] was Silberbach, Silberbach. And then there were seven more children. Now, I understand that two children died in infancy, but eight of them survived. And my father was one of the eight surviving children. There were three older brothers. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] Their name was-- the oldest one was David, was from the first mother. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] Another brother was Henek, which was from the-- my father's full brother, from the second wife, my grandfather's second wife. And the youngest one was [? Moritz. ?]  INT: You said there were three wives, though. LB: Two wives.  INT: OK. LB: Two wives.  INT: I thought you said there were three wives. LB: Two wives. Yeah. Now, my mother, as I said, her father's name was Jacob Wohfeiler. And her mother's name was [? Ann, ?] I believe. I'm not quite sure about the-- that first name. But I know the father's name was Jacob. And she was one of six children.  INT: Her name? Your mother's name? LB: My mother's name was Gitla Wohfeiler. And sometimes she was also known as [? Lemler, ?] because, in those days, the Jewish people believed in having religious marriage. But the municipality did not recognize [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] religious weddings unless you also took civil wedding in a-- a municipal office. And for some reason, many Jewish people did not pay attention to the civil weddings in the municipal office. So they only married by-- were married by the rabbi. And they were happy about it. So as far as the local authority was concerned, the wife had to carry her maiden name with it along. So my mother was known as Gitla Wohfeiler [? Lemler, ?] because her mother's maiden name was [? Lemler, ?] you know. They never took the civil wedding in the municipal office for some reason, you know. And so this the-- how the records are written, [? Gustav ?] Wohfeiler [? Lemler, ?] you know. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] My mother was one of six children. [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] Two sisters died. One died when she was 14 years old. She had some heart defect. And Another. Sister died at childbirth, somewhere in 19-- early 1920s. In those days, they didn't know how to perform Cesarean section. So if the birth was not normal, the-- the-- the mother and the child were-- were dying, you know. And this-- this is the way that-- it was the way of life in those days, you know. My mother and her siblings most likely had something like six or seven grade education, you know. And the same thing was for my father because very few people went to universities or beyond the elementary school in those days. Most of them who-- especially the boys-- when they finished elementary school education, they went into apprenticeship to-- to learn some kind of a trade, being a shoemaker, tailor, or-- or meat cutter, or baker, you know. That was the way of life in those days. There were-- and those were respectable professions in those days. Very few went into higher education to become doctors and lawyers. There were Jewish doctors and lawyers but not many. [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] My mother, I believe, had about six or seven grade education. And this was very normal for-- for girls in those days. Girls were prepared to be good mothers, good wives and good mothers, good Jewish wives and good Jewish mothers. There-- that was the way of living in those days, yes. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] I remember my mother was-- for Shabbat, there was no such thing as buying challah in the bakery. I see you do it here in America. Every mother, every wife, Jewish wife was baking her own challah at home for-- for Friday evening. My mother did the same thing. I remember her baking challah every Friday afternoon. 
INT: What was that like when you broke into that warm-- was the bread warm? Or what was it like when the bread was cut? What was that like on Shabbos for you? LB: Well, there were two challahs, because we had a Shabbos dinner-- that was the important part-- Friday evening. My father, when he came home from his business, he always emptied his pockets from money, I remember. He was putting it into some kind of a-- a little container and putting it away to make sure that he had no money in his pocket for Shabbat, because it was-- it was considered a sin to carry money with you on Shabbat. And just before the sundown, the table in our living room was set. My mother placed the two challahs that she baked and two candle-- candles. And soon as the sun set down, she lit the candles, and she blessed the candles. And then we sat down to dinner, Shabbat dinner. After dinner, my father and I and my brother, we walked to our local synagogue, which was something like one kilometer away from us, for Friday evening service. And we did the same thing Saturday morning. We went to the synagogue for Shabbat service but without eating any breakfast. The custom was that you don't eat breakfast before the prayers. So we first, we went to attend the services. And when we came home, then we ate some sort of a breakfast and lunch together. Sometimes we found a stranger in the-- in the synagogue. It was a small synagogue. Everyone in the synagogue wanted to have the honor to invite him for-- for a dinner-- for Shabbat dinner. And there was a-- there was a custom, because we believed that the stranger could be a-- an angel sent by God, you know. Everybody wanted to have the honor to invite this person for dinner, Shabbat dinner. So there was a stiff competition. And usually, the most honorable member of the synagogue won-- won the honor to have the stranger for dinner, Shabbat dinner. And we had quite often strangers in our house for Shabbat dinner, who appear in our synagogue. 
INT: You mentioned your brother. LB: My brother was about a year and a half younger than I.  INT: Why don't you tell me the-- the names and the-- and when each of your siblings was born? Why don't we start that way? LB: My daughter-- my daughter? My sister was born in 1925. I believe she was born in September. I don't know exact date. I was born in May 1927. And my brother was born in December, I believe, December-- December 6, 1928. I was born in 1927. He was born in December 1928. And my sister was born in 1925-- 1925.  INT: And their names. LB: My sister's name was [? Hana ?] [? Anna ?] Silberbach. My name was Leon Silberbach. And my brother's name was Karol or [? Kiwa. ?] In Hebrew, we called him, [? Kiwa ?] Silberbach.  INT: Why don't you tell me a little bit about your-- I know you were discussing Shabbos. But what kind of toys did you play with? What-- what kind of games did you play? LB: Well, there was very little toys in those days, as you try to compare with the toys of present day. Most of the toys were handmade or cut out of a piece of paper. [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] Most of the toys that we used to make at home was bow and arrow, made by the wooden stick and tied with a string. And the arrow, we also made with string-- with a piece of stick, which we cut normally from a willow tree growing in our backyard. Sometimes, we found one of those wooden flutes that some traveling vendors used to sell, wooden flutes. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] There's a Hebrew name for it-- [? halil, ?] I believe. [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] We had the, usually, were wandering merchants that carried those handmade toys, you know, like, made out of wood, you know. It's very simple, primitive toys. And they would walk through the neighborhood. And they sell those toys to children. So those wooden flutes was one of the toys. So sometimes we had a toy like this. But most of the toys were handmade. Also, we used to play checkers quite a bit at home. And checkers-- if, well, for some reason we couldn't find a nice checkers set, we made our own checker set out of cardboards, you know, and the pieces out of piece of wood, you know. But sometimes we-- somebody send a toy from America, some relative from America. So we all went to see, to this neighbor's kid, you know, this beautiful toy that he was sent from-- to him from America, you know. 
INT: What about music? Was there music? LB: Music was only made-- real music-- by persons who could either play accordion, guitar, or violin. There were a few pianos, very few, only the very wealthy people had pianos, you know. As a matter of fact, I-- the first time I heard-- I have seen a real piano was after the war in Germany. There were pianos in Poland, but not very popular. But accordions and violins and guitars, I have seen quite often and I have heard people playing. Now, my uncle, my mother's brother, was a very talented violinist. And he-- I heard him playing violin quite often. Quite often, he also had a few neighbors there, non-Jewish neighbors, who played guitar and accordion. And he had them invited in his backyard. And they were having a little music session, you know. And the entire neighborhood would go over there to listen. It was the kind of music that existed in those days. There were gramophones. The old-fashioned gramophones were the-- those large-- [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] how do you call those-- phonograph records, yeah. And you had to change the needle in the gramophone head quite often, you know. [LAUGHS]  INT: Did you have one? LB: Yeah, we had one, yes. We had one, yes.  INT: What kind of music did you listen to or did you enjoy? LB: Well, my father had a collection of cantorial singing records. But we also had some waltzes, Strauss music, you know, and so on. Later on, just about three or four years before the war broke out, radios were becoming popular. Now, the large receivers were very expensive. Only people who could afford it had it. And my father bought one. But other people had one of those earphone sorts, the crystal sets, you know, which were not very practical, you know. But people who couldn't afford anything else, they had these crystal sets, you know. They used to sit down with the earphones and listening to it, you know. 
INT: I think that you told me, unless I misunderstood you in the pre-interview, that you played. Did you play the violin or the accordion? Did you play any musical instruments? LB: I was very much interested, very much interested. Now, my uncle, the violinist, he had a son and a daughter, very small children at that time.  INT: Can you tell me his-- his name and their names? LB: Yes.  INT: And make sure when you refer to somebody-- like, you'll say, you know, my mother's brother-- make sure when you say, my mother's brother, and give us the person's name always, so we always have a context to-- to the person you're talking to. OK? LB: My mother's brother, his name was Solomon Wohfeiler, which was the only brother that my wife had-- my mother had, excuse me. And he was a very talented violinist. He had a son. His name was Jacob, named after the grandfather. And he had a daughter, two years younger daughter, than the son. Her name was [? Ann. ?] And my uncle believed that they would inherit the-- his musical talents. And he bought them violin, small violin, and small accordion. But apparently, they took after the mother, who was not very musical. And the children had no interest in music whatsoever. So at one point, he gave the violin to us. And I tried to play the violin a little bit. But I also didn't have much of a talent, you know. But I remember I showed interest in it, you know. My mother did play the violin, yes. Apparently, she was taking lessons at the same time when her brother was taking the lessons. But she wasn't as good as her brother was, you know. 
INT: You know, you didn't tell me what kind of business your father had. LB: My father-- basically, he was in a kosher meat business. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] That was-- that was his profession, you know. He was a meat cutter by profession or by trade. But he also was a good businessman. And we owned a apartment building, which we-- which he collected rent from renting the apartment. And there were some stores on the first floor of-- in the building. In one store, there was a shoemaker. In another store, there was a meat business. And the third store, it was a grocery store. And he collected the rents from-- from that building. We also-- he also owned a bakery. Adjacent to our house, there was a bakery. But he did not operate the bakery. He rented it to a baker, who operated the bakery. He-- my father was just collecting rent from the bakery. So he was, more or less, an entrepreneur, you know.  INT: How would you describe your family, as middle class, upper class, upper middle-- upper middle class? LB: Upper middle class, I would say. Upper middle class, yes.  INT: And you also-- what was it like [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] for your family in terms of Yiddish culture? LB: Well, we lived in a neighborhood where the-- very few Jewish people lived, something like maybe 10 Jewish families. And we were just scattered around. Like for instance, most of the people-- Jewish people that live in the neighborhood were related to each other-- my mother's cousin, my mother's sisters. And there were also about three or four other families not related to us. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] We lived in an extremely vicious antisemitic era of Poland. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] And in our neighborhood, any Jewish person who was-- did not belong in the neighborhood was taking a risk coming there, was taking a risk of being stoned or beaten up, which happened quite often. It happened to me, quite often, that I had to fight my way to school, going to school, coming from, through antisemitic-- gangs of antisemitic kids, you know, and so on. You could see slogans, antisemitic slogans painted on the walls. 'Kill the Jews.' 'Jews go to Palestine,' et cetera. There was a church just about a quarter of a kilometer from us, Catholic church, because Poland was mostly-- about 90% Catholic. Although that-- the priest in the church was never making any antisemitic remarks, but the people who went to worship there, they were quite antisemitic. And on Sunday, just before they were walking out from the church, any Jewish person walking near the church, you were taking a chance of being beaten up, you know. So that was the atmosphere that existed in our neighborhood, you know. We were more or less semi-accepted there, because my father employed several local people. And the baker, who operated our bakery, also employed several local people, you know, people who would take care of the horses and wagons and these bakers who are baking the-- the bread and so on. So we are more or less accepted there, we-- the Jewish people and the relatives of mine, my mother's sisters and brother and cousins who lived there. We are more or less accepted in the neighborhood. We were considered as part of the-- of the-- of the life there, you know. But any other Jewish person, who didn't belong there, was really taking a chance coming there to the neighborhood. 
INT: But in Cracow, itself, was such a center for Yiddish culture. LB: Yeah.  INT: How did that affect you? Did-- LB: Well, the center of Jewish culture was in the Jewish-- in the Jewish district, which was known as Kazimierz. Now, this was a very old neighborhoods. I think some of the buildings were as old as 400 years old in the Kazimierz district. And about 90% or 95% of people living there were Jewish people. They had their own schools. There was a Jewish hospital. And there were yeshivas and synagogues. Every second building had their own little shul there. But there was also a very famous old shul, which was known as the [? Alta ?] Shul or the Old Synagogue, which was, I would say, about 400 years old.  INT: And we're going to stop here and change the tape. LB: Yeah. OK.  INT: At the end of reel one, you were talking about the [? Alte Shul, ?] you said, the old synagogue. Why don't we continue? LB: I know that my mother's father, my grandfather, Jacob Wohfeiler, he was a frequent worshipper in the [? Alte Shul. ?] And I know that my cousin's-- my cousin also was bar mitzvahed there. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] But I personally never went into [? Alte Shul. ?] It was in the Jewish district of Kazimierz. There was about 90% or 95% inhabitants of the area were Jews. And they had their own schools, yeshivas. There was a-- Jewish hospital in that area. And it was more or less an independent Jewish enclave there, but of course, they were all subject to the Polish laws. All their disputes, anybody had disputes, were settled in Jewish courts, you know, some sort of rabbinical courts. And most of the children went to Jewish schools. There even were people who didn't know how to speak Polish. They spoke only Yiddish. And the amazing thing that was there, that if-- 5% or 4%-- 5%-- 5% or 4% of non-Jews that lived in that area also spoke Yiddish. There were Polish Catholics who could speak fluent Yiddish, because they lived there. This is the way-- this is the language they had all the time. There was an old market place. They called it-- it was known as Jewish marketplace. And you could buy anything from chicken to fruits to vegetables and even clothing. 
INT: Although your family didn't live in that district. LB: No. We didn't live in the--  INT: Did you participate in that area? Did you-- LB: Yes, yes. I was going to school in that area, because my parents, especially my mother, was not very happy me going-- that I would go to the local school. That I would be a member of two or three Jewish kids there and being called a Jew, you Christ killer, all the time, but non-Jewish children, you know? So my parents, especially my mother, insisted that I go to school in the Jewish district. And my father, being an Orthodox Jew, observant Jew, he sent me to a religious Jewish school, Mizrahi. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] And the walk was quite a distance from the neighborhood where we lived. It was about five kilometers. I had to walk to this school in the morning five kilometers, and five kilometers back home, rain or snow. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] And the first two years, I was escorted by our live-in maid, because my mother worried about me, that I would have to go through some very rough neighborhoods, and I may be beaten up by some anti-Semite and so on. The first two years, I was escorted there by our live-in maid. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] Now, in the Jewish orthodox school, we studied Polish for about two hours every day. The rest, everything was in Yiddish and Hebrew. We studied the Talmud. We studied the Torah. We had to read the [NON-ENGLISH] and translate it from Hebrew into Yiddish. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] And after two years, my father realized that I could not compete with the local Jewish children from the local district, Jewish district, because they spoke Yiddish fluently, and for me, Jewish-- Yiddish was a foreign language because of the district where we lived. When I came home, I only had Polish, and the kids in the neighborhood that I used to play with, most of them were Jews. So the only Yiddish I heard was when my father was speaking to my mother occasionally Yiddish. So after two years, my father realized that I could not compete with the local Jewish children in this orthodox school, and I was transferred to a public school also located in the Jewish district, where the entire student body were Jewish children. But it was a Polish public school, and we didn't study Yiddish or Hebrew or Talmud whatsoever. And I was attending that school until the war broke out. But of course, after my father transferred me from the orthodox school to this Polish school in the Jewish neighborhood, we had a rabbi coming to our house to keep instructing me, my brother, and my sister in reading the [NON-ENGLISH]. How to read the [NON-ENGLISH] and the history of the Jewish people. And a little bit of Talmud and Torah. And he was preparing me and my brother for bar mitzvah. Now, there's a very rare occasion that I was beaten up by the antisemites coming to our house. And once in a while, my father had to send our driver, who drove our horses, buggy and horses-- was a non-Jewish man. My father had to send him once in a while to bring the rabbi to our house to prevent him being abused by the antisemites. 
INT: Do you remember the name of this rabbi who came to your house? LB: Yes. His name was [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] Moshe Advokat. Advokat is a Polish name. [LAUGHS] And many Jewish men have Polish names.  INT: Do you know what happened to him? LB: He perished in the Holocaust, he and his wife, yes.  INT: Do you remember, we were talking on the phone the other day, and we were talking about Cracow being a center of Jewish culture, Yiddish culture, with the theater and the cinema and comedians. We talked about that, and you talked about some movies that you saw. You told me Yiddish movies. LB: Yes, yes. We had a Jewish theater there, of course, in the-- in the Jewish district. They were performing Yiddish plays, spoken only in Yiddish. I remember my parents used to go to see those plays. I never went to see those plays. Once in a while, we received a motion picture to be shot in the Jewish neighborhood. In the theater with Yiddish motion pictures made in America. [YIDDISH], or and it was the talk of the town. Every Jewish person was talking about this, [YIDDISH] or But I was too young to go to see both pictures, but my parents did go see both pictures. And it was played only in the Yiddish theaters in-- in the Jewish district.  INT: And what about Klezmer music? LB: Yes. Klezmer music was the only music that we know. At every Jewish wedding, there was a Klezmer. There was-- we didn't call it Klezmer music. There was-- that was the accepted music in those days, you know? And when I recall it, to this day, sometimes the musicians, each one of them played in different key, but-- because [LAUGHS] I don't think they knew how to read the music. They were home-made musicians who learned how to play a violin or a mandolin or guitar or-- or even accordion. They just learned-- learned how to play it by ear, you know? And they'd get together, and they played the-- the weddings, you know? And some of it was out of key, but somehow it sounded really [NON-ENGLISH], very happy. [LAUGHS] And this is what-- what we had in-- in those days, you know? 
INT: You also told me you saw-- you did see some movies from America when you were-- LB: Yes.  INT: What kind of-- LB: Well, I believe I did see [YIDDISH], yes. It was the only Jewish movie that I remember seeing before the war.  INT: How about any American films? Other-- LB: Oh, yes. American films. The cowboys movies were very popular. When a cowboy movie came to my hometown, you had to stay two hours in line to go see it. You know? Everybody was talking how they were riding the horses and shooting [LAUGHS] and jumping. And so-- you know. But those movies were playing in-- all over the town, in every theater, you know? Not only Jewish theaters, but [INAUDIBLE] theaters. They also had some classic Polish-made movies, you know, based on Polish history. But not-- there was not Yiddish movies.  INT: When you went to the movies, perhaps you saw newsreels. LB: Yes.  INT: Do you-- can you tell me about some of the newsreels you might have seen regarding what was going on in Germany? You know, the-- LB: Well, just before the war, the news were showing, I remember, how the Nazis were marching in Austria and Vienna. How the local people were greeting them with flags and swastikas, you know? And then how the Nazis march into Czechoslovakia, into Sudetenland. I remember seeing it in the newsreels in the movies, yes, yes.  INT: How did that affect you, seeing those-- those goose-stepping soldiers? LB: We were worried. We were worried very much, especially Jewish people. And quite often, you know, when I was playing with the non-Jewish kids in the neighborhood, playing soccer, you know, and they got angry at me because maybe I hit one too many goals, you know, and they were screaming at me, wait. That Hitler is going to come, he is going to take care of you, you know, shaking their fingers at me. So it was just about two years before, a year before the war broke out, something like that. 
INT: And what about-- you said you had a radio. LB: Yes, we had a radio.  INT: So obviously, you could hear on the radio certain kinds-- all kinds of things besides music. Do you ever remember listening to the radio and hearing Hitler speak when you were a small child? LB: Yes. But I didn't speak German. I couldn't understand. Then it was the era of the great orators, studying speech, making speeches every few weeks. Hitler was making speeches every few weeks. And occasionally, we even had the President of the United States, Roosevelt, was making speeches, you know? And we were tuning in into those speeches. Now, English or German, although my father spoke fluent German, because he served in the Austrian Army. And my mother also spoke some German because she went to Austrian school, and she was born in part of where it was Austria. She also spoke some German, my wife-- my mother, I mean. They could understand, but I understood very little. Practically nothing of what the speeches are. Only how Hitler speaking sounded like he was barking to me, you know, the way he spoke. And the people applauding him and screaming and singing the Nazi song. This is what I remember hearing on the radio. And occasionally we listened when Stalin was speaking in Russia, but I didn't speak Russian. Only somebody who could speak Russian could understand. Now, what we used to do in our house was that since we were the only people in the immediate area that had a radio, a powerful radio receiver, my father used to place his radio right in the-- on the window ledge, so our neighbors could come and listen. Listen, stand by on the window. And we had sometimes 40, 50 people standing at the window and listening to the radio. 
INT: And what about your brother and sister? Where were they during this period? LB: Well, my sister, my mother agreed to send her to local school. She was one of the two or three Jewish kids in this-- in the entire school. And somehow she was tolerated. She was a young, beautiful, blonde girl, and she didn't have any Semitic features, so she was not what you call harassed, there. However, since Catholicism was a state religion in Poland, our religion instruction was required in the public schools. So the school that she was going, there was one hour of religion, and the priest came to teach the children about Catholicism. And the non-Catholic children were excused. They had to go to the playground. So my sister, usually, during the hour of religion in the class, she was out in the play-- school playground, playing. Now, in that school that I was going to, and later on my brother was also enrolled in that school. It was in the Jewish district of Kazimierz. It was a public Polish school. There was no religious instruction whatsoever in that school.  INT: How much of what was going on in Germany was talked about in your house, or was that in hushed tones? LB: It was more or less in hushed tones, but we knew what was going on. Because in Poland, before the war, similar things were going on. Maybe not to such degree as in Germany. See, in Germany, it was sponsored by the government. And it was enforced by the government, our-- anti-Jewish measures. In Poland, it was not sponsored by the government. It was not enforced by the government. We just lived under severe antisemitism. So we more or less knew what was going on in Germany. We read it in the newspapers. The Polish newspapers very boldly printed what was going on. And some Polish people, I knew some of them who were very happy what was going on in Germany and were hoping that the same thing will happen in Poland, like the Nazis were taking away property from Jews, and Jews were not allowed to be professionals like doctors and lawyers or teach in schools. Some Poles were hoping the same thing would happen in Poland, you know, take away property from Jews, and kick out the Jewish teachers from the schools, you know? I have heard some Polish people expressing this desire, you know? But in Poland, there was a similar situation going on. In 1937, or maybe 1938. Actually, 1937, they tried to impose, in Poland, a strict restriction on how many animals that Jewish people can slaughter for kosher consumption. And since my father was in meat business, kosher meat business, he was very much worrying about it, and he was very much affected by it. I remember that in Polish parliament, there were daily debates on their-- one leading senator, lady senator, her name was Mrs. [NON-ENGLISH]. She was the leading exponent of barring the Jews from eating kosher meat or slaughtering for kosher consumption. And the debate was going on for months while Hitler was building his army and planning to invade and conquer Poland. Poland was-- the worries of Poland was how to stop Jewish people from eating kosher meat. No. That was the situation in Poland. And there were also talks of taking Jews to the Polish Army only for limited duties, like performing labor for the Polish Army rather than being combat soldiers, and banning Jews from becoming officers in Polish Army. This was existing in Poland. It was the big debates before the war. And the Polish newspapers were-- always had some kind of anti-Semitic articles in it and quite often depicting Jews in caricatures, you know, with large noses, you know, and big stomachs and so on. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] So when we read in the newspapers or heard on the radio what was happening in Germany, we-- we-- we knew what-- what it is, because we almost experienced a similar situation in Poland. Then in 1948-- [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] 19-- excuse me. 1938, during the Kristallnacht, when the Nazis rounded some 17,000 Jews in Germany of Polish origin, Jews of Polish origin, and they send them to the Polish border, and Poland refused to let them in. And for some two weeks, those people were stranded. That was in November 1938. Those people were stranded in the border in the rainy season, cold. It was November. And the Polish Jews were petitioning Polish government to let those people into Poland. And after two weeks, they were led in to Poland. And in Cracow, we received some 2,000 of those people. 
INT: Were any of them relatives of yours? LB: There was some distant relatives, yes. Some distant relatives. And my uncle, my father-- my mother's brother, took one family in, and he gave them a-- a little room in-- in one of his buildings. He let them live in. And my mother's cousin was inviting them for-- for dinners every day, you know, in our neighborhood, yeah. We also were collecting all kinds of clothing and bedsheets and bed covers and blankets for them, to accommodate in Cracow, for the 2,000. Many of them went to Warsaw and to Lodz, where a large Jewish population lived. You know?  INT: You said your mother's brother took them in. Which-- which brother, and what was his name? LB: His name was Solomon Wohfeiler. She had only one brother.  INT: Make sure you always say the name though. OK? [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] So why don't you take us to-- what happened next? I guess the invasion of Poland would be where we should continue. LB: Well, what happened during the debasing, vicious debasing in Polish parliament were the restriction-- restriction of Jewish people eating kosher food, or barring the Jewish people from eating kosher food. They finally agreed. Because there were some Jewish representatives in the Polish parliament, elected from Jewish neighborhoods, and they were fighting it. And finally, they agreed to restrict the Jewish people, how many heads of cattle can be slaughtered. And there was a restriction. At that time, the rabbinical court allowed the Jewish people to eat the hind part of the animal, you see? But they had to remove certain veins, blood veins, and so on. So my father had to hire extra Jewish men who knew what to do to prepare the hind part of the meat, so he could sell them as a kosher meat and so on. And this is the way it was until there was-- [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] the Nazis invaded Czechoslovakia, of course. There was a-- a big-- or large commotion in Poland. Poland was totally mobilized, because Poland demanded part of Czechoslovakia too, which was a tremendous error made by the Polish people, the Polish government. They said to unite with Czechoslovakia and fight Nazi Germany. The Polish government at the time decided to side with Nazi Germany and demand part of Poland-- part of Czechoslovakia. 
INT: Why not-- I want to keep this much more personal, about you. LB: Yes.  INT: OK? The history we can read in books. We want to know about you. So let's-- let's talk about what's happening in your family as a result of all these things. We don't-- OK? So let's-- I want to hear about you. LB: Yes. All right. Well, we lived like this in Poland until the war broke out. [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] But what I also wanted to mention, that starting with the third grade, my third grade, I was going to school in the Jewish neighborhood, in the Kazimierz District. And then my parents decided I could walk alone, without any-- being escorted by our live-in maid. And I had to learn how to survive walking through some rough neighborhoods there, where I was almost every-- each day, attacked by some antisemitic kids. I had to learn how to fight back, how to run sometimes, you know. And it was my daily activity until the war broke out. Now, when the war broke out in September the 1st, 1939, [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] just two weeks prior to the breaking out of the war, we are preparing for the war. We had to dig in shelters. It was required by the Polish-- order from the Polish government. There was a general mobilization. Many people that we knew were drafted to the army. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] We were digging shelters in the big yard. We had a huge garden in the big yard, and we had to dig the shelter in the big yard. And we were expecting something's going to happen any day, you know? This is the last time that we went on our vacation to our grandparents, to my father's parents, who had a small house, 25 kilometers, in a village-- 25 kilometers south of Cracow. And we just came back home from the vacation just two or three days before the war broke out. And we resumed our helping. I, and my sister, and my brother, digging the shelter in the big yard. And two days later, on September 5-- September 1, 1939, which was Friday morning, we were sleeping in our children's room, in separate beds, and my-- I, my brother, and my sister. It was upstairs. Around 6 o'clock in the morning, I heard some explosions. I thought it was raining, thundering, which we had quite frequently. Frequently, we had thunderstorms there in that area. Until my mother came in, and she said, very rapidly, I want you to get up very fast and go to the shelter. I said, what happened? She says, it's war. The Germans are bombing the airfield.
The airfield was something like about five kilometers from our house, you know? A military airfield. So we were sort of shocked, you know? And then I realized it was not a thunderstorm. We dressed quickly, and we ran to the shelter. In the shelter, there were already other people there. And the shelter consisted of a-- of a-- five feet deep or six feet deep trench in the ground, covered with wooden boards and covered with soil on the top. So we just walked into the shelter, and there are other people there. And there were some strange ladies and men, I have never seen them before, who became in charge. And they were like, who can get out from the shelter, who cannot get out of the shelter. You know? But we were there in the shelter until about 10 o'clock in the morning, when the air raid sirens, one of the air raids were over, you know? So we could get out and get some fresh air, you know? And we realized-- realized there was a war. I went to the Main Street, which was [INAUDIBLE] kilometers from us-- main thoroughfare. And we have seen army trucks loaded with soldiers going to the front. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] The Polish ladies were standing along the thoroughfare, throwing flowers at him-- at-- at the soldiers, you know, going to the battle, you know, and so on. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] Every now and then, there was a sound of-- air raid sound. We had to run to shelters, you know. On several occasions, I noticed German planes flying in the sky and the Polish antiaircraft artillery shooting at them quite heavily, you know? We could see those little explosions of the shells in the sky by their-- usually they left trace of smoke in-- in the sky, you know? And this was the first day of war. Friday evening, for Sabbath, we had to cover all the windows. [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] And of course, they warned us not to turn on the electric lights, but my mother lit up the candles for Sabbath. But there were several-- local antisemites who came to make sure that the candlelight doesn't show through the windows. And they were screaming loudly, Jews, don't show any! Don't have Hitler win the war! Don't-- don't light your candles. You know, don't show your candle lights through your window, et cetera. Now, my father, I, and my brother, we walked to the synagogue. Of course there were no candles in the synagogue. We just davened from memory, silently, without any lights. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] And the Jewish man who usually conducted the services, he knew the prayers by heart.
You know? So he didn't need any book, a light, and so on. And after the services, we walked home in total darkness. We heard some air raids. We heard some aircraft flying above the sky. We didn't know whether it was a Polish aircraft or a German aircraft. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] And the next day, on Saturday, in the morning, the same thing. We went to the synagogue, my father, I, and my brother. We davened in the synagogue without even realizing that it was the last time we were davening in the synagogue there. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] And most likely was the last time of any synagogue in Poland there were services. Maybe that was the last Saturday, I believe. Now, there were air raids throughout the entire day on Sabbath. We have seen German planes flying, but they were flying northward. They didn't bomb our city. Oh, no. Saturday morning, they did drop several bombs on the railway station and the bridge, but they didn't destroy the bridge, and they didn't destroy the railway station. The bombs missed the bridge, and they missed the railway station. And thereafter, the raids-- the German planes were flying northward to bomb, I believe, Warsaw. We have seen them coming from the south. They must be-- they must have been coming from the Sudeten area, you know. [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] And Sunday was quiet. We didn't see any movement of any soldiers in Poland-- in my hometown. But we did see, Sunday afternoon, large-- not-- large army movements retreating. Polish Army. They were going eastward. And we couldn't find out what it was. We couldn't hear any news on-- on the radio. Occasionally, we could hear a German propaganda in Polish, in a broken Polish language, [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] telling us that the Poles should give up fighting, that Poland lost the war. That don't fight for-- for the English and-- and-- and French Jews tell you to fight. And the Polish Jews to you to fight. This was German propaganda. You are fighting only for the Jews. Polish people, don't fight. Lay down your arms, and so on and so on. In the meantime, the Polish Army was retreating any way they could, on horseback, in horse-drawn wagons, in automobiles. By the thousands, they were retreating eastward. That was on Sunday. There was no air raids anymore on Sunday. Then on Monday, there was a quietness in the morning. We didn't see anybody. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] I went to visit my cousins, who lived about one kilometer away from us, on the main thoroughfare, on [NON-ENGLISH] Street. They had their own house, and my uncle there, he owned a grocery store there. Everything was closed. All the stores were closed. It was a very quiet Monday morning. And suddenly, we heard on the radio, urging all males military age, all males in good health, immediately leave the city, go eastward. Go eastward. Because the army is retreating, and at some point, when they can hold the front, you'll be needed for the army. So there was a panic. People were running away. And not only men, but in some families, even the wives with children were running away. Now, in our household-- actually, I missed my father's saying goodbye to us. He left, because he was the military draft age. He was about 40 years old at the time. 
INT: We're going to stop here and change the tape. CREW: Leo Bach.  INT: At the end of reel two, you were talking about your-- the last time your father-- you didn't see your father. LB: Yes. I came home and I was told by my mother and my brother and my sister that Father left with all the men-- military service men are able to be-- to be drafted to the army. And they left. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] So there was a panic in town. Everybody was leaving. And some-- in some families, even the wives with children were leaving, you know. The roads were blocked by the civilian population running away. It was a mass exodus from the city. And this prevented the army units, Polish Army, probably, from retreating. And later on, we began to think that-- that order to leave the town by all military able men was done by some Nazi agents to block the road so they can capture the Polish Army-- taking Polish Army. And the same situation I read in history book happened in France, I remember, when the Nazis invaded France. I-- I wanted to say something more about this Kazimierz district-- about this Jewish district in Cracow, which I should have mentioned. That area was occupied about 95% by Jewish people. They had their own Jewish culture. And there was very little antisemitism over there. As a matter of fact, the vicious antisemites were scared to go there because they had some Jewish roughnecks. And any antisemite who would venture there and try to do something antisemitic, he would be taken care of by the Jewish roughnecks over there. And they wouldn't come again. So Jewish people somewhat, somehow felt safe in the Jewish district. And I remember when I was going to school, once I came on the border of the Jewish district, I felt safe, you know, always. I was among the Jewish people. I knew that nobody is going to harm there, you know. There were only two types of Jewish people-- the orthodox and the Hasidic. The Hasidic, you could recognize-- the bearded ones with their little payots and the black coats. And they wear their own little caps, round caps, there. And they were mostly just Talmudic students, Yeshiva students. And many of them didn't know how to speak Polish, even. The Orthodox Jews knew how to speak Polish. They usually had no beards, but they were observant Jews. They observed Sabbath, all Jewish holidays, and they kept kosher kitchen. There were a few outcasts who you could see on Sabbath riding their bicycle. Everybody looked down upon them-- or lit a cigarette on Sabbath. Everybody would-- people wouldn't speak normally to them-- other Jewish people, because they was outcasts of the Jewish people. They had other Zionist organizations there in the Jewish district-- and Jewish sports club, the Maccabee Jewish soccer sports club, and a boxing club. 
INT: Did you participate in them? LB: Yes. Yes. And a ping-pong club. Yeah.  INT: What sorts of athletics did you participate in? LB: Well, I was very much into the playing ping-pong. I also was interested in boxing. And I attended a few boxing lessons there in the Jewish district. I was also very much into the soccer game. It was always national Polish sport. And we had a very good Jewish team-- the Maccabee team. So I went there quite often to participate in those sports activities, you know. They also had some good Jewish boxers, you know, who even antisemites feared coming to the [LAUGHS] neighborhood, you know. So this is what I wanted to interject into my testimony, you know, that there was a Jewish enclave which felt quite comfortable. They felt like at home there. On Purim, they had very large Purim parties there. They disguised themselves as King Ahasuerus and Queen Esther, and Mordechai. They even procured real camels from somewhere, maybe from the zoo. And they paraded the camels through the Jewish district, because I remember my father took me and my sister and my brother to see the Purim parade there in the Jewish district, you know.  INT: Why did you like it so much? LB: Well, I felt it was part of my history, you see. This is what I-- what I always learned. At each Purim we-- we heard about the Book of Esther, what happened there, you know. It was about Jewish people, you know. So I-- because I-- we always identify with those Jews, even though we lived in a non-Jewish neighborhood, you know. 
INT: So let's go back to 19-- to September of that first week in 1939. Your father was gone. LB: Yes.  INT: And you were left alone with your mother. LB: Right, with my mother and my brother and my sister and other neighbors-- except the men have left. And it was quiet that Monday afternoon. It was September the 4th, 1939, the fourth day of war. On Tuesday, it was also very quiet. But people still who did not leave the town were contemplating on leaving the town. And we had two horses, because my father needed those horses for business and wagons, you know. And I was taking care of the horse-- feeding them because our men who were there, we had two-- my father had two workers who taking care of the horses and the wagons. Those men also fled. So I was giving the-- bringing hay and food for the horses and water. And taking them out for a little exercise, you know. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] And one day a lady, a neighbor from across the street, came with another lady. And she demanded our horse and the wagon. Because she decided to take her children and a few other women children and they are running away. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] Of course, my-- my mother was resisting giving her that horse, and there was an argument. And finally, my mother told her, sorry, we'll-- I will need it for myself or for my children. And then if you are around, you can join us. But I'm not going to let you take our horse, our wagon to run away now. She-- the lady was so confused, she didn't know where she wanted to go anyway. And then we knew she was going to grab the horse and the wagon, somewhere there. And that was an investment, you know, for my father. So that was on Tuesday. And this lady went, left. She didn't get our horse and our wagon. Then Wednesday, which was September the 6th, I believe, [PAUSES FOR 5 SECONDS] the Germans began to shelling the city, Cracow. From very early morning, there was artillery shelling and aircraft flying over the city. The shelling was so powerful that we thought that we going to be gone, that our houses will go, too. All our neighbors for-- somehow came to-- to us, as if we were the protectors. Non-Jewish neighbors came to us-- [? inside ?] to the shelter that we had prepared. They came to our-- were sitting in the hall in our front of building there. For some reason, my mother considered the front of our building safer than the shelter that we had in the back yard. And we were all sitting there. And the shelling-- the-- the-- the buildings were shaking and the explosions we felt it was just like outside the building, you know. And this lasted until noon time. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] And around noon time, the shelling stopped. And one of the ladies there who was with us, she opened the door, [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] and she looked through the door. [BACKGROUND NOISE] 
INT: You were talking when-- we stopped because of the telephone. And it was because I think you were talking about it was that Wednesday or Thursday after the war began. LB: Right, right. Yes. Around noon time, the shelling stopped. And one of the ladies from the hall, that was in the hall with us, she opened the door. And she looked outside and she says, look like it's safe to go outside. So we went outside. And somebody just walked away somewhere and came back after half an hour, and said Germans are in town. He brought the news. Germans are in town. I ran to look at them myself, you know. They were in town there, in the main square, in the city square, you know, with all their heavy artillery, and-- and automobiles, and-- and so on, and so on. And they immediately were posting sentries everywhere near the bridges, you know. And some vital places, you know, as you have seen German soldiers helmeted with-- with guns in hands, and so and so.  INT: When you saw the-- those boots and those-- and those guns, what did you want to do? LB: Well, it was a sad, very sad sight to see. Just three days before, we have seen Polish soldiers, you know, all were full of optimism. We-- we going to fight the Hitler and German. Then all of a sudden, we see Germans there. We don't see any Polish soldiers, you know, there. So it was a very sad situation. And of course, we-- especially we Jews, we-- we didn't know what to expect. We-- we were prepared for the worst. Yes. Yes. 
INT: So once the Germans occupied Cracow, what happened next to your-- to you and your family? LB: Well, we were waiting every day for our father to return home, you know. And slowly people were-- those who-- who were running away from the town were coming back home to town. And there was one of the men that worked for us, for my father, he came back. And he told us that the father joined some group of veterans, Polish army veterans. And they were following the Polish army, hoping that at some point, when they set up the front line that they will rejoin the army and-- and fight back, help the Polish army to fight back. But this never happened. My father and this group that he was with, they were running away somewhere up to central Poland near the city of Lublin. And they were caught by the Germans there. And Germans were advancing very rapidly. They were fully motorized and the Polish army was in horse and wagon, you know. The Germans were fully motorized. And then from the east, the Soviet Union entered to Poland, unexpectedly. And a large part of Polish army was trapped by the Soviets. They was disarmed by the Soviets. This is what happened to my Uncle [? Morris, ?] and I have a picture here. He was shot by the Soviets there.  INT: So let's get back to you. LB: Yes.  INT: I want to keep this very personal-- LB: Right. 
INT: --about you, OK-- LB: All right.  INT: --and your mother and your sister and brother. LB: Yeah, we were living from day to day, waiting for Father to come back. And in the meantime, [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] we were just doing the best we could, you know. My mother reactivated one of the stores in our building-- front of building. She met-- she-- we used some meat dealer from before, a non-kosher meat dealer. And she said that he will supply meat to the store if my mother opens the store. And we knew some Polish man, he was a meat cutter, so she hired him. And she was selling the meat. But it was non-kosher. It was sold only not to Jewish people. And the business was doing very well. Now, somewhere there in-- at the end of September, the Nazis or the Germans-- what you want to call them-- administration camp took over the city and-- and-- and Poland. And they started issuing antisemitic laws and orders. They requested all Jewish inhabitants in the city in Cracow must take shovels and dismember those shelters. The shelters were built all over. It was some sort of a ditch in the ground, you know, covered with wooden boards, you know. And only Jews had to do it because they put signs all over the city that Jews were responsible for the war. The Jewish leaders in England and France and Poland forced Poland to go to war. It was a Jewish war. This is the kind of propaganda they were waging immediately against the Jews. And only Jews have to go with shovels, dismember those shelters. So I remember it was Yom-- Yom Kippur, the first Yom Kippur. The kahal sent notices in Cracow-- kahal was a Jewish community center-- that we have to comply with this. Otherwise, they would punish us. I remember on Yom Kippur, we went to dismembering those shelters. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] Then all Jewish stores had to-- those that reopened, those stores-- had to display large blue Star of David in the window. Now, since that store, meat store, that my mother operated [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] was not kosher meat store and she had this non-Jewish meat cutter there, so she never bothered putting a Jewish star until a Polish man from the local magistrate's office, he knew us. And he came and he demanded-- a Polish patriot, imagine that-- he demanded that my mother put the Jewish star there in the window. Then my mother said to me, OK, you draw a large Star of David and put it, she says to me, on a piece of paper. So I drew a large Star of David.
In the meantime, he started looking at the meat. And my mother says to him, would you like a big-- a kilo of meat of this? We weighed in kilos there and not in pounds. So he says, yes. So she ordered-- my mother told this meat cutter, cut a slice of meat for mister this and this, you know. So he cut a-- a slice of meat for him, packed it in the paper, and gave it to him. And so she took-- this official took the meat. He says to my mother, you know, you don't have to display the Jewish star anymore. That was he came only for a bribe, you know. [LAUGHS] Anyway my father came back after about four weeks. He came back. And he didn't know what to do. He knew that he couldn't go back into kosher meat business because they wouldn't tolerate kosher slaughtering in this municipal slaughterhouse. That was the only place where you could slaughter animals, you know, in the municipal slaughterhouse. So my father was just, for several weeks, just contemplating what to do. In the meantime, the Nazis were enforcing more and more anti-Jewish laws, you know-- what the Jews can own, what the Jews can do, what the Jews cannot do. Then finally, my father develop a way of slaughtering for kosher consumption in a secret way. We secretly brought in the shohet to a place. And-- and the animal was slaughtered there secretly. And the meat-- the-- the-- the animal was cut into pieces. And then it was transported secretly to my father's store in the Jewish district. And the shohet was there to-- to confirm to the Jewish people who came to buy the meat that it was a kosher meat, you know. There was also some, they called the mashgiach from the rabbinate also to testify that the meat is kosher, you know, and so on. But you have to understand, the people-- the Jewish people in those days adhered to the Jewish customs, traditions, in such a way beyond any doubt, beyond any questioning. Like for instance, when the animal that they slaughtered secretly for kosher consumption, and the shohet examining the stomach and the lungs, and declared the animal non-kosher, there was no second guessing about-- about it. The meat would not be sold to the Jewish people, you see, because the shohet declared non-kosher, you know. And this is the way of life it was in those days, you know. So my father operated this kosher meat business. And one day I used to go with-- in the morning and bringing him some food, some sandwiches my mother sent and some thermos with coffee. And one day, I arrived into this Jewish district, there were some-- first week in December 1939. And the whole district was surrounded by SS Nazi troops. And my father saw me from a distance. I had this food for him, but he couldn't come over to me. He tried to walk, but one of the SS men with a-- point a gun at my father, ordered him to go back. I tried to cross the line, but they wouldn't let me cross the line. So I had to go home and I told my mother what's happened-- the siege of the Jewish district was for two days and a night-- day and night, and a day-- and the next day afternoon. They were walking-- the SS search party was walking from apartment to apartment, from building to building, every Jewish household. And they were taking away everything of value-- silver candle holders, silver knives and forks-- any kind of-- anything of value, they took it away. Even from the poorest person, they took it away. Now they also searched all the merchants. They were very wealthy Jewish merchants who had the large supplies from before the war. They were wholesalers of materials like textile materials. They were hauling it away, the Nazis, in trucks. I have seen it myself. They were just hauling it away in trucks. And next day, late afternoon, the siege was complete. All the SS sentries moved away and my father came home. Now fortunately when the siege began, my father sold all his meat. So they couldn't question him where he had the meat or there was no worry on his part that the meat-- meat may spoil, because there was no refrigeration in those days. The only refrigeration that existed was in the municipal slaughterhouse. There was a cool house operated by the city where all the meat dealers could store their-- their meat. There was no refrigerators, you know, as you know today. There were ice boxes. You could get ice only in the wintertime. In the summertime, there was no ice. Sometimes, you could get ice in summertime from the-- from the municipal cooling house, you know. 
INT: You said that some laws were passed. LB: Yes.  INT: [INAUDIBLE] laws, and I wondered, did any of them actually affect you? LB: Yes.  INT: As a child, were things taken from you? LB: Yes. I remember in November, there was an announcement that-- that schools were reopened and we should go to school. My brother and I, we went to school in the Jewish district. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] And as we arrived in front of the school, I've-- I've seen all the Jewish students that I knew. They were in front of the school. So we came closer, and one of the students immediately tells me, go home. I said, why? What happened? So he says, go listen to the man that is standing in front of the-- of the gate. So I came close to the gate, and this man I have never seen before I know who he was-- I don't know who he was. He was very loudly saying every time and time, Jews go home. There is no more school for Jews. Jews go home. No more school for Jews. Then I realized that we were not allowed to go anymore to school. Now in other districts where most of the students were not Jewish-- where only very few Jewish students [INAUDIBLE]-- they allowed the Jewish students to continue for a short time-- maybe two, three weeks. And then they were all expelled, you see. There was order there will be no more public schooling for the Jews. 
INT: You know, you said something that really strikes me-- LB: Yeah.  INT: --kind of interesting. Earlier when you talked about going to the-- the cut-- I can't pronounce it, I'm sorry. The Jewish district in Cracow. LB: Yeah, it's Kazimierz.  INT: Kazimierz. LB: Yeah.  INT: You said that you had been, you know, you felt safe there. LB: Yes. Yes.  INT: And now, what-- wasn't this the opposite now happening, by going into that district, the place you had felt the safest? LB: Yes. Yes.  INT: Was-- LB: It was-- it was-- it was becoming dangerous, because the Nazis deliberately were watching the Jewish district. They had Nazi centers, Nazis police walking through the Jewish streets with the-- streets of the Jewish neighborhood. Yes. And there were mass arrests, mass beatings, shootings there.  INT: Did you witness any of these things? LB: I-- I witnessed-- now, the very first casualty happened in November or maybe early in December. I don't remember exactly when it happened, when a Jewish man was shot in this famous old synagogue, the Alta Shul. He was shot right in the shul. One SS thug at gunpoint picked up a Jewish man from the street. And this Jewish man-- what I heard was not religious at all, seldom attended services. He forced him at gunpoint in this Alta Shul, the old synagogue. And this SS man went to the ark, removed the-- the Torah, and he threw it on the floor. And he ordered this Jewish man to trample on it with his shoes, with his legs. And this Jewish man refused to do it and he shot him in the head on the spot. And this is where the man was lying, bleeding, and right next to the Torah, on the-- on the floor, yeah. 
INT: Did you actually witness this? LB: I didn't see it, but people saw it, yes, people.  INT: I only-- I only want you to tell me things that you-- LB: It's mentioned in the book, too.  INT: Right, but what I need for-- LB: Yeah.  INT: --you to tell me-- LB: When I saw it.  INT: --for our testimony are only things which you witnessed-- LB: Yeah.  INT: --or experienced. LB: Yeah.  INT: Not what you were told, OK? LB: Yes.  INT: That's very important-- LB: Yes.  INT: --to remember. LB: Yeah, I have seen in the Jewish district there, a German policeman-- they called him a Schutzpolizei-- grabbing Jewish people on the street and hitting them on-- on the head with their billy clubs, kicking them, and I-- threatening them with the guns. I have seen this happen, yes, right in the Jewish district.  INT: So how often did you then go into the Jewish district then? LB: After-- after the war, very seldom, very seldom. Before the war, I was there every day in the school. After the war, I went there very seldom.  INT: What-- once laws-- what kind of laws were being passed? What was being taken away from you as a-- as a young boy? What were you stripped of? LB: Well, first was the schooling. I couldn't go to school anymore. My brother couldn't go to school anymore. Fortunately, my sister graduated that summer before the war broke out, from elementary school. And she was planning to go to some kind of a trade school, the-- the trade school for Jewish women was going into becoming in a clothing designer or bookkeeper or something like that, you know. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] But I couldn't do anything except that we had this rabbi coming to our house coaching me for my bar mitzvah, me and my brother, how to read the Siddur. My father was extremely restricted in his meat business. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] He had to do this kosher slaughtering very secretly, which was life-risking. 
INT: Um-hum LB: Now, our baker who was renting the bakery from us. He was a Jewish man. His name was Mr. Silverstein. He was-- he lived there with his wife and three daughters and a son. And he was operating the-- the bakery. He could still procure supplies, of course, at higher prices. [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] And the demands were tremendous on him, because there was a shortage of food. And he used to have all kinds of people coming, arguing with him, many of them were antisemites. And screaming at him that he's hiding bread, you know, that he bakes, you know, because he couldn't bake enough to produce, because of a shortage of everything.  INT: But what about you? Let's go back. LB: My personally--  INT: Like what-- what-- what things were taken away from you? What kind of markings did you have on your body to indicate you were Jewish? LB: Well, in January 1940-- 1940, January, came order that we had to wear armbands-- white armbands with a blue yellow star on the right arm. Any Jewish person over the age of 12 years. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] Now I was already-- 1940, I was-- I was past 12-- not even 13. I was going to be bar mitzvah in-- in-- in-- in May that year. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] I used to continue going without the armband. Now in other cities, they used to make Jews wear yellow star. But in Cracow and in Warsaw was a white armband with a blue Star of David, you know. Now-- 
INT: What about your radio and your-- did you have-- LB: Oh, radio? The first week that the Nazis came to-- Germans came to our hometown they issued order that all weapons and all radios must be surrendered. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] So people were surrendering their radios, but my mother hid the radio. So I don't know where she hid the radio-- somewhere during the night. And I didn't know where-- whether in the attic or whether she buried it in our [INAUDIBLE]. I don't know what she did with it. She never surrendered it to the Germans.  INT: What about a bicycle? Did you have a bicycle? LB: Yes, I had a bicycle. Now, we didn't have to surrender the bicycle, you know.  INT: What about traveling on street cars or on the trolleys? LB: Yes, they were segregated. The streetcars became-- the rear part, there were signs-- only for Jews. The fronts part only for the Gentiles. But the Gentiles could go into Jewish section, but the Jewish people couldn't go to the-- to the Gentile section, you see. For Jews and not for Jews-- they had the signs on each streetcar. The same thing was with the railroad. You cannot travel on the railroad unless you had a special permit from the-- from the Nazi police. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] They were also taking away property from Jews. Now, Jewish doctors and lawyers couldn't anymore-- Jewish lawyers couldn't represent any more non-Jews. And the doctors couldn't treat non-Jews anymore. It was official. That was official. 
INT: What about your bar mitzvah? LB: Now, I come to this bar mitzvah. Now, we had to wear the Star of David. I quite often went around without the Star of David, and my father also. It became very severely punished by fine and imprisonment. And many Jews were being arrested for the just walking, stepping out in the city, from their apartment to the street without wearing armbands and being pointed out. Because the Germans didn't know who was Jewish, who wasn't Jewish. They had to be pointed out by the antisemites, by either Polish teenager or-- or-- or some really antisemitic person to go over to the German policeman and pointed out, this is a Jew, you know, without armband, yeah. In December 1939, they also issued an order that any large Polish currency banknote, $100-- 100 zlotys or more, had to be stamped, validated by German police. And they designated which police station people had to come, bring the money. For Jews only, 100 zloty was being validated. It was deliberate designed to-- to destroy Jewish people economically. For non-Jews, you could have those 100 zlotys banknote stamped as many as you wanted. Now, my father gave something like 2,000 zlotys and handed out his banknotes to our two men that worked for him.  INT: OK. We're going to stop here, change the tape. UNIDENTIFIED SPEAKER: [INAUDIBLE].  INT: So at the end of the last reel, which was three, you were talking about this zlotys that you-- 2,000 zlotys. LB: Yes. My father gave it to his workers who were non-Jews. And he asked them to go and stamp it for him. And they went there, and they stamped it only 100 zloty for each of them. Immediately there was some kind of a Polish antisemite sitting with this German police officer, stamping this. And he had said, where did you get so much money? You know? That money must belong to Jew, and you're doing it for a Jew. And they denied it, those Polish men that worked for my father. They denied it. No, it's my money. They said, no. You are doing-- doing it for the Jews. So they only stamped 100 zlotys for each. And they brought it back to my father, and they told my father what happened. But eventually, the Jewish people, the Jewish merchants, found a way of having a counterfeit stamp, like this. They stamped their money eventually. You know, they looked like real 100 zlotys, you know. Then eventually, they changed the currency. The Germans changed the currency in [INAUDIBLE]. 
INT: What about your bar mitzvah? LB: My bar mitzvah was in May 1940. And we wouldn't dare to go to our old little shul in my uncle's house. So we decide to do it in another uncle's apartment. And we just invited just 10 people to a minyan. Local Jewish people. And they came in groups of two, not to arouse any suspicion that there was a meeting. And the Torah, Sefer Torah, was hidden in the attic in this uncle's house. He was a husband on my mother's sister. His name was Haim Halpern. He was a very religious Jew. And he brought the Torah from the hiding in his-- in the attic. And we had a minyan. And we prayed while my other cousins were standing guards outside to-- to inform us if by chance any Nazi police or even Polish police was coming to that area. So they were not enjoying, celebrating with me. They had to stand guards on the outside. So we done it very quickly. I chanted my [NON-ENGLISH] very quickly. We concluded the service. Everybody congratulated me. And my uncle rolled the Torah, Sefer Torah, back, and put into hiding in his-- in his attic again. That was the only bar mitzvah I remember under Nazi occupation. My father insisted that I be bar mitzvahed. He wanted to have this-- the [INAUDIBLE] of seeing his son of being bar mitzvahed, even we were risking our lives to have it. But we did it. We did have it. 
INT: Did you understand the danger at the time? LB: Oh, definitely. Definitely. It was already at the time when the Nazis set up the Auschwitz death camp. And many people from our city and some from our neighborhood were arrested, Jews and non-Jews. And their family received a letter, some sort of a form letter from Auschwitz, that they are in Auschwitz, that they are being taken care of very well. And six weeks later, the same families received notices that those people died of heart attack if the families want their ashes for burial. So in those days, we already knew that the average length of life in Auschwitz was also like six weeks to two months. Because all the people that families received notices from them, from Auschwitz, six weeks or two months later. They could expect notice if-- if the family wanted the ashes removed. So we knew that the lifespan in Auschwitz was only two months. Six weeks to two months, you know? That was in 1940, you see. And some people from my neighborhood-- non-- Jews and non-Jews. Usually Polish patriots, Polish professors, you know, from the university, you know, and people that the Nazis didn't want around, you know? They arrest and send them to Auschwitz to be murdered in a few weeks. Yeah.  INT: When was the-- how-- how did the ghetto begin? LB: The first ghetto that we had it was in Warsaw, in 1940.  INT: No, no. You. LB: In Cracow was-- 
INT: I need to-- remember, we need to keep only about you. LB: I see.  INT: I don't-- you don't have to give me the history of Poland. I want to know when you-- when the ghetto was first started for you. LB: In Cracow, it was in March 21, 1941. They were systematically-- Nazis were putting all kinds of restrictions and-- and resettlement, they called it, from Cracow. You know? Some of my aunts and uncles were shipped out to-- to Lublin, but us who were left in Cracow were supposed to move to Cracow. But only those who received official permit from the Nazi police to stay in Cracow get to. Others must leave Cracow, you know?  INT: But where-- where did you go first? Into the Cracow ghetto, or someplace else? LB: We went someplace else. Because we heard terrible things from Warsaw ghetto, what was happening. And my father said we-- we prob-- we will have the same thing in Cracow ghetto. So we decided to move about some 12 kilometers east of Cracow to a small village known as Mogila. Today, the village doesn't exist anymore. It's part of Cracow now. It's known as Nowa Huta today. But at the time, it was a village. It was a primitive farming. You know, there was no electricity, no running water. And there were several Jewish families. And it was possible for Jewish people to still live there undisturbed. So we moved there. But before we got there, we had to bribe the local Polish police commandant. And this was only done through the help of an influential Jewish family who lived there for-- for generations in the village. And then we were permitted to go there. And there was something like maybe 20 Jewish families living in the village. 
INT: When was this that you went there? LB: On March 21, 1941. This is when every Jewish person had to leave Cracow-- live-- live either in ghetto or get out of town, move out of town. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] And there was an order, any Jewish person found hiding outside of ghetto would be shot to death. And any Polish person giving the Jewish person shelter or food or any assistance would be shot to death. And also, they posted all kinds of signs all over the city that Jews were infected with lice and typhoid fever, and they warned all the Polish people, non-Jewish people, not to have any contact or association with the Jewish people.  INT: Let's get back to you and your family. When you went to this Mila? LB: Mogila.  INT: Mogila. How did you get there, and where did you live? LB: We rented horse and buggy, horses and a wagon, and we took the few meager belongings that we had, and we arrived there by horse and wagon, toward the evening. We were stopped by the local Polish policemen there. And my mother told him that we have a permit, because my father wasn't with us. My mother told him we had a permission from the police commandant, and he could go to check with the Polish-- with the commandant. And he went to check. And the commandant said yes, let them go. And we went. And we already, previously, the week before, we rented a room, one room at a Polish farmer's house who needed extra zlotys, extra money. So he rented us a room. This is how most of the Jewish people who were settled there were renting rooms from Polish farmers. You know. It was a very primitive village. Dirt road, no running water. There was a well behind the house and a stable for horses and cows right next to it. No electricity. 
INT: And your house in Cracow, what happened to it? LB: Well, we had to abandon it, and some Polish people moved in and took over position whenever we left. Yes.  INT: What about family photographs? What did you do with those? LB: We took them with us. And we get in the village, in that-- where we lived, in this Mogila Village. We lived in that village until August 1942. At that time, the final solution was already operating, with Eichmann with his Einsatzgruppen, traveling throughout entire Europe and-- and transporting Jews from every locality and Jews, sending into death camps. Well, in August 1942, it came to the villages where we were. And we were ordered, by a certain date, all Jewish people must vacate this village. Anybody there will be shot. Any-- any Pole giving aid or shelter to a Jew will be shot, et cetera, et cetera. So the place that we had to go was on the other side of Cracow, a little town known as Wieliczka. It was known for salt mines. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] So we left that city, that little village, with the-- the remaining 20-- 20 Jewish families and so on. And we had to hire Polish farmer with a horse and buggy to take us with a few belongings, you know?  INT: How did your father have money to live during this time? How did-- how-- LB: Well, we had to do a little business.  INT: Where was the money-- LB: Well, we lived in-- we lived in that village for over a year. And the Jewish people demanded kosher meat, so my father was in kosher meat business there, in the village. There, we were very fortunate we had a [NON-ENGLISH] in the village. And the slaughtering was done usually in a farmer's barn. The farmer who wanted a few extra zlotys, you know. They usually bought the cow or a bull or some calves, you know? And they shared it with-- brought the secret-- first we had to-- to-- bring his knife. He didn't want to carry the knife on him, in case he was caught by the Polish police. And the slaughtering was done in the barn. And when [NON-ENGLISH] had declared that meat was [NON-ENGLISH]. It was [NON-ENGLISH]. My father had to sell it-- sell it to a local non-kosher butcher. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] And when the [NON-ENGLISH] had declared it was kosher, then my father cut it into pieces. And then we brought it to another house where Jewish people were coming, slowly. Not-- not in groups, the customers, and then buying pieces of meat, you know, and he was some sort of a distributor. Yeah. 
INT: How was he-- was your father teaching you to work with him at that? LB: Yes. I was helping out. Was helping out, yeah. From the beginning, I was kind of-- what's going on? Uncomfortable watching the animal being slaughtered, you know? But later on, I-- I learned how face it. You know? We also had a baker there who was baking matzo for the Passover. We were there during Passover time in 1942.  INT: What was the Passover dinner-- did you even have a Passover dinner? LB: Well, we-- we did the best we could. I know that as local baker, he baked the matzo the best he could with the [NON-ENGLISH] and the [NON-ENGLISH]. The [NON-ENGLISH] was the rabbi there. And he was overseeing, and he was approving whatever he could approve. He was also teaching the Jewish children how to read the [NON-ENGLISH].  INT: What about SS in this town of Mogila? LB: It was a little village, yes.  INT: What kind of-- [PAUSES FOR 5 SECONDS] in terms of the SS or the Wehrmacht, what-- LB: Very seldom they came through. Because it was a village. It was not important for them-- so very seldom-- the only time the Wehrmacht came in there, when they needed the farmers with their horses and wagons to transport some supplies for the Wehrmacht, you know. But the SS, very seldom. I-- I don't remember even seeing SS in the village. You know?  INT: That year and a half in Cracow before your family went to Mogila-- Mogila-- LB: Yes. 
INT: Did your-- did the Germans use your father's meat business for any reason? Was he hired by the Germans? LB: No. No. But at some point, he had to close it down. You know? They didn't-- they didn't use it.  INT: I'm sorry. Let's go back to Mogila. What-- what-- you said that you lived in one room. What was it like for a family? LB: It was a room, I would say, about 10 feet by 10 feet. And we just were jumbled in. There was a little stove where my mother could cook. And we just had one bed. And my brother and I and my sister, we slept on the floor, on blankets on the floor. And my mother and my father slept in this one bed. You know? We had one table, and we had three chairs. That was all that we had. It was-- and we had to do the best we could.  INT: What was the difference between this one room and the house you had left in Cracow? LB: It was quite a big difference. Quite a big difference, yes. Yeah. We just-- we just slept right-- right next to each other on the floor. You know? You could hardly walk through. And the toilet, there was no running toilet. The out-- it was usually outhouse, outside. You know? It was hole in the ground enclosed with a little booth, you know? Very primitive. You know.  INT: Versus what did you have in Cracow? LB: Flushing. In our-- in our house, it was, yes. 
INT: So your house in Cracow, how modern was it, then? LB: It was quite modern. Not as modern as here in America, you know, but it was quite modern. You know. We had running water in the house. We had electricity. [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] Automobiles. Very few automobiles. Most of the time it was done by a horse and a wagon, you know? And bicycles. And outhouses were very common. Outhouses, you know? But in our house, we did have a flushing toilet. And in the Jewish district, the homes had flushing water and electricity. Old buildings there. Some of the buildings were about 400 years old. But they had electricity and flushing water, they were modernized [INAUDIBLE].  INT: While you were in Mogila, what kind, if any, of education did you have at all? Your studies? LB: Well, the only thing I did study is by reading books at home by myself. My sister was reading, and I was reading. My brother was taking lessons from the [NON-ENGLISH] how to read [NON-ENGLISH]. Because my brother wasn't bar mitzvahed yet at the time. So but no, there was no schools whatsoever. We also had-- on Saturday, we had a meeting in one of the Jewish person's house. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] We had a meeting on Saturday afternoons where the [NON-ENGLISH] would come. And he was teaching Talmud. We were discussing Torah. So a few Jewish men would come, a few Jewish boys would come. Not women. And we were just discussing the-- the Talmud. 
INT: So in August 1942-- that I had interrupted you. And you said, so in August 1942, you were about to tell me something, and I-- LB: Yes. We had to leave the village. All the Jewish people had to leave the village, under the death penalty. And we went to a small town on the other side of Cracow. Wieliczka. The city was known for salt mines. As we arrived there, there were already thousands of Jewish people from all surrounding areas being evacuated. It was a preparation for a large scale evacuation to death camps.  INT: Did you know that at that time? LB: We began to feel it very well. They didn't notify us in advance it was going to happen. The whole city was surrounded by Nazi police and the Polish police. Now, we-- we noticed-- my mother noticed one of her sisters there with two daughters and a son. They lived in another town, and they also had to come to this village, [INAUDIBLE]. Her husband was shot by the Nazis just a few months before. My uncle was shot by Nazis. So--  INT: Can you tell me the names of these people? LB: Yes. His name was Adolf Berkowicz. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] You want me to spell Berkowicz, or? He was shot by the Nazis a few months before. So only his wife and two daughters and son-- which was my cousin-- they arrived to the village camp. He was shot because in wintertime before, the Nazis ordered Jews to surrender all fur coats, even the cheapest kind of fur coats. They needed the furs for the army. The army was freezing on the Russian front. So they were taking all furs from the Jews. And he was a member of the Judenrat, [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] there, my uncle, and he told the Jewish people, anybody who wants to hide the furs, bring it here. We'll dig a big hole in the ground, and we'll hide the furs. Not to give it to the Germans. And that's what they did. They hid the furs somewhere there, outside the Judenrat office building, you know, in the ground. But some Polish man knew about it, and he reported it to the Germans. And the German police came in. They arrested all members of the Juden-- Judenrat, and they shot them all. That was in the city of Bochnia. Including my uncle. They shot him. 
INT: But you never saw this. LB: I never saw it, no. So we met my aunt there, my mother's sister. And my mother's brother, with his wife and two sisters, we don't know what happened to him. We know that he didn't survive but we don't know. Because we didn't meet them in this village, [INAUDIBLE]. We were there for about two days, three days, and escape was almost impossible from there. It was surrounded. The whole city was surrounded. Then one day, we heard that from the [NON-ENGLISH], from the airfield, there was going to be a truck to take all the men who were working there. So I went there with my father. And here, I recognized the supervisor, who knew me from the [NON-ENGLISH], from the airfield. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] And he says to me, get into the truck. So I said, well, I have my father here and my brother and my mother and my sister. And he said, we'll send some other trucks for-- for women and for-- for children, he says. Right now, we want only men. So I say, this is my father, and this is my brother. And he said, I can only take your father and you. Your brother will come later on with children. So we said goodbye to my father and my sister and my brother. And--  INT: Wait. You said-- you said goodbye to-- you said-- you said goodbye to your father? Let's-- LB: No. To my mother. My mother and my sister and my brother. And my father and I, we boarded the truck. And the supervisor, he was a German. He-- he assured us that they would send some other trucks to bring up the wives and the-- and the children. So the truck was loaded to capacity. And he took us. And he brought us to Cracow ghetto. And he just let us loose in Cracow ghetto. And he says, he said, tomorrow, we'll bring the women and children. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] So next day, we wait by the gate of the ghetto, and here comes a truck from the airfield. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] And they brought a load truck of women and children, but my mother and my sister and my brother weren't on it. And later on we spoke to some lady there that we knew and asked her, what happened to my mother? And she says-- she says, there was a mob. Everybody was pushing, trying to board the truck. And this German supervisor, he didn't know who was whose wife and whose was the children. Anybody who could climb the truck, climbed the truck. Apparently, my mother and my sister, they just didn't want to push themselves. Some people were trampled, you know. It was a madness there. And apparently, my mother didn't want to push during the madness. So she didn't board the truck. He says, this is the only truck I could bring. He said, this German supervisor. And my mother and my sister, we have never seen them again. Now, my brother escaped. He escaped. He went to the railroad station. He-- he had no Jewish features. He was a young boy. He was already 13, but he didn't look Jewish at all. Blond, you know. And so no Jewish features. He went to the railroad station, and he boarded the train to Cracow, he said. But while he was on the train, he says, the Polish police-- imagine, not the German police, the Polish police-- came in, and they were scrutinizing everybody's faces. Any person who was just pretending, sleeping, like this, they lifted his-- the person's head to see if the person is Jewish. And they recognized Jews by-- by Semitic features, you know. But obviously, they didn't recognize my brother. You know? And my brother was able to come to Cracow. And from Cracow, he came-- he knew that if he doesn't find me and my father in ghetto, that he will find his aunt and uncle in ghetto. So he came to ghetto. And he just walked in through some opening in the-- in the barbed wire, he said. He just walked through. And he came to my aunt. And there he was-- my father and I, we were there, you know? And he told us exactly what was happening there. In the meantime, the people, there's thousands of Jewish people, were transported in boxcars, in freight cars, from the city of Wieliczka to death centers, like [? Chelmno, ?] or maybe Treblinka or something. We don't know exactly where. We-- 
INT: Let's go back to you now. When your brother arrived in the ghetto-- LB: Yes.  INT: --what did he tell you about your mother and your sister? LB: They were still there in the city of Wieliczka with thousands of other people. And they knew that something was going to happen, because the whole city was surrounded by-- by German police and Polish police.  INT: But your brother couldn't tell you anything more than-- LB: Not anything more than this, no.  INT: OK. LB: He just escaped just in time.  INT: Now that you're in the Cracow ghetto, how did you survive? You. Just you and your father and your brother, on a daily basis, how did you live? LB: Well, there were food rations, you know? You could get food rations. Money was worthless. You know? You could buy the food on the food rations, which was very meager, for-- for pennies, you know. But of course, if you wanted to buy any food on a black market, you had to pay high prices. You have to have money for it. Now, how did we survive? Fortunately, the Germans did not impose so strict restrictions on Cracow ghetto as they did in Warsaw or Lodz. People were able to get out from the ghetto. It was very easy to get pass to get out from the ghetto. I remember, I got a pass. You could walk to the German police outside the ghetto. Just get out from the ghetto, the building just facing the ghetto. And you put your ID card in front of the desk of German policemen, and he immediately stamp it for you for three months' pass. You can keep walking in to ghetto, out of the ghetto. And then there was a Polish policeman at the entrance. You showed it to him, and he respected it. And on the inside, there was a Jewish policeman who don't even bother looking at it. You know, you want to go out, you go out. You want to-- you know. The Jewish policeman were not real loyal to the-- perform Nazi duties. You know? 
INT: And what were you doing going in and out? What was your purpose? LB: Well, my father was able to conduct a little business from the ghetto, you know? Like selling some belongings, like some shirts. There was a shortage of everything. You know? Shirts or some-- a few meters of materials, you know? Neckties or even shoes, you know? And so on. So but I was able to carry disguised in a paper bag, you know? Some few shirts, you know? A few neckties, you know? To our neighbor, where we lived before the war, who would go to market, Polish market, you know, and sell it. And then he would make some profit, and he would give me the money. I would bring the money-- this is the way how we survived. My father tried to sell some personal belongings, like some rings or maybe gold watch or something like that. And that's what my aunts, uncles, did the same thing. Because the money-- we had to go to work, you know? Everybody had to be assigned to some kind of employment. And the-- their wages were, for Jews, special wages were very low. About one quarter what the non-Jews were getting. Also their food rations were very meager. Something one quarter what the non-Jews were getting. You know. But there was no shortage of food in Cracow ghetto. There was a food-- there was a kitchen, public kitchen, that you could go and get a soup. And then I also noticed something strange there, which to this day, I cannot understand. I saw a German Army Wehrmacht horse and wagon bringing a-- containers, huge containers of soup, and he was dividing it to the people, this German soldier. I don't know whether he was doing it out of humanitarian effort, or whether he was doing it to people who were working at the German installation. Because they forced the Jews from the ghetto to work in various German installations there, you know. 
INT: What about you? LB: I was-- I rejoined my working group at the airfield. You see, I was in the camp at the airfield before. And I escaped from the camp back to the village, because I wanted to go together with my parents.  INT: How did you wind-- how did you wind up working at that airfield? You didn't tell me that. LB: Well, I skip too fast. Just about two days before the Nazis invaded Soviet Union, in June 20th or June 21, 1941, my father sent me to Cracow on a bicycle without the armband, you know? Because it was death penalty for any Jew to go from-- to enter Cracow without special permission. And I was going without an armband, you know? On a bicycle. And I was able to get away-- get away with it. To deliver some-- something that my father wanted this neighbor to sell it for us. This Polish neighbor. And coming back home, I-- coming back home, I-- I ended up in a street where there was a trapped. Everybody, they were-- they were grabbing the German police. It was-- the ex-- the exit from the street was blocked. And I couldn't get out of the city. I couldn't even go back. And I was trapped. And next thing, I was with-- taken with several hundred men on a truck. And they took us in this airfield, and they made us unload freight cars with supplies, you know? They were preparing for the invasion of the Soviet Union. And we were working there all night and all day, and they-- and they gave us some soup and coffee and some bread, you know, to-- And after that, they separate all Jews. They separated all Jews. And the Jews, they kept there in a camp, in a barracks. And all the non-Jews, they let go. So I was in that camp already. You see? And after a few weeks, I escaped from that camp. 
INT: How did you manage to do that? LB: It was very easy to escape. It was very easy. It wasn't guarded-- severely guarded. You know? But the Jewish people, some of them, like, for instance, didn't have any place where to hide. So it was a convenient place to hide. You know? This camp. And in that camp, that camp was run by the-- by the Luftwaffe. There was no atrocities. They didn't give us much to eat, but one could survive, and one could sometimes do a little business with the civilians, Polish civilians, working at the airfield. And you could-- they could bring you some bread or some fruit, you know? The-- the Polish civilians, you know, for exchange of something, you know. So it was a more or less convenient place to hide, you know? But I wanted to be with my parents. So after about two months, or-- two months, I escaped from that place. You know? It was very easy. There was an opening in the fence, barbed wire fence, and I just walked through it, and I walked back to the village. You know? And it was about five kilometers away. Not far. You know? So I went-- I went back to the village. And I was at home. But later on, my father was afraid that maybe they would report that I was missing to the police. Maybe they will look for me. So I went back to that camp. And then I noticed that they were taking Jews from the village to work at the airfield, not in the camp. Not to keep them in the camp. They were coming every day, walking, to work in the camp, and walking back home in the evening. So I asked the supervisor to let me also stay home rather than stay in the camp. So he says, yes. You can stay home. So I start coming every day in the morning and walking back home in the evening with something like 20 or 30 other Jewish men. They lived in the-- in the village where I lived and the adjacent-- adjacent village [INAUDIBLE]. 
INT: We're going to stop here, change the tape.  INT: OK, we were just talking, in the tape break-- LB: Yes.  INT: --about the-- you went back to work at the airfield-- LB: Yes.  INT: --when you were in the ghetto in Cracow. LB: I picked--  INT: And you were talking about the Aktions. LB: Right. There was a-- in ghetto, there were Aktions every few weeks. There were Aktions where they were taking all those who couldn't prove that they were working in some necessary capacity, you see, for the German war-- war effort. They were taking them and-- and transporting to death camps. And we never-- and we never heard about those people. Now, the same situation existed while we still lived in that village, you know. That's why they had some Jewish people from the villages working at-- working at the airfield, to have it stamp on their ID card that they work at the airfield, see? So the same thing when I was dropped in ghetto with my father, we also started working at the airfield to have the stamp on your ID card that you are not just sitting in ghetto doing nothing. In case of an Aktion, that you could feel some kind of a sense of security that they won't take you away, you know. But it was a false sense of security, later on, we found out, anyway, you know. Because they were-- aimed to destroy all the Jewish people, anyway, in truth. 
INT: What about your father and your brother? What kind of work papers did they have? LB: Well, my father, later on, was able to contact a small camp where they kept the Jewish people there at the camp, not far from our house in our district, [NON-ENGLISH] district, where we lived. That camp, they were more or less storing supplies, building supplies for the German war effort. Building supplies, you know, like cement and bricks and so on and so. And my father, through some connection, was able to get into that camp with my brother. When they were just about ready to liquidate ghetto, my father escaped from the ghetto with my brother and went to that camp, you see. But until they liquidated the ghetto, we were all in ghetto, because we felt more secure in the ghetto. You know, you at least slept in your own rooms-- in-- in the room with other people, you know.  INT: With whom were you living? LB: With my aunt, the one who is now in Australia.  INT: Her name? LB: What?  INT: Her name. LB: Her name was Gosta Goldberger. Her husband was Helidg Goldberger. And he survived with Schindler, you know, under the protection of Schindler, you know, in Schindler's factory-- her husband, you know. But anyway, when we're in the ghetto, we lived in the same apartment there. Now, you have to understand that they crowded a lot of people into the ghetto. And to-- to a room, like 10 by 10. The housing authority could assign something like 10 people to stay with you, you know. That's how it was crowded, you know. We slept on the floors, on the beds, anywhere we could, you know. So my aunt's apartment was quite crowded with some other people, too, that we didn't know, you know. 
INT: And then what happened? LB: Then there was a Aktion in November 1942, Aktion in the ghetto. And this time-- by that time, my grandmother, who lived also with my Aunt in the ghetto-- my father's mother. She was already taken away by the Nazis with the transport. She was at least 80 years old. We don't know what happened to her. But I'm sure sent to death camp. Her husband, my grandfather, was still there. He was 92. He was still there. And there was an Aktion. And everybody had to line up on the street in the ghetto. And that time, any affiliation, work affiliation, anywhere you worked, was not helping you. There were-- the whole ghetto was surrounded by the special SS units, the Einsatzgruppen, and the Polish police and German police. You couldn't get out from the ghetto at all. They usually surrounded during the night, quietly. And you didn't hear anything about it. And you get up in the morning, and you see nobody can get out from the ghetto. So we had to line up. The order was lined up on the street. We had to lined up. And as we lined up, we walked in front of group of SS officers who look at every person, and look at me, look at my father. And then he-- and he points out with a stick or whip that you go to the left or to the right. One group, obviously, was going to their death, to be transported to death camps. Now, for sure, then, my father and I, we were sent into the other side. And we were sent to work, and we went to the airfield. The supervisors from the airfield was there again, waiting for us. I don't know whether he was doing it for humanitarian reason or whether he went there to get his Jewish workers because they needed the Jewish workers. I really-- it's not clear to me. He was there. He recognized me. And I said, this is my father, again. And he took me and my father with me. But my brother was able to hide somehow. Otherwise, they would probably send him to death camp. But my grandfather, they couldn't save him. And when we came home in the evening from-- from work that day, from the airfield, we didn't find my-- my grandfather there anymore. We don't know what happened to him. And we didn't find many other people. There was a man I know. They took his wife and son. He cried like a little baby, this man. And they took his wife. He was standing right with his wife and his-- and his son, you know. They-- they sent him to one side and his wife and his son to another side, you know. And my brother was waiting for us. He was able to hide in some little tiny, hollow place over there. He was able to hide, you know. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] The Germans search every apartment, every-- every basement, every attic. They don't themselves search. They brought dogs. And they also brought Polish-- they were not volunteers. They were some kind of a service in-- in-- Polish young men who were military age. But they didn't take them to military. They-- some kind of a service. They called them-- they called them Baudienst, the Polish Baudienst. And they used these Polish Baudienst. And many of them were vicious antisemites. And they helped the Nazis searching for Jews hiding anywhere the-- you know, attics and basements or-- and so. Now, thereafter, we decided that ghetto is gonna be eventually completely liquidated. So maybe a safer place would be to some labor camp. So I went to the airfield. And my father and my brother went to this other small camp, you know, where my father was able to get through some connections, you know. 
INT: When you were in the ghetto-- LB: Yeah.  INT: --did you actually-- you-- LB: Yeah.  INT: --ever witness any shootings, any beatings, any hangings, any-- LB: Not in the ghetto. I don't-- I did see some beatings. I heard some fire shots. I don't know who was shot, who was not shot, you know. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] But not hangings in the-- the ghetto. I didn't see it in the ghetto.  INT: Also-- I-- I may be jumping ahead, but I don't wanna lose sight of something. LB: Yeah.  INT: You had told me this early today. You showed me a photograph of a-- a woman and-- your father's sister, I think-- LB: Yes.  INT: --and her husband and the little boy. LB: Yes, yes, yeah.  INT: Have you gotten to that part of the story? I don't want you to forget to tell me. LB: Yes, yes. I want you to tell-- I want-- I want to tell you about it.  INT: Is that coming up, or have we passed that? LB: No, I'd like to tell you right now.  INT: OK. LB: My aunt did not bring this little boy with-- with her to the ghetto.  INT: You need to tell us everybody's names in this family. LB: Yes. That family-- this is my father's youngest sister. Her name was Gosta Goldberger, married name. Maiden name, Gosta Silberbach. Her husband was [? Helidg-- ?] [? Helidg ?] Goldberger, born several generations in Cracow. He was in plumbing business in Cracow. He employed about 10 people before the war. He was a well-to-do person. They had one son, little boy. His name was Stefan, or Stefcio, we called him in Polish. Blond, little, beautiful kid. When we had to move to ghetto, my aunt would not take him to the ghetto. She entrusted him to a-- to a-- a Polish man who was a caretaker of the apartment where they lived. And he took him to his mother in a village, some village near Cracow. And my aunt gave-- gave them certain sum of money to hide this boy throughout the war, because my aunt had a very bad feeling that something's going to bad happen in the ghetto-- something bad will happen in the ghetto. So this boy was being kept by this Polish woman in the village, by the mother of this caretaker of the apartment. And as-- the-- and a neighbor woman, Polish woman, noticed this little boy. And she became suspectful that it must be a Jewish child, because it was very common happening in those days. Jewish people used to entrust their children with-- with the non-Jews in-- in their villages. So this neighbor woman demanded a ransom from this Polish woman who was hiding this boy, my cousin. So from the beginning, this Polish woman was giving her money. But later on, she ran out of money. She had no money to give her anymore. At that time, this Polish neighbor went to the Polish police, reported it to Polish police. This Polish police came and took this little boy, my cousin. And they turned him over to the Nazis. And most likely, the Nazis killed him, because this is what they were doing. And we have never seen-- my aunt never saw him again in her life, this boy. [PAUSES FOR 10 SECONDS] Now, I was in this airfield there in the camp. My father was in the other camp. And it was a good place to hide, you know. There were several other camps like this around Cracow, where Jewish people thought it was a good place to hide until the war ends, you know. We had to do a little work there, you know. But there were no atrocities there at-- at the airfield. And we were treated fairly decently there, you know. Of course, there was not enough food. But we were able to-- to get more food by-- by being in contact with the Polish civilians working there. And this was going on until July 1943, when the situation in the east, on the Eastern Front, was growing worse, and the Soviets were pushing the Germans out of Russia. And then, on the outskirts of Poland, they decided to consolidate all the small camps, for security reason, into the large camp. And this is where they took us all-- all the Jewish people from Plaszow-- from the airfield, into Plaszow. The ghetto in Cracow did not exist for three months already. The ghetto in Cracow was liquidated by March 1943. 
INT: I-- I-- I wanted to ask you, were you aware while you were in-- LB: At the airfield?  INT: Cracow-- or-- in Cracow or in the airfield, about Schindler at all? LB: Very little, very little.  INT: You didn't know about the factory really? LB: We heard that there was a Emalia factory that was owned by the Jewish person before the war, but now it's owned by a German known Schindler. And that's all we knew-- that-- that Schindler was-- we only knew, in hush-hush, that Schindler was a person who the Jews could do business with. And he was a German, but in hush-hush, we knew that Jews could do business with him.  INT: So in the ghetto-- LB: Yes.  INT: --the large last liquidation of the ghetto-- LB: Yes.  INT: --where were you with-- LB: I was at the airfield, in the camp at the airfield, in the Flugplatz, yeah.  INT: So you were safe? LB: Yes, yes. I escaped the atrocity of the liquidation of the ghetto, yes, yes. But in July, the first week in July, 1943, they began to bringing all those small camps into Plaszow, because Plaszow was a very large camp. It was constructed at the-- right on the Jewish cemetery. It was a new-- new Jewish cemetery, because the old one was already overcrowded. And it was almost on the outskirts of Cracow, in a hilly area with hills. And the people who were there, incarcerated before I arrived there, it was their task to remove all the tombstones that the Jewish erected on their-- over the graves of their departed relatives. And they used those tombstones to pave the-- the road there in the camp. Now, when I arrived there in the-- in July, the camp was already functioning. And they had several thousand people there, Jewish people. And we heard about the atrocities there-- atrocities there. The camp was mainly guarded by Ukrainian irregulars who the Germans conscripted into German service. They called them SS guards. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] But they were Ukrainians. And they were-- they had German SS officers to give them orders to run this thing, you know. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] We were there. We went through the process of [? absorption, ?] like assigned to various barracks. Then we had to go to the larger bathhouse to take a bath, you know. And after bath, we had to appear on a huge assembly place. They called it Appell place, you know, a lot where we had to stand up for counting. And there was erected a scaffold where they were hanging people. And they were going to hang two Jewish men on-- on that day that we arrived there, just-- just deliberately to terrorize us, the newcomers, you know. And while we were standing there on this place, I-- it was some sort of a sloping place. I was standing way behind, so I couldn't see what was happening in the front, you know. But there were several thousand people standing in the place. And they brought a 17-year-old-- years-old Jewish boy. And then other middle-aged Jewish man accused of sabotage. He was working in some factory there, run by the Germans. And this Jewish boy, later on I heard, was hanged because he was caught singing a Russian song. And they were hanged there. Of course, the whole place is surrounded by machine guns with those Ukrainian guards and machine guns pointed at us, you know. Now, I didn't see the hanging because I was standing in the back, you know. But I heard two shots. And I thought they-- they shot two people. But later on, I found out that when those two men were dangling on the ropes, the young man, the rope broke. He fell down to the ground. And under international law, I understand that in such cases, there is amnesty. The person who was being hanged was going to be let live. But this commandant of the camp, Amon Goeth, he declared-- he said that there's no amnesty for Jews. That's what he said. This is what I heard. But I, personally, I didn't hear it with my own ears-- people who were close by. And he ordered him to be rehanged. And he was rehanged. And when they were dangling on the ropes, those two Jewish men, this commandant, Amon Goeth, took out his pistol, and he shot each one of them in the head, I guess to-- to shorten their struggling for life, or something like that, you know. 
INT: Now, did you see that part of it? LB: No, I heard the shots. And later on, when the Appell was over, when I was-- when we were told to go back to our barracks, I-- I spoke with the people. And I said, I heard that-- that there was-- somebody was shot. They said, no, he shot them in the-- after they were hanged, just to reduce their suffering, you know, or something like that. Thereafter, I became used to living in that camp. And I was assigned to the worst kind of work because I had no connection. I didn't know anybody, although my aunt and my uncle were there.  INT: Which one? LB: The Goldbergers. They were there. And my-- one of my cousin, who lives now in Australia. Her name was [? Irka ?] [? Traub. ?] She was there too, with her father. Her mother was taken-- her brother were taken from the ghetto to a death camp. They don't know what happened to them. But her father was there. But I didn't have real connection to get to be assigned to better work. Like, they had some metal workshops there. They had tailor shops where they were sewing uniforms for the Nazis. And they had other types of factories there, which was considered better-- better work, you know. I didn't have such connections. So I ended up in the Barrackenbau, they call it. That was the function, Barrackenbau. We're building barracks, foundation for barracks, for new factories or barracks to house new people, you know, and so on. Now, we were sent to [INAUDIBLE], a certain section of the camp-- [INAUDIBLE] barracks for Polish prisoners. We were expecting Polish prisoners. And this camp was, again, separated from the Jewish camp by barbed wires, you know, and so on. So I was working on the construction there. 
INT: What about your father and your brother? LB: My father was still in that small camp until they brought them sometime at the end of August. They brought them also to-- to Plaszow. And I didn't know whether my father was in that group or not. But I understand that a lot of people from the group escape. When they notice the SS Ukrainians with trucks coming to pick them up, according to my-- what my father told me years later-- that some German supervisor there told them, anybody who can run, run, escape! So my father and my brother jump over the fence, which was a wooden fence. And they ran-- they ran away. And something like 30 or 40 people other did the same thing. And whoever had no place where to go, so they remained, and they brought them in. And when this commandant in the camp, Amon Goeth found out that so many people escape, he ordered that the remainder of the group who were brought to Plaszow be-- be taken immediately on the hill where they were shooting them. You know, there was a certain hill over there with a depression. And they were shot. And I was watching that shooting from a distance. They shot them all. And I, miraculously, escaped of being drafted to go with a shovel and burying those people. Now, later on, I saw they were bringing their clothing to the warehouse, where they stored the clothing to be reused by the living people. And I noticed a sweater, my father's sweater there. And I was certain that my father was shot there. But after the war, when I met my father, I found out that my father sold this sweater to a-- to another Jewish man. And he didn't have the sweater. And that Jewish man was shot, you know. 
INT: When you witnessed this-- LB: Yeah.  INT: --this shooting, death had become so much a part of your life-- LB: Oh, yes. Definitely, yes. Yeah.  INT: What did you even-- what did you concentrate on? What did you focus on to steel yourself against this? LB: Well, the main objective was to survive, you see, in everybody's mind, you know. How to get a little extra food and survive. I had to get extra food and survive. That was the main objective. You become numb to the atrocities, you know. And you hope that is not gonna happen to you, just like the soldiers on the front line there. You know that somebody's gonna killed, but you hope that it's not gonna to be you, you know. And that was-- that was the hope that you lived with, you know. I saw people being shot right next to me or being tortured right next to me, right in the Plaszow camp, you know. Now, in the--  INT: When you-- LB: --motion picture they showed this episode at the gate with the-- with a group that-- that was smuggling food, with the chicken. I have seen it several times, several groups was caught by this commandant, by the gate, smuggling food. And he sent them all immediately to the hill, where they were shot, you know. And I have seen-- I have seen the shooting from a distance, you know.  INT: When you say atrocities right next to you, what-- what-- what exactly do you mean? LB: There was a young SS man, about 22, 23 years old. He was Austrian by birth. And his first name was-- his first name was Willy. I believe his name-- his last name was Dreifsky. He was Austrian by birth. I am not quite certain there. But he-- his first name was Willy, because I have seen other SS officers referring to him as Willy. And we called him, in Polish, [INAUDIBLE], you know, as we were making fun of him. And he was a vicious, sadistic criminal, this-- this young kid. Now, I understand that he had one glass eye, that he was almost shot dead by the Jews in the Warsaw ghetto, during Warsaw ghetto rebellion. This is what I heard. I don't know how true that was. And he lost an eye. That he had a glass eye, this is what I heard. But I don't know. And he was very vicious. And he was selecting, usually, a Jewish person who was wearing glasses, who looked a little bit intellectual. And he was torturing them, beating them with a lead pipe until the blood was coming from the head or from his body. And later on, when he saw that this person was almost half dead, you know-- he was pointing his pistol, his Luger, to many people's heads, you know, and so on, you know. And then, when he saw this person that he was torturing was almost half dead, he ordered another Jewish person with the wheelbarrows from the construction to put him in the wheelbarrows and take him to the hospital. There was a hospital in that camp, you know, some-- own barrack where they kept the sick people, you know. This was almost a daily occurrence as long as the-- as this Willy was there, you know. But sometime by November, this Willy disappeared, you know. Maybe they sent him to the front. Or maybe he was afraid that the Soviets will be there, and soon they would be caught, you know. He disappeared from the camp, you know. But anyway, I was in Plaszow until November 1943. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] And I had family pictures with me that I saved when we were leaving this village, Mogila. I took them with me to Wieliczka. Then, when I was taken by the truck to-- to ghetto, I had those pictures with me. And in ghetto, and then in-- in Flugplatz. And then I took them with me to Plaszow too. And in November 1943, we were working on constructing some barracks there. And after the work, instead to go to our barracks where we slept normally, they escorted us into a certain section of that Polish camp. But we were separated from the Polish people completely. And we were kept there overnight. And we received some food and some bread. And next day, in the morning, they march us out from there. They-- we-- we were standing, you see. To the railroad cars, boxcars, the nearby track. We were ordered to board those boxcars. And they shipped us out from there. And all my pictures, the few belongings that I had, remain in Plaszow camp. 
INT: I want to ask you one question. LB: Yeah.  INT: But it's about-- I think it can take care of both Flugplatz-- LB: Yeah, yeah.  INT: --and Plaszow. What were the sanitary conditions like in each place? How would you compare them? LB: Well, in-- in the airfield, we had those outhouses there, you know, next to our camp. We have barracks where we lived. We had running water. But there was no place where to take showers, so we just bathed anywhere we could, you know, with cold water, you know. In ghetto, there was a bathhouse, public bathhouse. You could go there quite often and take a shower, you know, bath, you know. In Plaszow, there was also bathhouse, you know. But you had to go in there on designated-- each barrack, on designated day, you could go to take a bath, you know.  INT: What about the toilets? LB: Toilet were outhouses, you know. And they called them latrines, you know. Just outhouses, huge latrines, you know.  INT: You were a-- a young boy at this time. LB: Yes, yes, yes.  INT: You were what-- LB: When I--  INT: By this time, you were 14, 15 years old? LB: When I was in-- in Plaszow, I was 16, yeah.  INT: 16. And I know this may sound trivial to you. But you obviously-- you were at a time when most people would have been-- young boys would have been interested in girls. LB: Yes, yes. 
INT: Was there any kind of time-- because there were women in Plaszow-- that you were able to communicate with women, that-- anything that was of any sort of normal life? LB: It was. It was. With some selected people, yes, it was. But I did not have the opportunity to develop any kind of a meaningful relationship with any young girl at that time, you know, because everybody-- everybody's mind was just survival, you know. You know. But--  INT: And I didn't mean it as trivial. I meant it-- LB: Yeah.  INT: Just, it's-- you know, those things were taken away from you. LB: Yeah. But the older people-- like, for instance, my aunt and her husband were there in that camp. And the other people whose wives were there in that camp. But eventually, they separated the women from men. And they separate by barbed wire. From the beginning, you could walk over to the women's section, you know. I used to go over visiting my aunt quite often, you know. But later on, they separated the women by barbed wire, you know. And there were-- there was a contact. People developed some kind of a close relationship. But I-- it was not on my mind. And it was-- I had no opportunity at that time because we didn't know what was going to happen, you know.  INT: I'm sorry. I just thought-- LB: Yeah.  INT: That was something that occurs to me-- people of that age. LB: Oh, yes. Yes, yes. At the airfield was more of it, yes. At the airfield, yes, where the young people will develop some kind of relationship with a young woman, you know. Because we-- we were in barrack next to each other. And we were not separated by any barbed wire, you know, at the airfield, you know. So there are boyfriends and girlfriends, you know, from-- even from before the camp or before the ghetto, you know, who somehow didn't get-- I mean they had opportunity to get married, but they became-- remained boyfriends and girlfriends. And there was this. 
INT: So that first kiss, those things that happen when you're 15 and 16-- LB: Yeah.  INT: --14, 15, 16, at the-- LB: Yeah, I was interested in-- in women, yes. But of course, I realized what was going on, you know. And survival was on my mind more than anything else, you know.  INT: OK, I just wanted to bring that up. LB: Yeah.  INT: I thought it was important. LB: Yeah.  INT: So you were talking about you were put into the cattle car. This was in November of-- LB: November 1943, yes. And we were shipped to-- to Starachowice, central Poland. There was ammunition factories there. And apparently, a lot of people, Jewish people in the camp died from typhoid fever and starvations, you know, because they give you very little food, and work was hard. So they had to replenish the people to work. So they demanded some extra people from Plaszow. And the people who were not assigned to any vital operations, like I, they shipped us first, you see. Those who were working in those factories there, they remained there almost to the end, you know. But I was shipped there with several hundred other men, you know.  INT: What was the train trip like for you? LB: Terrible. For three days, we didn't know whether we were going to Auschwitz. And some people were able to look through some holes there in the wagon or a little window there-- which direction we go. And somebody assured us that we're not going west, because Auschwitz was west. We're going north. So we had a feeling that we're not going to Auschwitz. But of course, they also had death camps in-- in the north, like Belzec or Treblinka or Majdanek there were-- so we didn't know. Until-- after three days, you know, without any food and water, you know, we arrive in the evening at the Starachowice, in the railway station. And again, the SS officer, which is Ukrainian army, there-- waiting for us there to-- for us to disembark. And we disembark. And they march us to the camp, you know. 
INT: And we're gonna stop here, change the tape.  INT: So you were talking about just entering Starachowice when we finished-- LB: Yes.  INT: --reel-- reel 5. LB: And this SS officer in charge of security made a speech to us. He says to us, if you try to escape, you will be shot. If you stay here, you'll work. You'll get food, and you'll work. This is what he told us. Well, anyway, next day, in the morning, we had to line up for assignment to work. And there was this-- the camp Jewish administration, the Jewish administrator who was looking at you and was assigning you to the type of work that you fit. They had several ammunition factories there. And he just look at me and my cousin, who was there, too, with me.  INT: His name? LB: His name was Henek Berkowicz. He was my father's sister's son. Handsome young fellow, almost looked like a motion picture actor-- tall. He was six feet tall. Strong, like an athlete, like an Olympic athlete, you know. And we were standing together in line. And the Jewish administrator says, you and you will go to-- to the HH. We didn't know what the HH was. It was a factory. You will be working there. Well, next day, in the morning, we had to join the group that went to the HH. There we work on three shifts. One group was working from-- in the morning, from 7:00 in the morning until 3:00 afternoon. The other group was working from 3:00 afternoon until midnight. And the third group was working from midnight until in the morning. So we had to rotate those shifts. So I started on a day shift there. And my cousin started on the night shift. And it was very hard work. We had to push small pushed-carts, on tracks, containing metal ore, to the smelting oven. It was very hard work. And in wintertime, almost, your finger were freezing to the metal pushcart, you know. The food that we're getting were very poor, just a few ounces of bread and-- and soup and some substitute coffee or ersatz coffee, they called it. And occasionally, we got a few boiled potatoes, you know. The conditions were terrible there. There was a latrine, where you could go wash yourself with cold water. And there was the outhouses. But there was no place where to take a shower or to take a bath, you know, for-- for weeks. And some of the people were just-- looked completely dark from the work that they did, in some other factories there, where there was a lot of heat. And they were sweating, and you could smell the sweat from the people and so on. But it was easy to escape from that camp. It was so easy it was-- comparatively to Plaszow was the least secure place. Almost like the airfield, where you could just walk over to the-- to the barbed wire at night, and just under the barbed wire, just go on the other side and escape, you know. But of course, there was no place where to escape. That was the big problem. So-- so I was really amazed that they had so little security there, you know. And then I began talking about escaping. And there were two other brothers from Cracow. They were planning to escape. And they said that they will let me know when they will escape. In the meantime, the work was very hard there. And many people become-- became sick and were dying from starvation. I could see the difference on the people that I saw every day, from hard work and little food that we were getting. You can see that they're-- people were losing the flesh on them. Their faces became very small, you know. And people became skinny, you know. Then there was-- there became typhoid epidemic. And many people died from typhoid epidemic there. I was, myself, infected with typhoid. But somehow, miraculously, I survive. And after two weeks in hospital, they send me home. Hospital was just a barrack there with a few broken windows, you know. And there was a Jewish doctor who worked very hard there, day and night. And his wife was nurse there. They were working very hard there trying to save the people, you know, the lives of the people. We had no medication whatsoever. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] And after two weeks, I was discharged. And I could hardly-- I was so weak from the typhoid, that I couldn't stand on my legs. Now, while there, my cousin also was infected with typhoid, and he also survive. And after surviving the typhoid, we were assigned to light work for about two weeks, to gets a little bit stronger. And then we were returned back to our smelting oven job, you know. It was very difficult. 
INT: In Starawice-- LB: Starachowice. Starachowice.  INT: Starachowice. LB: Yes.  INT: When you became-- when someone like yourself became ill-- LB: Yes.  INT: --weren't they just immediately sent-- LB: Well-- well, it was that in my barrack, where I lived, there were people became so sick with the typhoid that they were not getting up. And somebody had to-- but they're still alive. Somebody had to take them over to-- to the hospital. And everybody was scared to come close to them. It was in the same barrack. So I volunteered to carry them over to the hospital. I carried them over. And then, after I volunteered, everybody in the barrack was scared to touch me, you see, because I was transporting typhoid sick people, you know. Why I was doing it, I don't know. Some people I knew. I felt sorry for them, so I transport-- I helped them walk to the hospital. I was the last one in the barrack to be infected with the typhoid. And nobody-- there was nobody to take me over to the hospital. I had to walk myself. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] Because all the people who were scared of me, they were-- they were infected ahead of me, and I was helping them go over to the hospital. So I was the last one from the barrack go over to the hospital. And the doctor look at me. He said, you have a typhoid. He didn't even examine me. I can-- looking at you, you have a typhoid, he says. So he requested that his wife prepare the bathtub. And his wife gave me bath. I don't know whether she had any soap, I remember. She was the one that gave me the complete-- she took all the clothing away from me. And she put me into the bathtub. And she gave me a bathtub. And then she put me to bed with another Jewish boy who was dying from typhoid. He was delirious. Because there was shortage of beds in the hospital. It was right near the wall with the wind-broken glass window, where the snow-- it was snow falling at that time over there. It was snow falling right through the broken glass window, right on that boy and on me, you know. They plug in the-- that hole in the window with some shmata. But somehow, the shmata, the wind blew it out or something. When I went into coma after-- on the day-- second day or third day. When I had awakened from the coma, I didn't see this boy next to me. Apparently, he died. I-- I don't know when, you know. Then I recovered.
After two weeks, they release me from the hospital. There-- there was the hospital, you see. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] Now, after the hospital-- after-- after two weeks in some lighter work, they sent me back to the smelting oven. And I was working there with whoever was still alive, you know. And somehow, I contracted a skin disease, some kind prickles all over my-- especially around the genitals. And I went back to this Jewish doctor. And he said, well, you need medication, but we don't have medication. Except, we have some influential lady there. She was one of the Jewish woman, you know. But he says, she has a contact with outside Polish people. And maybe she can get you some ointment through the Polish people. And she did get me the ointment. And he told me, just keep applying this ointment. But this ointment was not-- we didn't have yet to take a bath. And there was no-- no bath. Fortunately, by April, the weather was warming up. And there was a creek running through that factory, a little creek that they were using the water to-- for cooling purposes in the smelting oven. And I noticed that creek. And sometimes, after work, we had a half an hour time before the guards came to escort us back to the camp. So I ran to that creek. I took my clothing-- completely nude. And I went bathing in that creek and exposed myself to the sun. And this cured my-- this thing, with the-- the ointment and this bathing in that creek, you know, cured this-- this skin disease, you know. And that was fortunate. That saved my life in Auschwitz and Birkenau. Anyway, this is how we lived until May. In May, we already knew that-- that the war is ending-- May 1944. Many-- many of us died there of typhoid fever and so. We already began to see Russian fighter planes flying, because the Russians were already in the Eastern Poland, you know-- or the Soviets. And we were looking, at that time, upon Soviet-- upon Soviet as liberators, you know. So we were hoping that we were being liberated any week, any day now, you know. But in May, they transferred us to another camp, to another factory in the same city there, a camp with a high-walled camp. In the first camp, there was a barbed wire. We could see through the barbed wire what was going on outside. And the thing I wanted to tell you-- that those two brothers who were contemplating escape with me, one morning, they touched me on my shoulder, very early morning. And they said, are you ready to go? We're going. So for some reason, I didn't feel like going. I said, no, I am not going this time. They left. They were caught two weeks later. They were brought, and they were shot. We were watching how they were being shot outside our camp, you know. We were watching through the barbed wire, and they were shot, you know. So I was fortunate I didn't go with them that morning, yeah. 
INT: Were there other kinds of atrocities or murders that you witnessed while you were in-- LB: In this particular camp? No. I didn't see-- except there were two Jewish women were shot, because they refused to go to work. And the commandant of the-- of the guards-- he was not SS. He was just a-- how they-- they had special industrial police brigade. He was ordered by the SS officer to take those two women to shoot them. They were shot. I saw their dead bodies, those two women bodies, yes. Because I was working at the time when they were shot, but their bodies were still not buried, you know. And we all knew about it, you know, why they were shot-- because they refused to go to work. So anyway, they transferred us to the other camp with a high wooden fence. We couldn't see anything was going behind the fence. And they wouldn't take us to work from there anymore, because the war was coming so close. That was some time in June or beginning of July, you know. We saw, again, those Soviet fighter planes flying over the camp. And we are jubilant. The end-- or the end is coming, you know. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] But somehow, the Soviets did not come. And one day, we heard somehow-- somebody had connection to the outside, who had a secret radio. And they had-- on the radio, there was attempt on Hitler's life. And we received that message in the camp. And we're all jubilant. We could see the Soviet planes flying above. And-- and attempt on Hitler's life-- probably just a matter of days, you know? But somehow they managed to bring freight cars, those boxcars right near-- there was a truck right near the camp. And they start to taking us out. While they were taking us out, some group of people ran toward the fence and tried to escape, jumping over the fence. And one of the Ukrainian guards on the tower opened machine gun fire. And he mowed down about 50 people. Some of them were dead. Some of them were badly wounded. Now, there-- some of the badly wounded were screaming for help. But we couldn't even come close, because we would be shot too, you know. Eventually, they-- they let us come and take the dead and the wounded-- wounded-- wounded and take them away. And then the-- a civilian administrator, the German civilian administrator, who was a Nazi, came and made a speech that they are going to transport us to Czechoslovakia. We're going to work in the factory there. We have nothing to be panicky about, you know. And he pointed out one Jewish policeman there in the camp, who was heavily wounded.
And he was just about dead. And he said, he was responsible for the mass breakout. And he will be shot to death. And he ordered one of the Ukrainian guards, go over to this wounded Jewish policeman, to shoot him right in front of us. So he was-- this policeman was shot, you know. But he was almost dead, you know. Well, anyway, after we buried the dead and the wounded were taken away to a separate barrack, we're-- they began to load us again into those boxcars. And somehow, everybody wanted to go with the Jewish people who were in the administration. They thought that, oh, they're going to be preserved. But the Jewish administrator, he said, no, we're going to go to where we were. He protested it-- it. He says, administration in one car. It was just plain naivete and stupidity on their part, without even realize that the Germans had the same verdict for all of us, you know. Well, anyway, I was in a group where they ran out of boxcars. And at that time, all the guards-- they brought also Wehrmacht units to guard us after this large breakout, you know. They also brought Wehrmacht units, because they didn't have enough guards. So the Wehrmacht units, at gunpoint, ordered us to lie flat on the ground. And of course, we had a feeling that this is the end. They're going to shoot us here. Because they ran out-- they were short of two boxcars. So we were waiting for the two boxcars-- until they brought two extra boxcars. They brought two extra boxcars. And they were the boxcars without roof, open cars. And that was also a fortunate thing for me, because those people, in those covered boxcars, they were dying from heat there later on in the transport. Of course, we left the camp. We were underway. We didn't know where they're taking us. After three days traveling, we arrive in the western part of Poland in their city Katowice. This is something like 20 or 30 kilometers west of Auschwitz. Well, we are in Katowice, so we had the feeling we are not going to Auschwitz. They kept us on a side track there until midnight. When it was dark, when most of us were just feeble, and some of them were asleep during the night, they started rolling us quietly into Auschwitz-Birkenau. Now, the boxcar I was in was open, so I could see the tower, the entrance tower near the gate-- something that you can see on many pictures showing Auschwitz-Birkenau. I remember this, how our train was riding right under the tower, you know, through the gate, you know.
And then we're-- came to a stop. We began to look through our openings and so on. We see barracks. We saw [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] wire fences, you know, with lights, you know. So we thought-- we didn't know where we were, you know. We thought, oh, hmm, there must be a camp, some kind of a camp, because we see lights, barracks, people. Well, at the daybreak, when they opened the boxcars, and they told us to get out, everybody was alive in the boxcar where I was in. But in those covered boxcars, people died from heat, some people, and-- and was deranged from heat, you know. And we walked down on the platform. And then we went through a selection, you know. They separated the women. And-- and they had-- they had a few young children, the young boys, you know. Not-- not children, you know, but boys 10 years, 12, or 14 years old, you know. They separated the women and those young boys and those feeble people. And those who-- who were still-- still looked like human beings, they march us. And we were marching toward buildings. We saw those big chimneys and smoke coming out of the crematoriums, you know, and the bathhouses there, you know. But we didn't know where we were, you know. Then we're go-- walking near some dugouts in the ground where smoke was coming from the ground. And some inmates, with those striped uniforms, were attending those dugouts, you know. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] And later on, about-- they took us near one of those buildings. And it was the bathhouse. We had to strip completely what we had. And completely nude, we had to go through the disinfection and hair being cut off. Anybody who had a mustache, they cut off his mustache. All hair on their arms, on-- around genitals. And then we had to dip in into a huge [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] basin there-- a basin, with some kind of a greenish liquid, containing disinfectant. And this was stinging your body, you know. You had to make it dip completely to kill any kind of the lice on your body. And then we were issuing-- they were issuing us clothing. And we spoke with those people, the inmates of concentration, you know. They told us, you are in Auschwitz-Birkenau. And they told us what's going on over there. And they said-- they-- they told us, you look like a group who has-- has been selected to go to work, you know. And they gave me shoes and-- and slacks. And the shortened person got the short slacks and short jacket group. And long person got long.
We had to keep exchanging them with ourselves, you know, and a shirt. And that's about-- slacks, shirt, and a jacket, you know. And after this, they took-- they-- to barracks. We were assigned to various barracks. And at that time, they assigned my group to the gypsy camp-- where the Roma gypsy camps. Roma gypsy people were housed for many months, I understand. They were there for many months with families, with children and-- and a wife, and so on. They had to evacuate the-- the barracks were along the road, dirt road, on both sides of the road. Those gypsies had to evacuate those on one side-- barracks on one side, and to join the gypsies on the other side of the road. And we were put into those barracks on the other-- it was on the left-hand side, you know. Then we were there. And the-- the commandant of that barrack was a German national, a criminal with a green triangle. He was a vicious [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] individual. He used to-- well, he talked, and he used to hit with a stick or the club, used to hit many of us, you know. We had to-- he was training us how to stand for counting, how to-- in the morning, how to stand for counting in the evening, you know. In the meantime, we had seen those chimneys from those crematoriums smoking. And you smell the smell of the burning flesh, you know. And we have seen transports arrive going there, you know. Those people were immediately sent to-- to gas them. Then we went through selection. And this is where they weeded my cousin. He was there, too. Because his skin rash-- he had the same skin rash that I had a few months before. And I was fortunate enough to cure it. He wasn't fortunate enough to have it cured. And they selected him with all those-- in the weaker individuals. And he was gassed there. And I was there for about a month in this camp, in this gypsy camp. In the meantime, they also gassed all those gypsies. They took them away. And there was screaming, fighting, shooting there. Now, we are not allowed to watch how they are being taken away. We are ordered to stay in, inside the barrack. The doors were closed. There was no windows in those barrack. There were only little windows in the roof there to give some daylight there. But otherwise, there was no window. And this criminal, German criminal, who was in charge of that barrack, he warned us, anybody who will try to sneak out to look out would be shot to death, you know. And he hit a few people. And he-- he put some kind of a lock on the door. Then we heard the trucks rolling in. We heard shots being fired. We heard those gypsies screaming because, in fact, there-- there was-- they could have been beaten, you know. And many of-- of them who refused to-- to board the trucks were maybe shot. After two days like this, we were able to get out from the barrack. Those barracks were empty. We just-- a few of the pots and skillets that the gypsies left, and a few shmatas that they left, you know, on the road in front of the barracks, you know. So we had a feeling that they were gassed and burned, you know, and those things. 
INT: When you-- two things. LB: Yeah.  INT: First, do you have a number? LB: Yes.  INT: Were you given a number? LB: Yeah. You want to have--  INT: Yes, we want to-- LB: You want to have it--  INT: --film it. LB: I have to take my jacket off.  INT: That's OK. You-- you-- you fit-- you didn't tell us about your number when you arrived. So-- LB: Well-- you can see it?  INT: Why don't you tell us what the number is? LB: I can remember mine.  INT: What's your number? LB: This is A19723. And I became known by this number all the time I was in Auschwitz. There was no names. There were only numbers.  INT: And when were you given that number? LB: Now, after about a week, one week at this gypsy camp there-- [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS]  INT: Take your time. Just put your jacket on, and then continue your story, OK? LB: A crew from the administration office came-- who are also inmates-- with all the records, paper records, came in. And they set up a little table. And they-- the commandant of the barracks said, I want you all lined up in single file. You'll be getting numbers. So we lined up in single files. And first, you go to a man who registers-- records your name, where you came from. And then they assigned you a number. And then you go to several other men, who were tattooing the numbers, you know. And that's how it was. I received the tattoo. 
INT: When you also were sent to the gypsy camp-- when you arrived at the gypsy-- LB: Yeah.  INT: --lager, actually. LB: Yes.  INT: That's what it was, wasn't it? LB: Yes, yes, yes, yeah.  INT: What kind of contact did you have, if any, with the gypsies, you personally? LB: Nothing. Absolutely nothing. We were not allowed even to look at them. And they were only about two days after we arrived. We only saw them when they brought us into the camp. I saw the children playing near large pool of water, a large pool of water, which was not swimming pool, but just in case of fire, the-- the firemen and the firefighters had to use this pool as a water supply. So I saw some gypsy children playing around that pool. And then I saw some women, gypsy women there entering the barracks, their barracks, and some gypsy men. And that was all. Then we were sent to our barracks. And we had to stay inside our barrack until the gypsies were removed. When they were removed, then they opened the barracks. We could see-- we could go across this-- the road to another barrack, you know, to see some other people, you know.  INT: What about homosexuals in Auschwitz? LB: Well, the only place where I noticed some purple triangles was when I was assigned to Monowitz, to the Buna Factory, for the-- to work for the IG Farben. It was a camp. And maybe they had about 10,000 or 12,000 inmates. And there, I have seen some individuals-- not many, but some-- with this purple triangle. Right. And I was curious what it is, because there was a red triangle. They were the communists. And then there was this green triangle of the German criminals. Then there was a black triangle. I don't know what the black triangle was. And of course, the Jewish people had two triangles, a yellow and a red, you know. And in there, I saw those purple triangles, you know. And I was just curious what is what, you know. So talking with other Jewish men, who have been there months before, and so they were telling me who they are, who these people were, you know. 
INT: What about this-- this prisoner? Do you remember his name, the one who locked you into the barracks when the gypsies were taken away? LB: The commandant of the barrack. Yeah, he was a interesting individual. He was in Cracow Ghetto in 1940 and-- and part of '41. He was the manager of the employment department in the ghetto. And his job was to procure and assign as many able-bodied Jews to work for the German war effort as possible. He was an individual from northwestern Poland. He could also speak Polish, and he had a Polish name. But he was of German nationality. So he was German. His name was Kozlowski. And I understand that he was getting along very well with the Jews in the Cracow Ghetto as the-- as the chief of the work-- employment office. And he was bragging about it, that while he was the chief of the employment office in ghetto, the Jews gave him many gifts. They gave him leather coat. They gave him beautiful boots. He says, the Jews gave me so many things, and this is what they ended me. I became a prisoner in Auschwitz. That's what-- he was telling us that, you know. He was bragging about it. He says, if I had not been chief with your coarse Jews-- this is what he said-- I would not have been here, you know.  INT: So let's go back to-- I-- I-- I had interrupted your flow. LB: Yeah. 
INT: --to when they let you-- when the-- you were let out of the barracks once the gypsies were removed. LB: Well, we had to go to more selections. And I remember, again, we-- we were herded into this latrine. It was a very huge latrine. And there we were walking out, one by one, completely nude. And there were several young SS officers who were standing there, very jokingly, telling-- telling themselves jokes and laughing, you know. And one was standing with a stick, you know, and pointing out whether you go to the left or to the right. I don't know if any of them was Mengele. But later on, I noticed one who I think it was Mengele. And those officers, about three or four of them-- young, maybe in the late 20s, you know. SS uniforms, you know, and laughing, you know. And, go here. Go there. Go there. This is where my cousin had to go to the left. And our baker's son, who operated our-- the man who was operating our bakery, Mr. Silverstein, his son-- I knew him very-- Yankl. He was a man of about 22. But he had a deformed leg. He was dragging his leg as he was walking. He also went to the left. So the following day, I met my cousin and this Yankl Silverstein in a latrine. And I asked them where they were, because they were taken away from the same barrack where I was, you know. So they told me, they said they-- they are sure that they're going to be gassed. I said, how-- what makes you say that? So-- because they are with all the weak, sick people, you know. And that was the last time I saw them. I didn't see them anymore. I don't know what happened to them. They-- most likely, they took them during the night, you know. Now, there's one man in my barrack that hanged himself on a-- on a belt. We-- you received a belt, you know, to-- to hold your trousers. But in the morning, we get up and see somebody's hanging there. And the-- the assistants to this barrack commandant, he-- they took him down. They laid him down near the barrack, you know, outside. And when we're lined up for counting in the morning-- we had to be counted every morning and evening. This commandant walks with a stick like mad, this Kozlowski. And he's one man short. And nobody can tell him anything, because, if you said a word, he would hit you with the stick on the head or on the face. He says, one man! He counts-- counting and recounting, counting and recounting. So-- 
INT: We have to-- LB: And he comes--  INT: We have to stop. I'm really sorry. LB: Yeah.  INT: We have to change the tape.  INT: No, if you wanted to. The end of reel six, you were talking about the-- the-- I guess he was a kapo. LB: He was a kommandant of the-- of the barrack. He was in charge of the barrack, usually some criminal, you know, who was an inmate in the concentration camp, you know?  INT: So he was walking up and down the line? LB: And counting and recounting, and he was shot, one person shot. And he could-- nobody could say anything. And he couldn't-- wouldn't tell anybody-- tell him anything. Finally, somebody took the courage and tell him that there's a dead body, the man who hang himself. And he turns around and said, oh, yes. That's the [? shot ?] man, you know? After something like one hour of screaming and hitting people there with his stick, you know, well, then somebody was able to tell him that there was the body there, lying there. That body was lying there for two days like this before they took it away. And each counting thereafter, he was one person short. Because he himself was deranged for some reasons, you know? And somebody had to remind-- take the courage to remind him, you know, that there was the body, you know? Now, we were there for about four weeks in this particular gypsy camp. And we went through this counting, recounting. And he was training us how to take off the cap. We had those inmates' caps, you know, round caps, in front of a German official or German individual, how to be a good prisoners. That was-- that was the indoctrination. And he says, you're going to go to work. And one day arrives a man on a bicycle, SS officer. And this, I believe, was Mengele. Because when I have seen Mengele's pictures, he had a mustache. And he was a man like in late 30s, I would say. And he was whistling, riding the bicycle. And this is what I have heard about Mengele. And he ordered us to come out from the barrack and to lined up. And he started talking to us. And he said that he needs [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] 20 plumbers. And at the time, we were in a frame of mind that you have to show something, that you have some kind of a skill that they need. Otherwise, they send-- they would send you to gas. They kill you. So lot of men showed up, raised up their hands. We are plumbers. And he says, I need 30 electricians. So again, quite a few men raised up their hands. I am electrician. Then I need 50 tailors. People raised hands. They are tailors. Then he says, sorry, I don't need anybody, he says to me. Then he said to me, OK, I need about 20 people who can repair roofs. Again, 30 people showed up or more, [? who repair ?] roofs. And he changed his mind. No. No, maybe I-- I-- I need about 100 bricklayers. Now we realized that he's playing games. And after he played, we were-- thereafter, when he started saying that he needs 20 people, so many, so many, skill, nobody was responding to him anymore. And when he was satisfied that he really psychologically prepared us to a point that we are ready to accept anything they going to do with us, then he took his bicycle. And he rode away, whistling. So then we realized that his main purpose was there just to brainwash us psychologically to put into such position-- to put us into such position that we should just accept anything they did to us, rather than struggle and fight, you know? That was his main-- that was his aim, you know? That was his reason why he came to-- to, you know, to speak to us, you know, just simply to brainwash us to-- oh, how do you call this [INAUDIBLE]-- to ruin our fighting spirit, you know? 
INT: How long-- LB: Now two weeks later-- no, let's see-- no, less-- a few days later, we are taken out from there. They march us, everybody from the barrack. They march us to Monowitz, to Buna, where we're taking the camp in Monowitz with nearby IG Farben's industrial complex. And that was the camp. It was a satellite of Auschwitz-Birkenau. And again, we went through the administration process. They assigned us to different barracks. And they were asking also, we can it, so. But interestingly enough, there were several old men among us who passed all the selections in Birkenau. And they marched with us to Monowitz. And soon as we arrived into Monowitz, they were weeded out inside the camp. And they were ordered to board the truck. And they were taken away. And most likely, they were gassed. Because we have never seen those several old men. But they led the-- they passed the selection in Birkenau. They made-- they allowed them to walk with us. It was a really interesting situation why this happened, you know? When I was in this Buna, I was assigned to fixing narrow rails for narrow-gauge railroad cars, you know? I was working with a mallet there and fixing or hitting the rails, you know? They were out of line, so I did. The supervisor was a German civilian who happened to be a very nice person. And he was telling me that I should just take it easy, don't overwork myself. He knew-- he must have known what was happening there. And he had several other young men my age, Hungarian Jews, there. Because there was a time when the thousands of Hungarian Jews are being brought to Birkenau, where they were gassed and cremated. 
INT: Let's keep this about you now. What was the name of this German you were-- LB: I don't know his name, [? sorry. ?] He was a short, fat man with a mustache, always pipe in his mouth, and wearing some sort of a corduroy suit with a vest and a chain, a silver chain with a watch, you know? And he told me-- he patted me on my shoulder. Don't work hard. Just work-- just pretend that you're working. I could understand every second word. He was talking German to me. I didn't know much German at that time. And one day, a kapo came from administration office. And he told the supervisor he has to take me along with him. And this supervisor began to protest. He thought that they were going to gas me or something. But this kapo, he was a German criminal with a green triangle. He assured this-- this supervisor that he's transferring me to the electricians group work, because I declared myself, I'm electrician, you know, during the registration there, you know? And they need electricians there. So he assured that supervisor German that nothing bad is going to happen to me, that I'm being transferred, too. And of course, this German supervisor couldn't do anything anyway. He couldn't stop anything bad if they were going to do. And this German kapo escorted me to a different group, working group, with the electricians. And that supervisor among the electricians was a tall, slender, Sudeten German. And he told me that he wants to see what I know. And there was a chemistry lab. And he was doing installations, electrical installation in this chemistry lab. So he asked me to work with him. And I went to work with him. There was a two-story building. And we go in the second story building. And he tells me I should go down to his workshop and bring him several screwdrivers. And I didn't know in German screwdriver. So I brought him a hammer. And he threw that hammer on the floor and screaming, cursing me in German. He points out to me what he wants. So I run down again. I brought him the screwdrivers. And this was going on for a few days, because I couldn't communicate with him. And he wanted to do a good job. Then he asked me to do something, some installation there. It was a metal pipings attached to a wall through which we run electric conduits. And I attach those metal pipings on metal brackets. And I cemented it with-- with plaster of Paris. This is what we used to do. But I didn't do a good job. And when he went there and started putting the electric cables inside, everything fell down. And he was angry at me. He started cursing me and chasing me with a screwdriver. I thought he was going to kill me, you know? But of course, he couldn't catch me. I was running everywhere in circles there. 
INT: What was his name? LB: I don't know his name. But I know he was Sudeten German because he knew also Czech a little. Then he started speaking to me in Czech, which was similar to Polish. Eventually, he realized that-- that the Soviets would be there any day. He mellowed. And he didn't care about doing good work. And he let me do anything I wanted, you know? I was doing for installation with him. They were crooked or not crooked, whatever, falling out, he didn't care anymore, you know? But there was another individual, a Nazi, real Nazi, working with a Nazi insignia, the swastika pin, gold pin. His name was-- he was in charge of the entire chemistry lab. He was Dr. [? Farber, ?] a vicious Nazi. He was making reports on the prisoners, inmates, working there. And some prisoners were tortured because of his report. They were-- they received 25 lashes. When you receive 25 lashes on the report that he reported--  INT: Did you witness any of those lashes? LB: No. But I know a Jewish boy from Krakow who received lashes because he reported seeing him smoking cigarettes, this [? Dr. Farber. ?]  INT: But you didn't witness? But you didn't see it? LB: I didn't witness. But this boy couldn't come to work for two weeks, he was so injured. He was sent immediately after the beatings, he was sent to the hospital in the camp, and then he [INAUDIBLE]. 
INT: It's important that you only tell me things that you-- LB: No, I-- no, I didn't witness it.  INT: --that you witnessed or experienced. That's very important. LB: I didn't witness that. And everybody knew that the end was coming there. One day, the Allied airplanes came in, mostly Americans, something maybe 200 of them, B-17s and B-24. It was on Sunday afternoon. We were already inside the camp. Because we work-- on some Sundays, we work on-- every day. And they came in. They started showering that factory with bombs, hundreds of bombs. Thereafter, the-- the factory couldn't produce anything after that bombing. You know, one bomb fell into the camp but didn't kill anybody. But some inmates were killed in the factory. Next day, we went to the factory area. And they took many of the inmates to remove those bombs that did not explode. Some of them-- quite a few of them did not explode. But the factory was still really damaged. They couldn't produce anything. And two or three weeks later, we had another air raid. We had to go to the shelters. The shelters for the Germans were thick, concrete, bombproof shelters. For the inmates were ditches in the ground and covered with wooden boards. So the inmates could go only to those shelters, ditches in the ground, including the German inmates, too, could-- could go into those ditches as a shelter. And when we heard those bombs, coming down, the bombs were whistling, you know? So you had a feeling they are coming right at you. So you just bend your head down, covering it with your hands, you know, hoping that this will help you. But fortunately, that shelter where I was in, nobody was injured in that shelter. There were hangings in that camp. Every two, three weeks, there were hangings. And we had to witness it. So I had to witness it. The first hangings was at that-- happened after the first air raid in September. They took two Russian inmates. And they hang them. Their accusation was that they were-- they broke into the kitchen. They were stealing food. After they were hung, we had to march near them. And we had to watch and look at their bodies, you know, a terrible, terrible [INAUDIBLE]. And thereafter, they hanged two Jewish men, or two Polish men, and then two Jewish men, two, three weeks later. And we had to watch each hanging. The last hanging was in October, late October. We came from the factory work. We saw those scaffolds set up, three scaffolds. And it was already mist-- the rain mist was coming. And we had to stop and look at the hanging.
There were two-- three Jewish young men in their early 20s, because they were planning an escape. And they were betrayed by somebody. And just before they-- the-- they scaffold it, the little stools on which they were standing were taking away from under their feet. They were screaming to us, friends, keep your head highs. We are the last ones. The end is almost over. You know, they were screaming to us, you know? And this how they were hanged, you know? That was the last hanging that I witnessed there, you know? And the air raids were coming every few days from that time on. We were going to a factory. But the factories couldn't produce anything, you know? They had also British prisoners working there, prisoners of war, and also Italian prisoners of war, you know, that we used to come in contact with. Then on January 18th in the morning-- during the night, we heard heavy bombings, planes flying over the camp and so on. During the daytime, we were gathering to get-- walk out from the camp to the-- to work. But we see nobody leaving the camp. And we were-- anybody who needed better shoes or better jackets, they gave us. And they also gave us something like one bread, loaf of bread, for four men, and blanket, each person. And at night, they march entire camp out. We are marching the following day and night through heavy snows. Anybody who couldn't march, they were shooting them along the road. We have seen dead bodies. Because it was a long march, several kilometers, you know? We march to small towns there. In the meantime, we heard the Soviet artillery behind us, the flashes during the night. Each time the artillery fired a shot, you could see the flashing in the sky. So they must have been something like 10 kilometers or so behind us, you know? We were hoping that we will be overrun by the Soviet army or something. In the meantime, we were marching. And the SS guards were on horseback. And anybody who couldn't walk, the-- walk, they were shooting them. After a day and night marching like this, we arrived at-- in an abandoned camp already, near city of Gliwice. And there, we rested for about a day. And somehow, they managed to give us bowl of soup to everybody, you know, that's [INAUDIBLE]. And then they boarded us into trains, boxcars. And we were taken away. Nobody knew where we're going away. It was wintertime. Snow was falling on us. The only protection we had was this blanket that they gave us, you know? And I was cold in the blanket, eating snow, getting with my hand from the blanket.
Some people died. Quite a few died, as a matter of fact. We were somewhere in Czechoslovakia at one stop for a day. And the Red Cross was distributing soup. But they couldn't give it to everybody, you know, whoever got-- to got-- to got-- had gotten it. Then they kept moving us. And then we arrived into Buchenwald. I believe it was about 11 days. We arrive in Buchenwald. And the boxcars are full of dead bodies. Whoever walked out, we walked out. And then we walked to the gate to Buchenwald camp. And again, they-- they didn't have a place where to put us. So they kept in the latrine or near the latrine in a tent for two days. And every time we were receiving some soup and some [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] [INAUDIBLE] coffee or some kind of minted liquid, warm. And we are staying there for two or three days. On the other side of that latrine, there was a warehouse full of dead bodies. They couldn't burn the dead bodies. So I could see each time they arrive a truck with several inmates, unloading. Those dead bodies were just skin and bones and-- and they turning green. They were just throwing them like pieces of wood into those trucks, taking them for cremation, you know? Then after a few days like, this they gave me a new number. I received a new number in Buchenwald. And I had to sew it on my jacket. It was something like 124 and something. I have it on my piece of paper in there. And they assigned me to a barrack. And that barrack was already overcrowded. There was some kind of a shelves there that we were just sliding in on the shelf and-- and slamming those shelves with the shoes when you're closing like this. And we're getting up in the morning for counting and in the morning and the evening for counting and just to collect our slice of bread and-- and bowl of soup. And many people died. There people were dying, you know? You-- you could be sleeping to a dead-- dead body. You don't know it was a dead body, you know? There were air raids. We could see the Allied planes flying low, bombing the nearby cities, you know? Once or twice or maybe three times, they took me out with some other people to clean the nearby city of-- of rubble, you know, the Weimar, city of Weimar. Then first week in April, I believe on April 7th, I go out to collect my bowl of soup and my portion of bread. You know, it was a dining hall. You received a token in your barrack where you slept. You go to the dining hall. You exchanged your token for the bowl of soup and this portion of bread. You eat it there. And then you get out on the other side. And you return around the dining hall back to your barrack. And many people went like this. It was around noontime. I eat my bowl of soup. And I took my slice of bread. And I-- as I walked out, there were already SS guards there, wouldn't allow me to go the usual way around the barrack to return to my barrack. They directed us in different direction. And there was few thousand of-- of inmates already. They marched us out. Evening, they march us to the railway station. Along the road, we saw few dead inmates who were shot along the road. Apparently, they tried to escape or something. And then we boarded those boxcars again. There was something like 40 boxcars. And sometime during the night, they started rolling. And for about first week, about seven days, they-- they were giving us one bread for six people. And they just brought a few buckets of water. Thereafter, they closed the door. And we were not getting any food, absolutely nothing for the remaining two weeks. The transport took about three weeks altogether. 
INT: So you were in a boxcar, just going back and forth? LB: Well, they were taking us. They took us to western Czechoslovakia, I remember, because I saw a sign of a city there. There was Czechoslovakia. I remember we were driving through bombed out city of Dresden and-- and Leipzig and then to western Czechoslovakia. And then they kept us on the side track for about couple of days. And then they started rolling goes again. And on the third week, which was April 27th already, we arrive in Dachau. And we were standing on a side-- side track in Dachau for about two, three hours before they opened the back [INAUDIBLE]. They tell everybody out. But there were only a few people alive in my car. I don't know what it was in the other cars, you know? So I walked out. And I was helped by the inmates from the camp. They brought out inmates from inside the camp with push carts. And they said, those who cannot walk, put them into the pushcarts and-- and roll them in, you know?  INT: I just want to-- so for several weeks, you just lived in this train? You survived. LB: For about three weeks, yes, about three weeks, yes-- now we stopped along the way somewhere in-- in Bavaria. And they made us to remove the dead bodies from each car and drag-- we were dragging them, because nobody had the strength, to drag them into the last car or two cars, which were loaded with dead bodies already, you know? 
INT: What about-- did they let you-- how did they-- how did you sleep? How did you go to the toilet? LB: We just-- just-- to the bathroom? There was a bucket. You just go to the bucket. And then when they opened the side door, the guards opened the side door once a day, you emptied the bucket or something like that. And we're just sitting on the-- on the floor there in the boxcar. And-- and you sleep, you know? There was a rain for a few days. And I remember sucking my blanket, the rain water from the blanket, you know? And somehow, somebody threw some potatoes, raw potatoes. And I remember, I was able to get one of those potatoes. And I started chewing on the raw potato, you know? And that was all, you know, [? one potato. ?]  INT: What about opening the boxcars ever and letting you out? LB: No. They only took to carry all those dead bodies one day. That's about all, yeah. That's about all. Yeah. Yeah. So we arrive to Dachau. And I showed the picture in that magazine there. This is one of those cars I arrived there. Very few people were alive in those cars, you know? And I was able to move toward the door of the car. And then somebody, one of the inmates from the camp, helped me to get out of the car. And he put me into the pushcart. And they had several of the living people in those currently around inside the camp. And they also kept us in a certain area where they were going to give us baths and disinfection again, you know? And I was just waiting there, sitting, and tried to stand, you know? And one inmate noticed my number on the hand. He was a Hungarian. He was not a Jew. He said to me that he knows that these numbers are only given to Jews. He was correct, you know? The A, B, and C, they were giving to Jews we were-- the Jews they were bringing, the Polish Jews and Hungarian Jews, at the end of 1944. And he said, I know you are Jewish. But I am-- I would not tell anybody. Because a few days before they took us from Buchenwald, they were removing all Jews from Buchenwald. They were announcing over intercom, all Jewish inmates, please get out of your barracks and-- and stand in front of your barracks. They were-- they took them out. We don't know where. I didn't go. I was hiding under the barrack. And the following day when they stopped looking for Jews, I somehow managed to replace my Jewish star with a letter P.
Some Polish fellow I knew, he gave me letter P that all the Polish people had to wear. And I sew it on. And I was traveling as a Polish man at that time, although I didn't look Polish at all. And this how I arrived in Dachau, until this fellow in-- in-- in Dachau says to me, I know you are Jewish. But I will not tell anybody, he says to me. I said, no, I am not Jewish, I said. Anyway, we went through this disinfection there. And we are assigned to hospital. The hospital was a barrack with blankets on the floor. And I was assigned to the hospital there. And the doctor in charge was a Polish doctor, not a Jewish fellow. And we were just lying there on the floor. And next day, which was Saturday, an SS-- SS officer came in. And he was looking for Jews. Any Jews here? And nobody answered. Except one Ukrainian inmate there was pointing at a Frenchman who happened to have a Jewish nose. This Frenchman had some kind of a large-- large nose. And this Ukrainian inmate pointed out, he is a Jew. He is a Jew. And this Frenchman, this SS officer says to him, are you a Jew? And he says, no. He is a Frenchman, he says. He is not a Jew. He is a Frenchman. So this SS officer accepted. And he walked out. Why he was still looking for Jews, I don't know. And that was Saturday. Now, in that hospital, we were-- we received a bowl of soup day and every day we were there. It was Friday and Saturday. And Sunday, early in the morning, we begin to hear firing shots of machine guns and air-- aircraft flying over the camp. And then later on, we heard the sounds of the machine gun strong and strong. And this lasted until late afternoon. And then even some artillery shells, we heard, you know? And then afternoon, every-- there was a quietness [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] until one inmate-- it was a Belgian fellow-- came in. We are liberated. American tanks are at the camp. He was screaming, American tanks at the camp. I mean, we couldn't believe that, you know? Because few months before, we also heard that the Soviets would do the same thing while we were in Poland, you know? But this time, it was true. Then they later brought us one of the GIs. And this GI didn't even bother walking through the doors. He was walking through the open windows [INAUDIBLE]. Because those windows were very low, you know? 
INT: What was the first thing you saw when the camp was liberated? LB: The first moment?  INT: Yeah. LB: It was unbelievable. It was unbelievable, until this GI came in and he-- this is American soldier. I said, well, yes, we are liberated. So we can go out. But we couldn't go out next day. [LAUGHS] They wouldn't let us out, because we were sick people. They didn't know what kind of epidemics we had and what [INAUDIBLE], you know? But it was became-- it became obvious that we were liberated. More American soldiers and officers and doctors came in, you know, [INAUDIBLE] and so on and so on.  INT: What kind of questions were you asked? LB: They didn't ask us. They just look at us. They saw that we were skeletons, living skeletons, you know? Because we were from this transport, you know? And they were-- this was the worst transport that the camp had ever received, you know, with so many dead bodies. And those dead bodies remained there in those boxcars after the camp was liberated. And this is how the American soldiers did see those boxcars. Because the Nazis had no time to remove it. Now there's one thing that we had that the Nazis were defending this camp more than any other camp that the Allies liberated. And they wondered why they defended-- the Nazis-- defended this camp so much. Maybe they wanted to remove the [INAUDIBLE]-- time to remove those bodies from those cars, you know? 
INT: What was the first food that you were-- that you remember tasting? LB: Well, I tell you what happened. A few days later, about three or four days later after the liberation, they brought in all kinds of Red Cross people and army medics. And they stripped us again. They give us showers again. They cut off all our hair. And they set up hospitals for us in the barracks where the former-- the barracks were formerly occupied by-- by the SS guards. So they set it up as the hospitals. And the American army officer, the doctors, were the-- officers were the doctors. And American army nurses were the nurses. And the medical personnel, army personnel, they were taking care of us. And they did not give us much to eat. But they gave us some good food and quite often. And the reason for it was because we were so starved that some people would die from overeating, you know? So they fed us on soups and milk, you know, and some warm cereals, you know? And the-- the most frequent food that they gave us was this condensed, heavy, very sweet milk, you know? It tasted very good. We always wanted more of it, you know?  INT: We're going to stop. LB: It came in cans, you know?  INT: We're going to stop here and change the tape. LB: Yeah.  INT: OK, at the end of reel seven, you were talking about liberation, and the evaporated milk, and how sweet it was. LB: Right. Well, we were in this hospital for about two months. And after two months, we were taken-- since I was a Polish citizen, this is how they registered me, the American Army took registration as a Polish citizen. I was taken with all the Polish citizens to a recuperation place in-- near Stuttgart in Germany. It was run by the Vatican Mission, where the priests were the doctors, and the-- the nuns were the nurses, and they took several Jewish fellows along, because we were Polish citizens, you know. And I was there until-- until August, first week of August, 1945. At that time, I went before this priest doctor, and he looked my record. He says to me, I'm recuperating very well. He says I can go if I-- if I want to, or I can still stay another few weeks. But I decided to go. At that time, I left. And they gave me transportation to Stuttgart-- which is a city, large city, in Germany. And there was already set up a displaced person camp for Jewish people. And I was assigned to one of those camps. There were actually two displaced persons for Jewish people, so I was assigned to one of them, the smaller camp, which was known as Degerloch camp.
It was a very nice camp. And there I remained until I went to look for my father in Poland. How I went to look for my father in Poland was this way-- when I was in this hospital under this-- run by Vatican Mission, they asked me where I come from, where I was born, if I wanted to send a message to somebody in my hometown. So I told them, some neighbor of ours, that I would like to send a message, because I didn't know where my family was. And this message went through the church channels, through a Catholic-- through Vatican. And they deliver it through the church in Poland, to this neighbor in Poland. And this neighbor knew my-- that my father was in-- in town. And this neighbor delivered this message to my father. And my father knew where I was in this hospital, so he sent a telegram in December, 1945. He asked me to come home. It was a short telegram. And I received the telegram in the displaced person camp in Stuttgart. And then I packed with a Polish friend who I knew from the hospital. He was not in the-- in the DP camp, [INAUDIBLE] this Polish friend, but he was in the hospital with us. And he also wanted to go-- he wanted to look for his wife and his parents. And we both decided to go to Poland, and we traveled for days, where we were by those bombed-out trains and railroad tracks through Czechoslovakia, and then to Poland to Krakow. And then I went to my uncle's restaurant, not knowing that he might be there-- I was just hoping that he was there. And my uncle was there. And he told me my-- where my father was. And I went to see my father. Now, my father was operating a kosher meat business, because there were already several hundred Jewish people in Krakow. And there was a demand for kosher meat. And there was a [NON-ENGLISH] in Krakow. My father didn't recognize me, because I grew up and I changed completely. He passed by me several times. He thought I looked familiar, but later on I said to him, don't you recognize me? I recognized my father immediately, he changed very little. And then we embraced, he told me where he is, where he lived. And I found out the-- the sad news that only he and I, we survive from the entire family-- my brother, and my sister, and my mother were gone. And then he told me he also survived, et cetera, et cetera. We didn't live in our house, because my father tried to live there after the war, but some Polish people tried to kill him after the war. And he was warned there were pogroms against the Jews in Poland after the war. So he lived with-- shared an apartment with another Jewish family in the Jewish district, in the [NON-ENGLISH] district. So I was living there with him for a while. Later on, I was sharing my apartment with uncle who-- who operated the restaurant in Krakow. He recovered his restaurant, his restaurant was taken by the Germans and by a Polishman, and he took it away from the Polishman. 
INT: Let's keep this-- since we need to wrap up, why don't we keep this directly upon you and your father. LB: I lived with him until-- until the first week in July, 1946. I-- there were pogroms against Jews. Every few days, another Jewish person was murdered by the Polish people. There was a triumphant public burial of five Jewish young men who were murdered in Krakow in May. And then my cousins who just came from Russia, they didn't want to stay in Poland, so my father advised me I should go with them back to West Germany, and from there either to Palestine at the time, or to other countries. So we left. We smuggled ourself to Czech border. We were caught up by the Czech guards, but they let us go. Then we deported to a Jewish organization, Joint Distribution Committee in Prague, who sent us with a few hundred other Jews like us to Germany. And of course, there was preparation for illegal trip to Palestine. I was-- I returned back to Stuttgart to the displaced persons camp, from which I went back to Poland to look for my relatives. And I was registered to go illegally to British blockade to Palestine at the time. But [? the ?] doctor told me that I shouldn't go yet, I should wait a few more months to recuperate from the camps. In the meantime, my mother's cousin who lived in New York City, she found out about me, and she sponsored me, with the help of HIAS-- Hebrew charitable organization in New York. And I received visa to come to the United States. In January 1948, I arrived in the United States, and I stayed at the HIAS shelter for several weeks. From there, I was sent by HIAS to Wilmington, Delaware-- a small Jewish community. I was observed there. I was given a place to-- to live, and an employment, and I lived there for-- for-- until 1950, January 1951. 
INT: What did you do in Wilmington? LB: I was working-- first I was working in a wholesale house as a clerk. Later on, I got a job as a mechanic for a Jewish place that was selling home appliances.  INT: Then after Wilmington, where did you go? LB: Well, then, I was called by the draft board, the Korean War broke out. I was called by the draft board. And I went to the induction in Philadelphia, and to a physical and so on. But I got an excuse because I couldn't eat the army food, and I-- I was suffering a sinus problem. So they-- they gave me a medical excuse. And then I left Wilmington. I moved to New York City, because I thought there were many more immigrants in New York City. And there was more opportunities than in a small town, you know, like Wilmington, Delaware. Although the Jewish people in Delaware were very nice. They were very hospitable to us, and-- and very nice to us. There were several of us like this. But I decided to go back to New York. I think there was more opportunities in New York. I went-- I went to New York, and I found employment there. And I was going to high school in the evening. I graduated from high school, then I was admitted to City College in New York, Uptown City College-- which was a very strict, high-- highly competitive college, and I was there for two years. In the meantime, the Korean War broke out, and they-- they stopped, rather, they wouldn't call me anymore to-- to the army. So I was very happy. They changed my classification. And I lived in New York City until 1946. And I-- 19-- excuse me, 1956. I developed some kind of a sinus problem there from the humidity. And-- some kind of a problem. And I suffered very much from it. And a friend of mine moved to California, and he wrote me a letter, why don't you come to California? The climate is good. You will be much happier here in California. So I resigned from the City College In New York, and I took my suitcase, and I came partially by bus, by Greyhound bus, partially some people gave me a lift that I met along the road, until I arrived in California. I stood for a few days with my friend, he was renting a room somewhere in Beverly Hills. And then I found myself an employment, [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] and I settled. Eventually, I was hired by the Los Angeles postal service. I was very happy about it, it was a steady employment with the good benefits. And I was taking courses part time at city college here in Los Angeles, I earned my AA degree in engineering. But I realized that postal service would be my career to-- to the end. Then I met my wife in one of the Jewish outings, you know. And-- 
INT: What's her name? You need to tell us her name. LB: It was-- it was a Camp Ramah.  INT: No, no, your wife's name. LB: Oh my-- my wife's name was Evelyn Wechsler, before we were married. And she agreed to-- to see me again. So I called her a few more times, and we saw each other for about a year or more. And we started dating, and then we decide to get married, you know. We got-- we got married on the spur of the moment, you know. I had no close family here, so we didn't plan any big weddings. She was also transplant from New York, from Brooklyn, you know. She had-- she had a brother here, and sister-in-law. So we had a very small wedding, very small, quick wedding at the Temple Beth Am on La Cienega.  INT: And how many children do you have? LB: We have two children-- one son and one daughter.  INT: Can you tell us-- tell me their names, and for whom they are named. LB: My daughter is the older one-- she is named after my mother, and after my sister, because my father wanted to name somebody after my sister, so we gave her a Gloria, or Gitla in Yiddish, and Ann after my sister, because it was my father's request. My son is the younger one. He is named after my wife's uncle-- she requested it, my wife. But my father also requested that he will be named after my brother, so he's named after my-- after her uncle and my brother, Julian Karol, after my-- my brother yes. 
INT: And today, are you-- are you still working? LB: No, I'm retired, I've been retired for the past 11 years.  INT: And now that it's over 50 years since the war has ended, what is it that you want to pass on to your children, and hopefully your grandchildren someday? Your legacy about your experiences? LB: Well, my legacy, and my responsibility to-- to humanity as a survivor, is this-- that humanity must endeavor in some way to see that those things will never happen again anywhere in the world-- not only against the Jews. Because I am very much disappointed that Holocaust did happen after the war in several places in the world. And seems to me that humanity did not learn anything from that experience. There were the situation in Cambodia, where-- with the Khmer Rouge killed millions of their own people. And the humanity just look and didn't stop it. There was this military regime in Argentina who killed thousands of people, taking husbands and children away from people. And to this day, many people don't know what happened to them. The humanity around the world just look at it, didn't stop it at all. Recently, we had this situation in Bosnia-- where people were killed by the thousands, just a Nazi style. And the humanity all over the world just look at it and talked about it. Humanity must find some way to stop this thing. Whenever criminals and mad individuals come to power, and start killing thousands of innocent civilians-- humanity, in general, on this planet has responsibility to go there and stop it. Unless the humanity develop such mechanism, I-- I feel very, very unsecure in this world. Not only for Jews, or but for anybody. And this is the legacy I want to leave to my children and to future generations. I'd also like to mention that what has happened in Europe during World War II, the genocide against Jews, I think Christianity, collectively-- not individually-- collectively, Christianity bears large responsibility for it. And I think Christianity collectively should learn something from it. 
INT: We have some photographs to film that you have, as well as an opportunity to meet your wife and children. So we're going to do that right now. LB: This is a picture of my sister. She was born in August 1925. She was only a few months old when my parents took this picture of her.  INT: What's her name? LB: Her name is-- was Anna Silberbach.  INT: And where was this photograph taken? LB: In Krakow--  INT: Poland. LB: Poland, yes. This is my brother. This picture was taken in Krakow sometime in 1929. And his name was Karol Silberbach. This is my father's brother. His name was Henek Silberbach. He was a very talented hairstylist. He was murdered by the Nazis in Warsaw, Poland, sometime in 1943.  INT: Where was this photograph taken, do you know? LB: This photograph was taken before the war in Krakow. This is my mother's brother, Solomon Wohlfeiler. This picture was taken, I believe, in 1938. He perished with his wife and two children in the Holocaust.  INT: And where was this photo taken? LB: In Krakow. This is my father's youngest sister, Gitla Silberbach, with her husband, Helidg Goldberger, and their little son, Stefan. The husband, Henek Goldberger, survived in the protection of Oskar Schindler in his factory. And this little boy was murdered by the Nazis in Poland.  INT: He was the one you told us about in the story, they gave him up? Where-- where was this photo taken and when? LB: This photo was taken, I believe, in 1937-- 1937 in Krakow, yes. The one on the left side is my father's youngest brother, and the one on the right side is my cousin, son of my father's sister. 
INT: You should tell us who each one is. Who's on the left? LB: The one on the left side is the Maurice Silberbach. And the one on the right side was Henek Berkowicz, son of my father's sister. They were about the same age at the time.  INT: When was this photograph taken? LB: This photograph was taken, I believe, in 1936.  INT: And where? LB: In Krakow.  INT: Did these either-- did they both survive, or-- LB: My uncle survived. He served in the Polish army right at the war broke out, and he's still living in Australia to this day. The one on the right side, my cousin, he died in Auschwitz-Birkenau. I-- this is where I saw him last time. This document shows that I was liberated in Dachau by the American Army. And that I came to Dachau from a concentration camp Buchenwald. This document was issued to me, or to everybody else in the camp there, by a committee of former inmates to substantiate that we were there, that we were liberated there by the American Army on April 29, 1945-- death camp Dachau. I have them somewhere. This picture is of me and two of my cousins who just returned from Russia, or Soviet Union at the time. The one on the left, his name was Dolek Feiner. The one in the middle is me, and the one on the right is the brother-- is my cousin, too, but brother of the fellow on the left, his name was Joseph Feiner. 
INT: And where was this photograph taken? LB: This was taken in a hotel on a-- in a small town on the border, Czechoslovak, Polish-Czechoslovakian border. We were just about ready to cross the border to Czechoslovakia where we were running away from Poland in July 1946. We stopped on the Polish side in the hotel, pretending that we were just tourists, visitors, you know. And after a few days, during the night, we crossed the border to Czechoslovakia. This is-- I-- I am coming to America. Somewhere in the middle of Atlantic, this picture was taken in January 1948, somewhere in the middle of Atlantic. I am on the deck with some of the passengers. Those who are not sick had to come to the deck, you know. And I don't even know those names of those people.  INT: Which one are you? LB: The one on the left. You can see me, on the left. Next to the young boy there.  INT: Holding onto the railing. LB: Right, right, this is me, right. I was only 21 at the time. This is my father. He erected a monument on the grave of his brother at the old cemetery in Krakow. This is my father, his name was Jacob Silberbach. And his brother passed away in June 1946. So after he-- my father erected this monument, he listed on this monument the names of other members of the family who perished in the Holocaust, including my mother and my sister and my brother. 
INT: When did your father finally pass away? LB: My father passed away in May 1973, in Haifa, Israel.  INT: Which is where he went to live? LB: Right, right. This is a picture of my son's bar mitzvah, in 1977, in November 1977. The one to the left is my daughter, Gloria, or Gitl Bach. The second is my son, Julian Bach. Then is my wife, Evelyn Bach. And then you can see me there, Leo Bach.  INT: And where was this-- LB: This was taken at Temple Beth Shalom here in Long Beach-- during my son's-- just before the bar mitzvah. We didn't-- we wouldn't take any picture on [? Shabbat ?] so it was before the bar mitzvah. This is the house where we lived and owned before the war, until we had to leave Krakow. My father built this house in 1931. Right in the back of this house there was another small house consisting of two bedrooms, in which we lived. But this house, my father rented always. And we owned this house until we had to abandon Krakow. And I still-- I'm still listed there as a legal owner of this building, but each time I write a letter to-- to the Polish officers there, I get the reply that it is owned by the Polish government. And I wonder if I ever get it back.  INT: What is the address of this building? LB: Right now, the address is [NON-ENGLISH] Street, number nine, but when we lived there, the name was different. It was [NON-ENGLISH] Street, number 16. 
INT: And when did you take this picture? LB: This picture was taken in 1988. My cousin went to Poland from Long Beach, here, California, and he took this picture.  INT: OK, now we're going-- going to meet your family. OK, I see you have your lovely family with you now. Why don't you introduce everyone to us. LB: This is my wife for the past 36 years, happily married to this beautiful young lady.  INT: Tell us her name. LB: And her name is Evelyn Wechsler Bach-- her maiden-- maiden name was Wechsler, now she's married to me, it's Bach. And this is my lovely daughter, Gloria, or Gitla we call her in Yiddish, Bach. She's currently at the Cornell University, working on her PhD degree. And this is my handsome son, Julian Bach. He's-- he's the attorney. But when we need an attorney, we have to get one. [LAUGHTER]  INT: Why don't we start-- first of all, I know you all have something you want to say, so why don't you start, Mrs. Bach? EVELYN BACH: Well, I'd like to tell you what it's like living with a survivor. Living with a survivor becomes a part of your marriage. It lives with you on a daily basis, consciously or unconsciously. On a conscious level, I felt a very special responsibility to ensure that our children grow up in a home with Judaism as its core, hoping that they will continue on with the traditions, and take pride in their religion, its beliefs, and its people. Leo has been a wonderful husband and father. I often wonder, with all that he has been through, how he has been able to maintain his optimism and sense of humor. In August, we will be celebrating our 36th anniversary, but I still cannot forget those many years when he would be trembling in his sleep, and frightened, I would awaken him. Questions, always questions-- what's causing this? I can only imagine. Or the many times when the children were young and-- and curious, Daddy, what's the number on your arm? He would invariably come up with some joke, unable or unwilling to tell them the truth. It upset me that he lied to them, even though I understood his reasons. Despite lengthy discussions, he could not get himself to share that part of his life with them. It took many years before he would talk to them on any level about the number on his arm, and many more years to speak openly about some of his experiences during his youth. However, the details and unimaginable horrors are still unspoken. That is why today is so important to us, that a record of his young life, and the lives of so many of his family-- including his mother, Gitla, his sister Ann, and brother Karol, who were never able-- who we were never able to know, are being recorded and remembered with the hope that the worst 20th century Holocaust will never be forgotten. GLORIA BACH: My turn? 
INT: Sure. GLORIA BACH: OK, I would just like to add to the last-- one of the last statements that my father made, and that is that I've always felt that when society falls apart, only the people with the strongest defense system survive. And there's a lot of way to build strong defense systems, but I think that it's important that every individual has the right to bear arms. And that right was taken away from the Jewish people in Europe. On a personal level, I think that knowing that my father survived those atrocities has allowed me to push myself really hard, both in athletics and at work. And I take advantage of every opportunity that I can get, because I know that he didn't have any opportunities when he was young, and it also affected his level of opportunity as he grew older. JULIAN BACH: I would say there are three words that come to mind to describe my feelings as the child of a Holocaust survivor, and that would be sadness, sensitivity, and strength. Sadness because I know there's a whole part of my family's heritage that I was unable to-- to meet. My father's mother, sister, and brother were murdered, and I never had the opportunity to get to know them. Sensitivity because hearing these stories of my father's childhood, and as well as the teachings of both my mother and father, make me realize that I have to be sensitive towards others who may not share the same beliefs as myself, and may not have the same opportunities that I have. And strength because, again, hearing the stories of my father's childhood makes me realize that no matter how difficult things get in my life, they will never be as difficult as the atrocities my father faced in his life. I recognize the responsibility, as the child of Holocaust survivor, to pass on to my future family, as well as to others, the stories of my father. And to ensure that this nightmare that my father experienced as a child will not occur again in the future. 
INT: That's very nice, very nice. We have just a couple minutes left, as you know, if there's anything else you want to say, this is an opportunity. I think we just have a couple more minutes. LB: I wanted to say I was very fortunate that I met a young Jewish woman like my wife, that she wanted to share her life with me, and give me such a beautiful, handsome family. I never-- frankly speaking, I never expected it in my life to happen. So I am very fortunate that I met Evelyn, and that she wanted to marry me. And I am very grateful to her for giving me such wonderful, handsome children. And I honestly considered the-- consider this as a blessing-- blessing from-- from God. And sometimes, I even ask, did I really deserve this? Did I really deserve this? This kind of good blessing that she brought me. EVELYN BACH: You must have. LB: Apparently.  INT: And I think on that note, it's a perfect place to end. I want to thank you all very much, especially you, Mr. Bach, for giving your testimony. EVELYN BACH: Thank you very much.