INT: Today's date is July 9, 1997. The survivor is Lea Fanarof. Her last name at birth is Schabinski. Interviewer, Maureen Halpert. City and state, Laguna Hills, California. Country is USA. Language is English. My name is Maureen-- M-A-U-R-E-E-N-- Halpert-- H-A-L P as in Paul E-R-T. I'm interviewing today Lea Fanarof. It is July 9th, 1997. We are in Laguna Hills, California, USA. Can you give me your full name and spell it for me? LF: Lea Fanarof. Lea- L-E-A. Fanarof-- F-A-N-A-R-O-F.  INT: Can you give me your name at birth and spell it for me? LF: Lea Schabinski-- S-C-H-A-B-I-N-S-K-I.  INT: Can you give me any Hebrew names that you may have? LF: Well, it's Lea, because that's a biblical name.  INT: And spell that please. LF: L-E-A.  INT: Do you have any nicknames? LF: They called me Leke.  INT: And spell that please. LF: I guess L-E-K-E.  INT: What city and country were you born in? LF: I was born in Berlin, Germany.  INT: When were you born? LF: 1920-- February 24th, 1920.  INT: How old are you today? LF: 77.  INT: Tell me again where you were born, the city and the town. LF: I was born in Germany-- Berlin, Germany.  INT: What was that like growing up? LF: Well, it was-- it was fine until I was about 12 years old. It was a good life. And then when I was 12 it all ended.  INT: Tell me about your parents. What are their names? LF: My mother's name was Regina. My father's name was Jacob. 
INT: What was your mother's maiden name? LF: My mother's maiden-- maiden name was Winkler.  INT: Where was she from originally? LF: She was from Warsaw.  INT: What about your father? LF: My father was from Vilna.  INT: How did they meet each other? LF: Well, they both went to Germany. And I guess this is where they met and got married.  INT: What did your parents do for work? LF: My father was in business. Actually, he was an artist. But, you know, he couldn't make a living on that. So when he came to Germany, he-- he got into business.  INT: When did he come to Germany? LF: I really don't know exactly when that was. It must have been around 1911.  INT: What type of artwork would he do? LF: He liked to do portraits. Yeah.  INT: What type of work did he do in Germany? LF: Well, he had a business. And it was-- the first one was chocolates, and wines, and spirits, and, you know, I mean, really good stuff-- very fine chocolates. And was in the very good neighborhood downtown-- well, what you would call downtown Berlin. It was a big store. And then later he had-- they went into the ice cream business, made their own ice cream. And in Germany people don't eat ice cream in the wintertime. So the ice cream business was converted into a poultry business-- chickens, ducks, and geese.  INT: What was the name of the store? LF: The store-- the name was [? Genzawinkler. ?] He used my-- my grandmother's name. 
INT: What type of customers would he have? LF: What type of customer?  INT: Mhm. LF: Their business was in a very German area-- no-- none Jewish. I mean, we had no-- no Jewish trade or anything. And as a matter of fact, when I went to school, I was the only Jewish girl in school out of 500 students.  INT: What did your mother do? LF: My mother helped in the business. When she first came to Germany, my grandmother took the three girls-- you know, there were two-- she had two sisters-- she brought them to Berlin. And they worked in the cigarette-- [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] in the-- yeah, they were rolling cigarettes. You know, at that time they were doing them by hand. So that's where they all worked. And I understand my mother was about 14.  INT: Tell me about your grandparents. LF: I don't know my grandfather, but I do know my grandmother. I was very close with her. And for a couple of years, the last years we were in Berlin, she lived with us because she wasn't able to take care of herself, you know, in her apartment. So she lived with us.  INT: What was her name? LF: Esther-- Esther Winkler.  INT: Did anybody else live with you? LF: Yeah. I had an aunt who was retarded. And she lived with us the whole time. She took care of us kids, you know. She was there when I was born already, so she was part of the family. 
INT: What was her name? LF: Her name was Rosa. But when my brother was born, he couldn't pronounce that. So he would call her [? Uze ?] and then name stuck-- she was [? Uze. ?]  INT: Do you recall the names of any of your other grandparents? LF: No. Yeah, my father's parents. I've never met them, OK. They lived in Vilna. But I know that his name was Lazar and that I was named after him. My-- my grandmother's name was [? Taube ?] [? Chaim ?] and my sister was named after her. [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] They died about-- I don't know, like the end of the-- of the 1920s, something like that. I've never-- I've never met them, never seen them. They had a bakery in Vilna. They were baking bagels.  INT: Tell me about your brothers or sisters and their names. LF: My brother-- I have a brother whose name is Sigmund. We call him Ziggy. He was born in 1924. My sister is Thea. She was born in 1926. And we always-- we always stuck very much together.  INT: What type of things would you do as a child? LF: What did I do? I was interested in sports all the time. And it was a really funny thing because I was such a skinny thing. So they wouldn't let me do those things, OK. They'd always-- they always tried to stop me. But I went right ahead, you know? And I would jump rope out in the streets. And I was on a gymnastics team. And when I was 15 I joined a club-- it was a Jewish-- Jewish club, row-- the rowboaters. And we used to do the races. So I was involved in that. And I loved swimming. And of course I liked art. So I was supposed to go-- they were supposed to send me to art school. But, you know, at that time Hitler came already and it didn't come about. 
INT: What type of things would you do with your art? LF: What kind of what?  INT: Things would you do with your art-- what type of things? LF: Oh, I would-- god, if there was a project in school in geometry, I would turn it into a whole project. They wanted triangles, I made a village of Indians with tepees and everything. I cut them out of paper and, you know, I made all those things. You know, I-- I really had-- had fun.  INT: Describe the relationship between you and your sister and brother and what type of things you would do together. LF: Well, when we were kids we were fighting like cats and dogs, OK. But we're very close, very close.  INT: What about your family, what would you do together? LF: Ah, who remembers? Oh, we'd go on vacation. Parents would take us on vacation, things like that. My father, when I was little, he would take me-- like every Sunday he would do that, take me in Berlin. They had all these beautiful monuments and things. And he would always take me around, and show me the monuments, and explain who these people were. And he did this until my brother was born, you know. Then, of course, there was no time.  INT: Where would you go on vacation? LF: We went up to the North Sea, the Baltic Sea. Went to the mountains. Went summer, we went winter. I remember sleigh rides we did-- you know, with the horses for the sleighs. 
INT: Tell me about your home. Where did you live? LF: Well, we lived in Berlin all the time. You know, they're all apartments over there. So we lived in a very nice neighborhood. The one place especially was across from a park. And it was really beautiful. In fact, when I went back there in 1989, I went back to visit over there and nothing was destroyed. It was not bombed or anything. It was just the way I had left it.  INT: What was your home like inside? How large was it? What would you say if you walked through? LF: Well, it's hard to compare it. We usually had two bedrooms, you know, living room, and-- and there was a bathroom, bath and all. it was nice. I mean, apartments were big over there-- very big.  INT: How big? LF: There were no small rooms. They were all big.  INT: What would you say square footage-wise? LF: What's what?  INT: Square footage? LF: Oh, god, that's hard to say. Could have been maybe between 1,500 and 2,000 square feet, I figure.  INT: What were your neighbors like? LF: We had very nice neighbors and got along well with them. No complaints there.  INT: Were there any Jewish people living near you? LF: No, no. We didn't have any Jewish people. In fact, no, my mother was working. She was helping out in the business. So we always had maids in the house, you know, girls that took care of us. And [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] you know, but-- but neighbors were-- they were great. 
INT: Tell me about any close friend-- friends that you had. LF: Well, I had friends, you know, from school. And my parents had their friends. And in school even-- I was in school until 1934. And the last couple of years, you know, when all the stuff was going on with Hitler and everything, the kids were very protective of me and the teachers too. A couple of them, they were real Nazis already, you know. They were trying to give me a bad time. But the kids would always stick up for me because they would borrow their homework from me. [LAUGHS] So. And one of the teachers, I remember that very well-- they were supposed to sing all these songs. One was the Horst Wessel Song. That was the S-- SS song. And in the of the scenes-- one of the verses it said they would be happy when they see the Jewish blood run off from the knifes. And the teacher didn't know that. She didn't know the lyrics to it. And when they started singing it, she stopped them. And she came over to me and she actually apologized. And she said she felt very bad, she didn't know. If she had known that this was-- those were the lyrics, she would have never allowed them to sing it. So that was really-- it was really something.  INT: Were all the children singing it? LF: Yeah. Well, they were required to sing it, OK. So. But she felt very bad. And I never had any problem with all the kids in school, I mean. 
INT: What languages did you speak inside and outside of your home? LF: At home, German. We spoke German.  INT: Did you speak any other languages? LF: No. I learned Yiddish to read and write when my father started corresponding with his sister in Los Angeles. And so we were waiting for letters because they were supposed to send us papers-- affidavits. So everybody was eager when the letter would come, you know. So I-- I helped them read it. I mean, I looked at the letters. And this way I learned to read and write Yiddish. I could write Hebrew because I was going to Hebrew school. But this was Yiddish. I learned it.  INT: Tell me about the schools that you went to. LF: It would just be public school, OK. And I was there. Now, over there if you want to go to high school, you have to transfer out at the fourth-- fourth or fifth grade, I'm not sure-- about 10 years old. But I was sick with the measles at that time. So I missed the entrance date and the whole thing. So I couldn't go. So I was stuck in the-- in the public school. I couldn't go. And I stayed there until I graduated from there. And that was 1934, when I was 14. And then I wanted to go-- I wanted to become a pharmacist. But I couldn't get into any school [? away. ?] So then I said I'll become a fashion designer. They wouldn't take me into a school. [INAUDIBLE] so Jewish people-- children couldn't go. And then from the Jewish community they started opening some schools. They had some schools-- they had a high school, Jewish high school. But they opened a business college. And I applied to that and I got in. So I was there for a year. And that's where I learned to speak English, and do all the business correspondence, and whatever-- you know, typing, shorthand, and so on. So I was there for a year. And after a year, I got a job as a stenographer. And I worked for about a year. And then they took my work permit away from me and that was the end of that. 
INT: What type of company did you work for? LF: It was an agency of-- they were like in the middle. They were selling lumber, which they purchased in eastern Germany. And it was sold to western Germany. So we had to send out all the letters and specifications of the lumber and the whole thing. It went all through our office.  INT: What was it like growing up in Berlin? What was the town like? LF: Oh, it was great. It was really great. It was a beautiful city. It was clean. It-- I mean, it had everything. It was really beautiful-- parks and everything, everything. So, I mean, I didn't feel any different from any of the, you know, German people, or German kids, or whatever, you know. We had all the privileges until 1932.  INT: Tell me about religious life for you. LF: What? Religious life? Well, my father, he was not a religious man. But he was very much into traditions. And he was very Jewish. And even during Hitler times, he wouldn't let me go to school on-- on holidays. I mean, none of us kids-- we could-- we couldn't go to school. He would write us a note-- this is Jewish holidays. And he closed the store and put a sign on outside-- closed on account of the Jewish holidays. And that was in a Christian area. I mean, there were no Jewish people living. He stuck to that. So. But he was not interested in any temple or synagogues. That he wasn't. 
INT: Did you go to any? LF: Well, we would go on the holidays. Especially on Simhat Torah we liked to go. You know, there was a whole celebration always. So we used to go.  INT: What about Shabbos? LF: No. We didn't do that. [PAUSES FOR 6 SECONDS] In fact, we had to go to school on Saturdays, you know. In Germany, school was six days a week unless you went to a Jewish school, which I didn't.  INT: Was you father bar mitzvahed LF: I don't think he was. He left his-- he left home when he was 11 years old. And he took-- he wandered from Poland into Germany.  INT: What about your brother? LF: No, my brother did not have a bar mitzvah.  INT: Did you go to religious school at all? LF: I went to Hebrew school, yeah. Yeah, he had me in Hebrew school. But not my brother.  INT: How long did you go? LF: I don't know. It must have been a couple of years or more, something like that, yeah. But then it was all closed, you know. I mean, once it came to 1932, all this was done away with.  INT: Tell me about 1932. LF: 1932. That was before the election. And-- but people knew already what would happen. And they had already the marches, the parades, you know. You saw the brown shirts walking through the streets in the night and they would carry flares. And it-- it wasn't good. And people would say at that time, ah, it's nothing. This crazy guy, he's going to come and go. He's not going to stay. 
INT: How old were you in 1932? LF: 12.  INT: What would your family-- your parents say about what was going on? LF: My father said right away, it's no place for us over here. It's not going to get better. It's going to get worse. And this is when he started writing to his sister in Los Angeles. He had no contact with her. He didn't have an address. So he wrote to his brother in Vilna. And from them, he got their address. And he sent a letter, and we got a letter back right away, they would help us get-- to get out. And we went to the American consul, got an appointment. And at that time, you could walk right in there. It took two days, you had an appointment. And the papers kept coming, you know. But then as time went on, more and more people applied. And there was a waiting period of maybe five years before you could see the American consul again.  INT: When did you first apply? LF: We applied in 1935.  INT: I'd like to go back a little bit. You were talking about 1932. What was the first thing that you saw regarding Nazism? LF: What did I see? The parades, the brown shirts marching in the streets. It was scary.  INT: What happened prior to that or what did you hear about? LF: See, it all came out of Munich, so we didn't hear much about it, you know, until we saw the columns walking through the streets. And of course, eh, I was 12 years old. I mean, I didn't think about politics, things like that. But then when they started marching, it was very scary. 
INT: Tell me about the marches. LF: Well, they were usually at night. And they would come through the streets. I mean, they filled the whole streets when they marched. Traffic stopped, everything stopped. And then they-- they marched, played their music, you know, goose stepping, and carried flares. So I don't know. We stayed in the house, just peeked out from the window and were scared. That's all. I mean, we had never seen anything like this before.  INT: What type of music or songs would they sing? LF: Oh, it was drums, you know. And then all these war songs. Like I said, they had those lyrics, you know-- when the Jewish blood runs off from the knives and things like that, you know. So it was very scary.  INT: When that started happening, how did the children at school start to treat you? LF: Oh, I had no problem with them. They treated me great. I supplied them with homework. I supplied them with everything. [LAUGHS] I don't know if I was just smarter than them or I was with a bunch of dummies-- I don't know. But they always came to me for the stuff. So they were protecting me. [LAUGHS]  INT: What did you know about Hitler and when did you start to learn about him? LF: It all started in 1932 really, you know. But like I say, I don't-- at that time I wasn't interested in politics. I didn't know. I just picked up what I heard, you know, that he was trying to run-- he would be chancellor, he would be in the election, things like that, you know. I didn't pay much attention to it except for the marches that were going on already, you know. They were scary to me. 
INT: How often would they march? LF: Very often. I don't know. There were no set times, you know. All of a sudden, you heard drums and stuff and you heard them march with those big boots, you know. And then the motorcycles. Oh, wow. I used to hate those motorcycle that would come through there. That was the SS, the black shirts. They ran the motorcycles.  INT: I would like to stop right here. We're going to be changing to the next tape.  INT: Did you have access to a radio? LF: No. We had to turn radios, cameras-- everything we had to turn in. We could have a-- like an AM radio or something, you know, just a local station. But-- well, at that time, we didn't have FM or whatever. It was shortwave, OK? No, we had to turn all those in.  INT: When was that? LF: That was maybe in 1934 or something like that. Mm-hmm. We had to turn in radios, guns, of course, all the jewelry. We had to give everything up. And we never got anything for it.  INT: Prior to turning it in, did you ever hear him-- Hitler speak on the radio? LF: Oh, yeah, we heard him. I was still in school. And he would speak, and that was like two-hours speech all the time. And they would take us-- they would take us into-- into the gymnasium. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] And-- to the gym-- and we had to stand there for the two hours and listen to his speech. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] Oh, yeah. 
INT: What were his speeches like? LF: What were his speeches? To tell you the truth, half of it you couldn't understand, because he stood there, and he screamed his lungs out. You couldn't understand what he was saying.  INT: And what about the other times when you could understand? LF: Well, the whole thing was what he would do for Germany, and of course, the Jews, you know? [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] And that-- those were basically his speeches, what he would do.  INT: What did he say he would do? LF: Well, Germans were not allowed to have any-- any weapons, you know, after the First World War. And he said that he would give them weapons back, and he would bring Germany up. He would make a military power out of them. That was his main-- main draw, you know? So, I-- I mean, [LAUGHS] they liked that. And that he would give everybody housing, and everybody would have a car. That was where the VW was born, OK? So that's what he did. So people liked that. And then they had to stand there and yell, Sieg Heil, Sieg Heil, you know? And their arm would go up in the air. [SIGHS] I tell you.  INT: What did he say about the-- the Jews in the speeches? LF: Well, he would always say that we're the whole problem of it. We are Germany's problem. The Jews are the problem. So that was the bottom line. [LAUGHS] He didn't say what he was going to do. But that the Jews were the problem. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] And he started, you know-- started with the doctors, with the lawyers, you know? Their licenses were taken away. They could not practice anymore. And-- and then later on, we didn't even know that they had concentration camps or anything. I mean, everything was so secretive. We didn't know. But I knew that friends that we had, that the men would disappear. They would come to the house and arrest them. And the strange thing is the way they did this. At one time, they were all the people that were Polish. And another time they were people that were from Hungary. And one time, it was the Polish men-- usually the men. They would take the men first-- leave the women alone. And then after a few weeks, the families would get a cigar box in the mail full of ashes. And that said on there that so-and-so, the husband, the father, whoever he was, had died of a heart attack, and they had cremated him. But this was the beginning of the concentration camps. And you would go to a concentration camp for jaywalking, anything. Anything, they could get there-- they could say that you did wrong. 
INT: How do you know this, and did you know anybody specifically? LF: Oh, yeah, I knew the people. I knew them. They would disappear. And then the families would get that box with the ashes.  INT: Do you recall any of their names? LF: No. I don't recall their names. Those were friends.  INT: Did you know any Nazis personally? LF: Yes. The building where we lived. Well, they weren't Nazis, but their relatives, they had a brother-in-law who was in the SS. And when Kristallnacht came, I was coming home from someplace, and I saw that they were lining up on the street corners with iron bars. And it had just come over the radio that the person that had been shot in France-- you know, at the embassy in France-- that he had died. And maybe an hour later already, you saw them grouping at the-- at the street corners with iron bars. And I came home, and I said, something is going to happen tonight, you know? So then the people that lived upstairs on the fifth floor, they came down. And they said that they have a brother-in-law who is in the SS. He's a stormtrooper. And he said that tonight they were going to kill all the Jews. And he said, if you have anything that's valuable, that you want to keep, he says, I'll keep it for you. And he said, I suggest that you not stay home tonight, that you go and hide someplace. So we did. They took some stuff from us. And they were very honest people. And then when it was over with, we came back. They were going to return it. We told them to keep it, you know? I said, just keep it there. So they warned us. And we went. We were hiding out anyways. We had to split up. I went with my father someplace and my mother went with my brother and my sister. And then we made up to meet in the morning-- a certain corner at a certain place. And we did that. And anyway, we took a taxi, and went to the American consul. And the street was filled already with people. Now, the gates were closed. You couldn't get in. But see, the sidewalk is-- that was American territory. They couldn't come and arrest you over there. So the people were on the sidewalk. They were hanging on the gates, on the-- you know, on the iron fence. They climbed up. They were hanging onto anything, And we were crowded onto the sidewalk. And there, the police couldn't touch you. They couldn't do anything to you. So we were there until nightfall. And nobody came. So then we went back home. 
INT: What were they-- your neighbors' names? LF: Neighbors' names?  INT: Mm-hmm. LF: God, I don't remember. [LAUGHS] No, I don't remember what their names were. But one of the guys who was hiding us, he lived a few blocks away from where we lived, with his mother. She was a very elderly woman. And he had-- he belonged to the Communist Party. So they had taken him in several times already-- beaten the hell out of him-- because they wanted names. They wanted people that belonged to the party, and they wanted the names. And he wouldn't give them the names. He came out-- he was a cripple. And still, he took us in. And you knew, if they would catch him, that he was hiding Jewish people, they would have killed him, right then and there, and killed his mother, too. But he took the chance. He took us in.  INT: What was his name? LF: He had a nickname. I think they call him The Red One, because he was communist. They called him The Red One. I don't know his name.  INT: I'd like to go back a little bit. You said that doctors were not permitted-- LF: Nuh-uh.  INT: --to practice. When did that happen? Did you know of any? LF: God, I don't know the exact time. It must have been '34-- something like that, you know? Doctors were not allowed to practice. Lawyers were not allowed to practice. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] Big business was taken over by them. [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] The small stores they still left alone. They didn't bother us. But we had to mark it. The window had to be marked. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] Jew, you know, it had to say on there. But people came in anyway. They would come. And some of them would come at night. See, all the businesses would close at 7 o'clock. You had to close. If you didn't, you got a ticket, you know. So after 7:00, they would come in the back way, and they would buy stuff from us. You know, there were a lot of Germans that were good-- a lot of them. 
INT: Did you ever get sick during that time? LF: Did I get what?  INT: Sick-- that you had to seek medical attention? And if so, where would you go? LF: Yeah. But we still had this little doctor. He-- he was in the army. He had served at, you know, World War I. And he would come. OK? He would do it. And then especially since I was working, from 1935 through 1936, I came under social security. So I got medical care. I got everything. Yeah.  INT: Was it a German or Jewish company that you were working for? LF: The name was Max Lewin-- L-E-W-I-N-- Max Lewin. He worked with his two sons. I had three bosses. One of the sons, he was a lawyer, and they wouldn't let him practice. So he got into the business with the father. And in fact, I met him, and we all laughed. [LAUGHS]  INT: You mentioned a lot of things were taken away. Who took them from you, and how did they do it? LF: You had to turn it into the police station. You had to turn everything in. And you got nothing for it.  INT: What did they tell you? LF: They didn't give you any explanations. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] They said, well, you come, and you turn it in. And that's all. I don't even remember if they gave us a piece of paper or not. Oh, yeah, that was worthless. Hmm. It didn't mean anything. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] So you had to turn any-- anything that was of value, we had to turn in. And then later on, in 19-- in 1939-- either it was the end of '38 or the beginning of 1939-- they put a German woman into our apartment. And they said, well, she is going to buy everything from us-- the furniture and everything-- and she is going to live there. So-- what did they give us for it? I don't know-- just a-- you know, few dollars. You could maybe have a good dinner on it. And that was it. And she moved in. But she was a very decent person, too. And she said, well, she said, I know you have no place to go. You can stay in one room and use the kitchen if you have to. So we were living in this apartment with all our furniture in there. It doesn't belong to us anymore. And we have one room. So the five people-- I mean, all of us, we stayed in this one room. And [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] that was it. And this when I said, well, it can't go on like this, because they going to throw us out of this, too. Besides this, they're going to haul us off to the camp. They would come, like, every morning, about 4 o'clock. And you never knew if it was the milk man that would come up the stairs or if it was the police that would come. And so, like, from 4 o'clock in the morning on, you'd pull the covers over your head, and you lay there, and you'd shiver, you know, until the noise stopped. And then we thought, well, we have another day. 
INT: Would they come in your house? LF: Did they what?  INT: Would they come inside? LF: Yeah. They would bang on the door. And they would just tell you-- come with us. And that was it. And you had to go.  INT: Where would you go? Where did-- did you go with them? LF: No, no. They never came. I mean, we were lucky they didn't come. They didn't come for us. But it was like from 4 o'clock in the morning on, you know, nobody slept. We were all shivering when we heard a noise out there. And we thought, well, maybe that's it. Maybe that's it.  INT: When you gave your property, what about jewelry and-- LF: That had been turned in before. So we never saw that back.  INT: Did you try to hide anything? LF: No. No, we didn't, because if you were to hide something, they would find out of a-- they'd come. They'd shoot you on the spot. They'd hit, and, you know, they'd kill you right then and there.  INT: Did you see anybody being killed or attacked by the Germans? LF: I didn't actually see it. No. I didn't see it. But [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] I know I would always worry. My father had to go out. And if he didn't come back at a certain time, you know, right away I would say, oh, they got him already. They got him. There was no way to reach him or anything, you know? They got him. And [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] the store was open until midnight, during the summer months, you know, when we had ice cream. And I'd go to bed. We didn't even have a phone in the house at that time anymore. And I couldn't call. So if I saw it was 12 o'clock, and he didn't walk into the house, I would sneak out and run down a couple streets, to the corner, where I could see the store. And if I saw the light still on, you know, then I'd run back. I didn't want them to know that I was looking for him. I used to do that almost every night. 
INT: When was the phone taken from you? LF: I don't remember what year it was. I don't know. But it was horrible, you know, never knowing if somebody left the house if they'd ever come back.  INT: Did you see any book burnings or-- LF: No, I don't-- I didn't actually see it, but I saw-- after Kristallnacht, I saw the damage that they had done all over. I mean, they broke all that glass in all the stores. They looted. They took everything out. If a person was there, who was the owner, of course, he got killed or he was dragged away to the camp or wherever.  INT: Were there certain places that you couldn't go, or did you-- LF: Yeah.  INT: --see signs in the street. Tell me about that. LF: We could not sit on a bench anywhere. We could not use the public swimming pool or park. It always said, 'no Jews.' There were signs. And sometimes we would sneak in, my sister and I. [LAUGHS] We went-- I remember we went to the pool one day, and they left me alone. Nobody came over or said anything to me. And then when she came over, then they called me. They threw us out. She looked Jewish. I didn't. See, I was light, you know? She has dark eyes, dark hair. So they throw her out. They would throw us out. But we tried to get in sometimes. We had to be in the house at 8 o'clock every night. There was a curfew. We couldn't go to any show. We couldn't go to the theater. We couldn't-- we couldn't do anything. We had to be in the house. So it was easy for them to pick us up when they wanted to or whatever. 
INT: Who would throw you out? LF: Who'd sell the house?  INT: Who would throw you out? You said you went swimming. LF: That was just an order. We got a letter, you know? That so-and-so is going to move in, and that was it. And she's going to pay you for the-- for the furniture. She's going to take your furniture over. [LAUGHS] Like I say, it was enough to buy a good dinner.  INT: What about at the swimming pool? Who would actually say you cannot come in? LF: From the city. I don't know who put those signs up. But there were signs. 'No Jews allowed.' That's what it said all over-- 'no Jews allowed.'  INT: Who would talk to you to, just tell you that you had to leave? LF: The people that worked at the pool. Somebody came over and told us that we had to go. So, we left. [LAUGHS] And that was it.  INT: What about newspapers? What was-- LF: My what?  INT: Newspapers. LF: Newspapers? Yeah, we could buy newspapers, but what did they tell you? They only told you the good things that were done for the German people-- nothing else. You wouldn't know. And then we heard that they had marched into-- to Austria, you know? And they took that away, and they went into-- I mean, one place after the other were swallowed up, you know? It was-- became Germany. And [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] I don't know. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] You know, a lot of things. They're not clear in my mind anymore. [LAUGHS] I don't want to know them. 
INT: Did you see any posters? LF: Plenty of posters. Oh, newspaper-- they had all the newspaper. One of them now was And that had all the caricatures of, you know, Jewish people, and that we used blood to bake matzah with. And-- ugh. I mean horrible things were in there, just horrible things. And the pictures-- I mean, it would just make you sick. You couldn't look at it.  INT: What about the posters? What would you see? LF: Posters? I think the same people that did the caricatures in the-- in this newspaper, in they must have made the posters, too. They were all over the place. Everywhere.  INT: How would you feel seeing all this? LF: [LAUGHS] Scared to say the least, you know? We were scared stiff. [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] And I mean, we lived with that fear constantly. Maybe they're going to come. The next minute, they're going to come. They're going to take us. They're going to send us someplace. We didn't know where.  INT: How did your German neighbors-- did anybody try and help you? LF: The Germans?  INT: Yeah. LF: Yeah, they were hiding us. They were helping us. We had people in the one apartment where we used to lived. They helped us out. And then, like I say, Red, he helped us out. And there were other people too. And they would come at night. When the store was closed, they would come in. Talk to us. And then the kids would come in from school. And one day, two little boys came in. And they just stood there. And they were looking at my father, just staring at him. And when he said to them, what are you looking for? You know, can I help you with something? What are you looking for? He said-- the one said, well, we were told, when you look a Jew in the eye, you can see the devil in there. He says, I just wanted to see if that's true-- a little eight-year-old kid. I mean, those were the things [LAUGHS] we had to put up with. 
INT: What about your friends? How did they treat-- did you-- did they treat you any differently? LF: No, my friends were nice-- nice with me, you know? Until all hell broke loose, you know? I mean, as long as things were going along, it was OK. But then, you know, they weren't allowed even to talk to us. They would get in trouble.  INT: Let's go to Crystal Night-- Kristallnacht. You mentioned that before. I'd like to find out a little bit more about it. LF: I don't know. There is nothing I can tell you about it anymore than I told you. That I saw them meeting at the street corner. I seen them with the iron bars. And the guy upstairs helped us. And we were hiding during the night. And then the next day, we went to the American consul.  INT: How long did your father have his business, or when did he close it? LF: Oh, he had it for about [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] 1932-- about 30-- about 7 years I think he was there. Yeah, about seven years.  INT: When did he close it and why? LF: When did he what?  INT: When did he close it? Or what happened to his business? LF: Well, they just told him to close up and get out. That was the end of it. We didn't get anything for it. Just told him to get out. That was in 1938, the end of '38. See? That's why I said, in 1939 I'm-- I can't see staying there and waiting. I mean, there was no money. There was nothing left anymore. So I said, we got to go. So I-- I left. 
INT: You said you attended a synagogue for the high holidays. What happened to the synagogue during Kristallnacht? LF: Oh, that was shot to pieces. It was all bombed. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] Not by the German, but I mean, during the Blitz, you know, it was bombed. But they-- they rebuilt it now. And it is not a synagogue anymore. It's not-- more like a museum or something like that. But, you know, I saw it in 1989. They were beginning to re-- rebuild it.  INT: During Kristallnacht, did you see any Jewish people being attacked or punished? LF: No, I didn't see. I didn't see it, because we were at home. We did not leave the house until we went over in hiding. Yeah, so we-- we didn't look around. I mean, you tried to stay and make yourself invisible.  INT: What happened after that? LF: Well, after that, we went back to the house, tried to pick up where we left off. But things got worse from day to day, you know? There was no income anymore. And then they had him close the-- they had us close up the business. That was in 19-- oh, it was 1938, I think-- November of '38. See? Yeah. So then, of course, we couldn't open a business anymore, and no money was coming in, nothing. And that's when I said, I'm leaving. I had friends. I had a girlfriend there. And her brother made it across the border into-- into Holland. And I said to myself, if he could do it, I could do it. Somebody's got to go. Somebody has to make a beginning. We couldn't stay there anymore. So, then I-- I took off. And my father took me to the train station. And I-- I got on a train. And I went to-- I went to Cologne. And there, I hooked up with some smugglers. They were German-- they were Jewish people that did that. And they got paid for it. 
INT: When was this? LF: That was in April of 1939.  INT: What about before that time? How did you pay for food and-- LF: Oh, I tell you. We had applied to a visa to go to Cuba. And you had to show $250 per person. Then they would give you the visa. So the family from Los Angeles, they sent us $1,250 So that-- so we could show that when we got over there. And in the meantime, what happened, Cuba closed the borders. They wouldn't let you in anymore. And so anyway, we-- we used that money to live on, to buy food. Hmm, that was the whole story, don't you know? I mean, they didn't have the money over here. They cashed in their insurance policies on everything. And they sent us their money. And we had to use it, because we were starved.  INT: I'd like to stop right here. We're going to be going on to the next tape.  INT: Tell me about immigration-- what the process was like, what type of papers you had to have, where did you go? LF: Well, that's a whole story with the American consul. Every time we got papers, they would tell us there are not enough guarantees. You may have to have public assistance, and we can't let people in who need public assistance or anything like this. We need more-- more guarantees. And that was my aunt who had sent the papers. She had four children. There were three sons and a daughter-- my cousins. They all sent papers. One of 'em-- no. They were all three-- they were pharmacists. And one was a pharmacist and an optometrist. 
INT: What were their names? LF: There was Henry, Myer, Lew, and Ruth Kaufman-- no, Ruth Berkovitz. She was married, so her name was Berkovitz. And-- but the other ones were the Kaufmans. They all sent us papers. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] Denied us the papers every time. Every time we went back to the consul. And you know, it took time at that time, because there was no air mail. The only air mail that they had was this dirigible-- the Hindenburg. And that burned down. So after that, it was mailed by ship. And it took, like, six weeks-- six to eight weeks before we would get a reply back from them and we would know what happened. Meanwhile, time was ticking away. And finally, he said, that's not enough. So my cousins had a friend here. He was not Jewish. He owned the Los Angeles Tent and Awning Company. His name was Harvey. I think it was a first name. His last name was Harvey. And he said that he would send us an affidavit. He did. The consul said, can't accept it. Friends don't count. It has to be a blood relative. So my father said to him, you know, he said, a man who is going to obligate himself to take care of five people, he says, sometimes he's better than a relative. So he said, well, then let him show me that he's better than a relative. He said, let him put $5,000 in a bank in your name and hold it there for two years. And when you come to the States that you can draw $200 a month out of this for living expenses. So we thought, well, this is the end of it. You know, it's not going to work anymore. But we sent him a letter and so-- saying what the consul had said. So then when we-- we got a telegram back. And I'll never forget this. And it says Harvey grants your wish. So a man went ahead and put $5,000 in the bank, which was in 1938-- that was a fortune in money-- small fortune. And-- but by that time, they were so overworked, so overloaded with applications, that we had, like, a two- to five-year waiting period. So, well, we can stay here and wait. So that's when I decided that I'm gonna make it over to Belgium. 
INT: What about your family-- your brother, your sister, your father and mother? LF: I left them behind, because five people-- that was a lot, you know? And I said, I'll try it myself. I'll see if I can get across.  INT: Well, what did they say to you? LF: They didn't want me to go-- of course not. My father took me to the train. I mean, I'll never forget the-- he-- he was shaking like a leaf. He was, like-- like jello. And I left.  INT: What did they-- did they try to immigrate, too, and-- LF: Well, they stayed there. They said they would wait until they hear from me, OK? And anyway, I met up with some smugglers over there in Cologne. Stayed in Cologne for three days. I was at a Jewish guy's house. His name was Schlumper. [LAUGHS] I'll never-- I'll never forget the Schlumper. He was like a schlumper. He really was. Oh, God. I mean, I could tell you a story about this, but I'm not. Anyway, I was there for three days. Finally, he gave us the smugglers. And I had to pay him 1,000 marks. That was like $250 at that time. And I would get as a receipt a photograph torn in half. So it meant that they kept one half. They gave me one half. So when I made it across Belgium, once they delivered me, I would give them the photograph, and then they would match it up when they come back, and they would get their money. So in the meantime, they took us across, and the Germans were preparing for war already. So everything was ripped open with trenches. They were digging in. And then, you know, between Germany and Belgium, there's a mountain chain. We couldn't get across. So they said, well, they would have to take me through Holland and see what they could do. Anyway, we got on a street car, and we got off the street car. And then other people met me. And then they took me across the border in Holland. Well, actually, we were not across the border. We were, like, in no man's land. 
INT: Who were you with? LF: By myself.  INT: And what other people? Did you know anybody else? LF: I didn't know anybody. I was by myself. And finally, they got me across. They took me to some house. And there I met two women. One was from Czechoslovakia. One was from Poland. They were elderly people already. And their husbands were in Belgium. So they put me together with them. And they dragged us through Holland on the train, on the street cars-- I don't know. Well, we made it into Amsterdam. And in Amsterdam, they stopped, and it was in the afternoon, and took us into some little restaurant. And he said, you wait here. I got to make contact with somebody. And I said, uh-uh. I'm not going to wait. I'm not gonna let them go. So these two women, they were smarter. They said, no. He's going to come back. We'll leave him. We'll just wait. He's going to come back. And I said, that man is not going to come back. And that's how it was. It got dark. And the owner of the restaurant came running over. And he kept saying-- oh, in Dutch-- police! Police! Police! Yeah, oh, because the police in Holland took everybody and shipped them back, because they were so overrun with people. So they shipped them back. They turned them over to the German police. So when he yelled police, I said, let's go. So we ran out into the street. It was dark. And you know, where we were, they left us off in the red light district. At that time I didn't know from any white light districts or anything. I mean, I couldn't believe it. It was like a nightmare-- came out there, and you saw these great big windows in the stores, and the girls were sitting behind them, you know, all dolled up with pearls, with the furs on them. It was in-- I said, my God, where were-- where are we? You know? So we started running. Ran. Nobody was on the street, but you would see a cop sneaking around a corner every so often, and we didn't want to be caught. And I said, you know what? I said, let's look. Maybe we can see some neon lights someplace. If it had neon lights there must be business. So let's run for there. And so we did. And we came out at the train station. So we were looking for some Jewish faces. And sure enough, I saw a man there. I went over to him. And he said, I know a place, he says, I can take you to. So he took us to a hotel. They were Jewish owners. And they put us up for the night-- not in a hotel, because they came and looked there-- someplace. I don't know. We walked through a street. But anyway, they put us up for the night, and they told us to come back in the morning. So when we came back in the morning, there were some businessmen there, and they were working on a plan. And first of all, they made a collection. They gave us some money. We had no money at all. And then they said-- they told us we should take the train, go to the border, take a bus. And that bus will take us right up to the border. And he said they can make some other connections. But he says, be careful on the bus. So anyway, we got on the train. They brought us Dutch newspapers. And he said, just sit there and look at the newspapers. Don't talk to anyone. So, well, we came to the last station-- got off. And there was a bus standing. So we ran over to the bus. And I was gonna ask him where he's going. He didn't understand me. So I said, uh-uh-- better not go on the bus. So we decided to walk. It was 12 miles. So we walked the 12 miles to the border. And it was late in the afternoon. And, oh, you can imagine-- the people-- it was all farmland, and they had finished work. And they were all out talking to one another. And here we're walking. And the one woman was wearing a fur coat, you know? I mean, she would stick out like a sore thumb. [LAUGHS] I said to her, take the damn coat off already. She wouldn't take the coat off. So I said, walk behind me. So she walked behind me. I didn't want to talk to her. And she started yelling at me all kinds of things in Yiddish, you know? And I said, well, fine. They're going to catch us. But we made it. We made it to the border. And there was a little restaurant. So we went in there. And I said to the girl, we need to get across the border. So she said, wait till it's dark. My father will come. So when it was dark, the father came. And he took us across the border. And he had a taxi waiting there for us. 
INT: Do you-- LF: And that's how we got into Antwerp.  INT: Do you recall any of the names of the people that you were with then? LF: No. I don't know any of their names.  INT: What did you have with you? What did you take? LF: Nothing. I wore a double set of underwear. And I wore two dresses and a coat. That's all I had-- and a small purse. It's all I had.  INT: What about papers-- passports or visas or-- LF: I didn't have anything with me. [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] So, we got-- we got in there, and then we went to-- we went to Antwerp and to Brussels. And we got there. It was about 3 o'clock in the morning. And we went over to the address. We dropped the one woman with a fur coat. We dropped her off in Antwerp. [LAUGHS] And the other one-- [LAUGHS] and we went to Brussels, and her husband was there. So we stood in the street there. And we-- we saw them, we screamed. Finally, the window opened up up there. It was [INAUDIBLE] so we went up there. And he took us in, so we stayed there for the night. And the next day, I went over, of course, to the committee. And they took over from there. And then, of course, I wrote to my parents. And you know, it had all-- had to be written, like, in [LAUGHS] code and whatever, you know? So they should-- they should understand what was going on. 
INT: Where did you stay when you were in Belgium, and how long were you there? LF: When I was in Belgium? See, I had an uncle in Paris. And I got in touch with him. He had a friend who had a chemical factory in Paris and in Brussels. And it so happened that at a time when I got there-- I mean, a stroke of luck-- he was in Brussels. And I had the address. So I went to him. And he took me over to a family. And they put me up in there. And then, of course, he got in touch with my uncle. And I had to get my parents over somehow. So-- but anyway, they made it. I waited three weeks before I saw them. Yeah. But one fine day they showed up-- all four of them.  INT: How did you get them over? LF: They worked it from over there. They also used some smugglers-- but different ones, OK? And my father-- oh, they were caught at the border. They were caught. And my father had paper, you know, instructions. And they made him march along the highway, and they had the lights on them, you know, behind them. So he couldn't throw the paper away. He didn't know what to do with it. So he was chewing it a little [LAUGHS] bit-- I don't know-- spitting it out or so. I don't know. He got rid of that paper. And they got him to the police station. And over there they said, we've got four Jews here. What should we do with them? So the message came back from headquarters. The camps are all full right now. Let them go. See? They were plain lucky. So they let them go, but they shipped them back to Cologne. They had to go back to Cologne. And so they locked up the smugglers there. They had no-- nothing-- no money at all with them-- nothing-- nothing. So when they got back to Cologne, they sat on a train station there until morning where they were. And then they went over to the smugglers. And on the second try, they made it across. 
INT: How did they pay them? LF: They had given them the money before they had started out. See? So when they got shipped back, you know, they went and they complained that they didn't make it across. So they sent them a second time.  INT: Who are these smugglers? Did you-- LF: They were a bunch of Jewish people who did that-- very religious ones. Like the guy I told you-- Schlumper.  INT: So when did they get to Brussels? LF: I waited about three weeks.  INT: And when was that? LF: Well, I went there in April. It was April of 19-- it was about the middle of-- middle of May when they got all over. And then my uncle came from Paris. And they found us a place to stay. I mean, it was just-- there were two bare rooms. And then the people in that house, at first they didn't want to let us in. They kept saying [NON-ENGLISH]. German pig, you know? And but then when we said, no, we're refugees. Oh! Refugee, you know? Then they came. They brought us a stove. They brought us all kinds of things, you know? And we stayed there six months. And then in the meantime, we got in touch with the American consul in Berlin. They sent the papers over. And they finally said it was OK for us. They accepted the papers in Brussels. And all we needed was a passage to America. So we worked this through the HIAS, you know-- the committee over there. They didn't want to give us the money. They said, you have $5,000 sitting in America. Use the money. And we were arguing with them. I said, we cannot touch the money. They will not release it. We have to be in America for us to get the first $200. Well, I don't know. Time was running out. And we had to be in New York before December the 31st, because then the visa would not have been good anymore. And here it was, already the 15th. And we couldn't go. They wouldn't-- they wouldn't give us the money. So, oh, God, what we went through with them. So finally they said, OK. We'll give you the money. We'll pay for you. And we got on the ship. And by that time, the English Channel was all mined. And the submarines were going around. And-- but we got on the ship. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] And it took us two weeks to make the trip from England over here, which takes, like, six days. 
INT: How did you get to England from Brussels? LF: Well, no. We took the ship in Amsterdam. And then we went over-- no, through the English Channel. And then we left from there. So it took two weeks. It took us five days to go through the English Channel, because the ship stopped every time a fog came in.  INT: What ship did you take? LF: It was the It was a Dutch liner-- carried about 300 people.  INT: Were most of them refugees or all, or-- LF: Yeah, they were refugees.  INT: OK. LF: All refugees. They left from Amsterdam, and then we picked a group up in-- in England.  INT: Did you have to pay the HIAS back? LF: Oh, yes. We had to sign papers. They brought a lawyer in. And we had to go through all these formalities that we would pay them back. Oh, yeah. Oh, we signed everything. We paid them back every penny. I mean, huh-- we had no intentions of, you know, keeping the money. But whenever we could, we sent them money back.  INT: So how much did you have to pay them totally? LF: It was, I think, $1,200.  INT: Did your family bring anything with them? LF: Well, we were able-- we had shipped out a couple of suitcases from Berlin. We had-- when we saw that things were getting really tight, we packed some clothes in two suitcases-- bought two tickets to Paris. And with that, we were able to send a couple of suitcases. And then we sent the stubs to my uncle in Paris, and he kept it for us. So when we were in Belgium, he had taken out the suitcases, and he brought them to us in Belgium. And then we had a trunk made out of straw, out of wicker. I don't know. And we had packed some dishes and things in there-- some linens and dishes. That came to America. That was all we had. 
INT: Did you try and hide anything? LF: No. Oh, my father wouldn't hear of it. No, he wouldn't hear of it. He said if they find something, he says, we're all going to be lost. And it was true.  INT: What about paperwork? Did you have a passport or visa or-- LF: Listen, I did all the paperwork. It was all on my shoulders, because I had gone to business college. I knew how to write business letters. I went to every embassy, to every consulate, and I was standing there and pleading and crying and carrying on. Well, I have a visa. I have about seven visas and a passport. But when it came time to go, they closed the borders again. [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] You couldn't go. Too bad I don't have the passports here.  INT: What was it like coming to the United States? LF: In the United States? We came to New York. We were the last people to go through customs. It was already 10 o'clock at night. And it was Christmas Eve. It was freezing cold. And my mother had cousins in New York. And she said, let's send them a letter that we're coming. And my father was very stubborn. And he said, no way. He said, if they say no, he said, I'm not gonna go back to them. But like this he says, we'll just take a taxi or something home. He says, we'll get over there. We're there. So this is what we did. Took a taxi. We had, like, $10. And it was such a rip-off at the-- at the dock to-- this guy, he spoke German. And he told us to give this one $2, and give this one $2. I mean, $2 was a lot of money as a tip, you know-- at that time. So we were out of money. But we got a taxi. And he took us over to the house. Went to the door, and we asked for Mrs. Walter. And this babysitter answered the door. And she said-- she went to a wedding tonight. She won't be back. I said, how about letting us in? She said, I can't do that. [LAUGHS] Of course, she couldn't do that-- five people. So there was no way. We had to take the taxi. We said, take us to a hotel someplace. He took us to a hotel. Next morning, we took the subway. We went back to the house. They couldn't believe it-- how we got there-- everything. And they welcomed us. I mean, it was just so great. 
INT: What were their names again? LF: Walter-- Rose Walter-- God, I can't remember his name. She was a-- she was my mother's cousin-- first cousin.  INT: And their last name again? LF: Walter.  INT: OK. LF: And they kept us there for three weeks until they fought the battle with the HIAS again to get transportation to Los Angeles. It took three weeks. They sent us on the bus-- in the winter. We almost froze to death on the bus. We hit such a snowstorm. It was awful.  INT: Tell me again the date-- the month, the year, and how old you were when you came to New York. LF: I came here December the 23rd, 1939. I was 19.  INT: So what happened in Los Angeles? LF: Well, [SIGHS] we made it to Los Angeles. And my aunt, my cousins, they all came to the bus station. They picked us up. And we got off the bus, and they couldn't believe it. They thought we would come in there wearing babushkas and everything Yeah! This is what they thought. They couldn't believe it that we wore regular clothes. And I mean, we had good clothes on. They couldn't believe it. So anyway, they took us to the house. They lived in a black neighborhood in Central Avenue. And she lived in a very old house that was over 100 years old already. And it was a hotel at one time. Anyway, we stayed there for six months. And I enrolled in night school over there-- high school. It was all black. But those kids, they were so nice to me. And I spoke English, you know, when I came. But anyway, I wanted to learn some more, so I went to school there. And then looking for work-- I couldn't get any work. I mean, at that time, it was just-- you couldn't find any work. So finally, we said, sitting there on Central Avenue, it's not going to help us. We've got to move. So we moved down to Brooklyn Avenue, where my parents could get along with a language, you know, with Yiddish at least. And he found himself a friend there who was a painter-- a house painter. And he took him to the union. And they hired him as a helper. So my father became a house painter. He worked for $2 a day. And he did that for a while. And then we lived there. And then one of the neighbors got sick. Her sister-in-law got sick. I don't know. So she wanted to know if I would help her out. So I said, sure, I'll help her out. I went there, and she liked what I did. So she said, would I stay? I said, sure, I'll stay. So I took care of a seven-room house with five crazy kids, you know, for $4 a week. [LAUGHS] But it was some money that came in, you know? And that was it. And then somebody found me a job. I had a cousin in a needle trade. And I know how to sew, so she took me there to the union. And they sent me to a place, and I got a job. It was-- 
INT: Where was that? LF: In Los Angeles.  INT: The name of the company? LF: [? Percell ?] was the name. And I was working piecework. I made a lot of money. I mean, I had a girlfriend by that time. I had met a girlfriend. And she was working civil service. She was getting $80 a month working civil service. And I made that much in a week. She couldn't [LAUGHS] believe it. So I supported the whole family.  INT: Did you have any communication with anybody back in your-- did you leave anybody there? LF: Well, yeah-- uncle in Paris, but they got-- she got killed. My aunt got killed. The Germans marched in. So she got killed.  INT: What was her name? LF: Judith-- Judis Gorevitch.  INT: Did you know exactly what was going on there? LF: What's going--  INT: In Europe? LF: Yeah. We kept-- we kept up with it. And then, of course, it came out about the concentration camps and everything. Over there we couldn't find out. I mean, we had an inkling of, you know, there were some shady things going on. But we didn't really know, you see? And when we came here, my brother, of course, he went to high school. He finished high school over here. And from there he went to Caltech. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] And then when the war broke out, you know, after-- after December-- bombing and everything-- he said, well, he was gonna go in the army, he says. He doesn't like this. He wants to go and fight-- fight Hitler. So they would not have taken him, you know, from Caltech. But he insisted. So he got in. And then he was shipped across during the Battle of the Bulge. And he was in the infantry. But they found out he spoke German. OK, so then he was put into intelligence. And he was there after the war with the demolition squad and everything. 
INT: What was his name again? LF: Sigmund Sabin.  INT: How did people treat you in the United States knowing that you're a refugee? LF: It didn't make any difference. [LAUGHS] You know what happened? From the government, they put us on a curfew. Once the war broke out, once the United States were at war with-- with Germany, then we were considered aliens again and-- German aliens. But we were never German. See, we were stateless. So it was fighting that. So we were on curfew. We couldn't go out after 8 o'clock at night or anything. We had to go and get fingerprinted and whatnot. That's what we ran away from there. So now we come here, and we're aliens again? But anyway, then they said, where the parents came from? I said my parents came from Poland. So they said, you want to be considered Polish? I said maybe make me Polish. At least I can, you know--  INT: Let's stop here. We're gonna be going on to the next tape. Thank--  INT: You mentioned you were alien status in the United States. And then, how long did that last? LF: Oh, maybe three months or so, you know, until I-- I got straightened out by the government. [LAUGHS]  INT: I'd like to find out, when did you marry? LF: I got married in 1943.  INT: Who did you marry? LF: A soldier boy. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] He was shipped out here-- I had a girlfriend, and he was shipped out to California. And he had his brother-- [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] his brother was married in New York. And this was his sister-in-law's sister he was married to. So he-- and they lived out here, so he came to visit them. So that's how I met him. 
INT: What is his name? LF: Well, his Jewish name was Chaim. But-- he went under Herman Fanarof.  INT: And where was he from, originally? LF: Excuse me. From-- [LAUGHS] from Latvia.  INT: And he came out here when? LF: He came here because-- he came on a visiting visa in August of 1938, to see his brother. But then the war broke out and the ship he came on was sunk. The war broke out, and he was left here. I've got to get a drink of water. Maybe it'll stop the hiccups. [DRINKS]  INT: Tell me about your children. How many, and what are their names? LF: Sid, Sidney, was born 1944. And then Michael was born 1948.  INT: What about grandchildren? LF: I have four grandchildren. Sid-- Sid has two-- two sons, [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] David and Joseph. And Michael has two sons, Jay and John. And Sid got married a second time, so I have two step-grandchildren. They're like my real grandchildren. [LAUGHS]  INT: Sid and Michael, what name do they use today? LF: What?  INT: What name do they use? What's their last name? LF: Fanarof.  INT: What type of things do you enjoy doing in your spare time? LF: What am I doing in my spare time?  INT: Hobbies. LF: I'm a folk dancer. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] Now I'm not dancing, but I belong to a performing group. We put on shows. Made our own costumes from all over the world. And I really have fun with that-- I love it. Love it. But then, when I got sick, this ended. 
INT: How long were you married? LF: I was married 38 years.  INT: What happened? LF: He passed away.  INT: When was that? LF: That was in November 26, 1981.  INT: What effect have your experiences had on you raising your children? LF: What effects of what?  INT: What effects being a survivor has it had in how you raised your children? LF: On the children? Well, I don't know. I mean, I guess I scared them, you know? I was scared. And-- but they wanted to know things. So I told them. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] I don't know if I did the right thing or the wrong thing. But they survived it. And of course, they were very supportive of everything, you know, I wanted to do, and even the grandchildren. I mean, if they could, they would have been here, they would have all been here today, so we can go through that.  INT: What effect did your experiences have on you? LF: On me? Oh, I don't know. I had nightmares for the longest time. Longest time. I always felt like I was in a tunnel somewhere and I couldn't get out, until I went back to Germany in 1989. And it-- it stopped.  INT: Why did you go back? LF: Why? I was invited by the mayor of Berlin. They took-- they brought the survivors back. They treated us like royalty. So I was able to go back before with my father, I was able to accompany him. But he didn't want to go back, so we shelved it. And then I didn't feel like going back, either, anymore. But in 1989, I said to myself, what the heck. I might as well go back and see what's going on. Maybe it'll resolve some things. 
INT: How did you feel? LF: Yeah, yeah, so I went back. And they were all just wonderful to us. They really were, especially the young people. And we talked to them. And I mean, they really didn't know what to do for us. I understand it has changed again, but at that time, it was just fine. I was-- I was never able-- I used to go on a lot of trips. And you know you meet all kinds of people. And I heard German spoken, and I wanted some information from somebody and it was a German-speaking person. I couldn't get myself to speak German to ask him in German. I would always speak English to them, you know, I couldn't-- I couldn't speak it.  INT: Describe your religious affiliation today. LF: Do what?  INT: Do you go to synagogue? Belong to a synagogue? LF: Yeah, oh sure, belong to a synagogue all the time. Belong to Temple B'nai Emet, in Montebello, where we lived out there, in Monterrey Park. And oh, years and years there. Kids were about-- had their bar mitzvah there. And then over here, I belong to Temple [HEBREW].  INT: Would you-- LF: From the very beginning. I don't belong to them now.  INT: Would you consider yourself reformed, conservative? LF: More reformed. I would really like to go to reconstructionist altogether.  INT: Do you think about the Shoah often? LF: Oh, yes, it comes to my mind. It sure does. 
INT: How much? LF: It never leaves my mind, let's put it that way, you know. I try to put it aside, but it keeps popping up.  INT: What do you think about? LF: What do I think about? How could this happen? You know? And I get very angry when people try to say this never happened, you know. I mean, it upsets me to no end. I know, I was there. I didn't dream it. I didn't make it up.  INT: Why do you think you survived? What made you just keep on going? LF: It's a drive I have. I'm a survivor. How do you think I'm here today? I mean, I got sick three years ago. They had given up on me three times already. And I kept yelling, you get me out of this. I'm a survivor. Well, here I am. So I've got to do it-- I've got to do it.  INT: Why did you want to tell your story today? LF: I wanted to do it a long time already. I think I told you, I had made an appointment once. And it was in April of 1994, but then, 19-- in May, I had to go to the hospital. So I fell in the water. And my kids were pushing. They said, why don't you make a tape or some-- aside from this, you know? But they wanted me just to make a tape for them, so they would know. 
INT: How do you feel about the way you've lived your life, and what is important to you? LF: I have no regrets. I've got a great family, OK. My kids are wonderful. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] And I know, especially the last couple of years, you know, when I got sick, the way they all stood by me. Not just my kids, but my brother, the-- my-- my nieces and nephews, my sister, I mean, everybody. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] So that's all I can say. I feel I'm very lucky.  INT: Have there been any decisions that you made that were influenced by your experience? LF: Any decisions? Not really. No, no. [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] Nope.  INT: Do people ask you about your experiences? LF: Sometimes they do, yeah. I'm willing to answer questions, you know. I would never, you know, hide it or anything like that. And I think the more people know about it, the better. So it wouldn't happen again.  INT: Do you talk about it with other people? LF: Yes, I talk about it. Because most people say they can't comprehend it.  INT: Who do you-- LF: Unless you were there.  INT: Who do you talk about it to? LF: Do I what?  INT: Who do you talk about it to? LF: Who do I talk about it? Whoever comes across, whoever wants to know-- I'll tell them. I mean, I'm not going to stop people in the street and tell them, [LAUGHS] but whoever wants to know, you know, I'll tell them. I'll volunteer information. 
INT: It's been 50 years, actually over 50 years, since the end of the war. Your children, grandchildren, other people will be watching this tape. What message would you like to give to them? LF: First of all, I want them to remain Jewish. Carry on the traditions. Because the way it is today, we're dwindling away. I'm worried about that. So you really have to walk along those lines. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] And of course, I want them to know, I love them all. [LAUGHS] And wouldn't want it to be any different. [PAUSES FOR 6 SECONDS] I just want them to be good people, you know? [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] And help wherever they can. Not just live for themselves, but consider other people, too. I think they've been doing it anyway, you know. I want them to be happy.  INT: Is there anything else you would like to add? Perhaps something that maybe you did not say before we bring your son on and then show photographs? LF: I can't think of anything right now.  INT: We want to thank you very much for sharing your testimony. LF: Well, I'd say it's my pleasure. I mean, it was no pleasure, really. [LAUGHS] But I'm glad I was able to do it. Probably things will come to my mind after all this is over, oh, I should have said this, I should have done this, you know. But as of right now, I can't. 
INT: We'd like to bring your son on, and we're going to be stopping the tape for a moment. LF: OK.  INT: Lea, can you introduce me to your son? LF: Yeah, this is my son, Sid. Number one, number two isn't here.  INT: Sid, how much of your parents'-- actually, your mother's wartime experiences do you know? SIDNEY FANAROF: A fair amount. But probably lots I don't.  INT: When was the first time you heard about what your mother went through? SIDNEY FANAROF: I think I knew it as an infant, almost. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] I think that there was always fear in our home. And-- now I think I was raised in fear. I can remember, you know, needing to have-- sleep with the lights on. It wasn't a boogie man, it was a Nazi that was going to come and take me away. And yeah. I think it was always discussed, and I remember hearing them at the table-- had to be before five, before I really-- really ever understood the words. But you know, I had a-- I had a sense of it all the time. And walking the streets and remembering how-- on Brooklyn Avenue-- just being held, held onto, you know? Fear that somebody would take you away, or something like that. That's real [INAUDIBLE].  INT: How did it affect your relationship with your mother? SIDNEY FANAROF: It was pretty profound, in the sense that I always had this sense of being a survivor in some way, and in some way being special. And in other ways, being outcast, you know, in Jewish community. [PAUSES FOR 6 SECONDS] In some ways it felt like, you know, being a hero to survive, but also a victim at the same time. I think that was kind of interesting. I think what was profound about Mother was, you know, having been a victim, I think she was always interested in the victims. And cared, and always open to people who were discriminated against. I think I grew up very [INAUDIBLE] in attitude. 
INT: How have your experiences affected the way you raised your children? SIDNEY FANAROF: Same way. You know, I've always want-- wanted them to remember who they were. I don't think that anybody ever forgets who they are. Yeah, from early-on discrimination, I think, you know, it disappears, at least overtly. But I think deep inside me, I know that it wasn't that long ago, and it was a very elite and intelligent group of people that came to those conclusions, and I don't know that it can't happen again. So I think that fear remains. And my children are aware that I have that fear, too.  INT: Are you a member of any survivor-- child survivor groups? SIDNEY FANAROF: No.  INT: Lea, what would you like to say to your son? LF: To keep it up-- to be involved in this, and to teach people that it could happen again. And try and remain Jewish and keep this. Not to give up on it.  INT: Sid, what would you like to say to your mother? SIDNEY FANAROF: You know, I-- I don't think there's any running away from who you are, Mom. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] That is what I've taught my kids, and what I want them to know, is acceptance of who they are. And to be proud of that fact, you know? LF: I think they have. They really have. SIDNEY FANAROF: And hopefully to pass that on to their children, too. 
INT: Is there anything else that either of you would like to say? LF: That's about all.  INT: Thank you for joining us. Thank you very much. LF: This was my grandmother, Esther Winkler. The picture was taken about 1906 in Berlin.  INT: And the country? LF: Germany.  INT: How did you get the picture? LF: I don't know. We had like a lot of pictures, you know, in the family. And I just saved them. This is my mother, Regina. The picture was taken in 1914 in Berlin, Germany.  INT: What is Regina's last name? LF: At that time, well, she wasn't married yet, so it was Winkler. This is my father, Jacob Schabinski. This picture was taken 1915 in Berlin, Germany. This is myself and my brother, Sigmund. Picture was taken in 1924.  INT: Last name? LF: Berlin, Germany. Last name at that time was Schabinski. This is the business my father was running in 1936, in Berlin, Germany.  INT: What was the name of the business? LF: Ganse-Winkler. In the left corner, this is my brother, Sigmund Sabin.  INT: Is at the bottom or the top row? LF: On the bottom, Sigmund Sabin. My mother, Regina Sabin. My sister, Thea Sabin. The top row on the left, my father, Jacob Sabin. My cousin, Heinz Govselowicz, and his mother, my aunt, Gertrude Govselowicz, at that time. And myself. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] And this is my aunt, on the end, Rosa Winkler. 
INT: And yourself, give your first and last name, please? LF: Myself, I'm Lea-- [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] at that time it was Sabin-- yeah, it was-- no, it was Schabinski, at that time.  INT: So was everybody in-- with the last Sabin, their name was actually Schabinski? LF: They were Schabinski at the time, right.  INT: And that was taken, again, what year, in what city? LF: That was taken in 1938, in Berlin, Germany.  INT: How did you get the photographs from Germany to the United States? LF: Oh, just was one thing we took, the photographs. This is my wedding picture. Was taken in 1943, Los Angeles, California, United States. My name, Lea Sabin. And this is my husband, Herman Fanarof. On the left is my husband, Herman Fanarof, myself, Lea Fanaroff, my son, Sidney Fanarof, and my other son, Michael Fanarof.  INT: And is he the one that's standing? Who's in the blue shirt? LF: Sidney's standing.  INT: OK LF: Michael is down.  INT: When was this taken and where? LF: The picture was taken in Monterrey Park, California, United States, on-- in 1966. This is my son, Michael Fanarof, and his wife, Roberta Fanarof. It was taken in 1994 in-- [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] I think it was Mission Viejo, California, United States. These are my grandchildren. That's David Fanarof--  INT: Left to right? LF: On the left, David Fanarof, Seth Simchovitz, he's my step grandson. Joseph Fanarof, and Donna Simchovitz, my step granddaughter. 
INT: When was it taken and where? LF: That was taken 1996, in, think in Laguna Beach, California, USA. This is my grandson, John Fanarof. The picture was taken in 1997 in Huntington Beach, California. This is my grandson Jay Fanarof. Picture was taken 1997, in Huntington Beach, California. From left to right, just my son, my grandson, David Fanarof, my son, Sidney Fanarof, my grandson Joseph Fanarof. I'm in the middle, myself, Lea Fanarof. It was taken in 1997 in San Francisco--  INT: California. LF: California.