INT: Today is July 9, 1997. Survivor's name is Jack Bass. His name-- last name at, at birth is Bassfreund. The interviewer's name is Karni Perez. The interview is taking place in Adamsville, Alabama, USA, and the primary language of the interview is English. My name is Karni Rebecca Perez. Today's date is July 9, 1997. I'm conducting an interview with Jack Bass, and the interview is taking place in Birmingham, Alabama, USA. CREW: Adamsville.  INT: I'm sorry. Not Birmingham. It's Adamsville. We're near Birmingham. Adamsville, Alabama, USA. Would you tell us your name please? JB: My name is Jack Bass.  INT: Would you spell it for us? JB: Yes. That's B-A-S-S.  INT: And how do you spell your first name? JB: J-A-C-K.  INT: Thank you. What was your name at birth? JB: My name at birth was Juergen Jacob Bassfreund.  INT: And would you spell that for us also? JB: That would be J-U-E-R-G-E-N B-A-S-S-F-R-E-U-N-D. And Jacob, of course, J-A-C-O-B.  INT: Did you-- have you gone by any other names? JB: No, I never have.  INT: Did you have any nicknames? JB: No, not that I can think of.  INT: Would you tell us your date of birth, please? JB: I was born September 30, 1923.  INT: And your age? JB: I'm 74.  INT: And please tell us the city and country of your birth. JB: I was born in Bernkastel. Do you want me to spell it? 
INT: Please. JB: B-E-R-N-K-A-S-T-E-L at the Mosel River in Germany.  INT: And would you tell us the names of your parents and any brothers or sisters that you had? JB: Yeah, my father's name was Manfred, M-A-N-F-R-E-D, Bassfreund, B-A-S-S-F-R-E-U-N-D. My mother's name was Irma Bassfreund, I-R-M-A, B-A-S-S-F-R-E-U-N-D.  INT: And your sister's name? JB: My sister's name was Ilse Bassfruend, I-L-S-E B-A-S-S-F-R-E-U-N-D.  INT: Thank you. Would you tell us first a little bit about the town in which you were born? JB: Well, this town I lived in was a very small town. Dates back to the Romans yet, and it has a bridge going from Bernkastel to the other side, which is called Cues, C-U-E-S. And this was an old Roman bridge which was built by the Romans. It had a high school and a little marketplace, a few stores. It was a small town.  INT: And what was the community like, the people in the town? What do you remember about the people? JB: Well, I could not really say because I did not live in Bernkastel. It so happened that the, the hospital I was born in was in Bernkastel was the only hospital around, and therefore I couldn't say much about the population itself.  INT: I see. What town did you actually live in? JB: I lived in a-- what I would call a village which was called Muelheim, M-U-E-L-H-E-I-M. It's about a few kilometers or a few miles away from Bernkastel. 
INT: I see. Would you describe Muelheim for us? JB: Yeah, Muelheim was a real small village, and [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] it was a place with a few Jewish people there-- not that many, really. And my father was a doctor in this town. He was an M.D.  INT: Tell us about your family. JB: Well, my mother came from a town near Saarbrücken, which is in the Saar Basin. And my father was born in [NON-ENGLISH] in upper Silesia. And I think he met my mother during the war, and they got married in 1919 or 1920. I don't remember correctly the year.  INT: What, what did you do-- what kinds of things did you do together as a family that you remember, with your mother and father? JB: Oh, I remember that my father was very good to us, and we never got punished by my father. My mother had to do it, as my father was extremely busy. He took care of so many patients, and then he had to go to the hospital in Bernkastel to visit patients which were at the hospital there, since it was the only one around. And then, of course, in those years there was such a thing as house calls, which is nonexistent today.  INT: So did you-- the four of you go any places together that you can remember when you were young? JB: Oh, yes. I remember that we always used to go-- when we used to go to the seashore, we did not go in any place in Germany because there was already antisemitism in those years. In fact, there were some resort towns which wouldn't allow Jews in there. And I remember that the Jewish newspapers used to print every year a booklet. And it said-- this booklet was entitled, where Jews are not wanted. And that would give a whole list of all these places, inns and restaurants, where a Jew could not be seen or was not allowed to be seen. 
INT: Did you see those-- that printed material? JB: Yeah, I did.  INT: What, what years are you thinking of that you saw those things? JB: Well, I would say that was 1932, 1931. [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] There were a number of Jewish newspapers in, in Germany, and I don't remember exactly which one it was. I think it was called [SPEAKING GERMAN]. It means the, the Jewish Family Paper, so to speak. And they used to print these booklets.  INT: And you read them? JB: Yeah, I had seen them.  INT: What did you-- what did you-- JB: And I remember that my father always told us about a town which called-- was called [NON-ENGLISH], which was at the Atlantic coast. And Jews were not allowed to go there.  INT: What did you think when you were a child when you-- JB: Well, at first I couldn't understand it because-- but I soon realized when I got a little older that every time when I used to play with children and I did something they didn't like, they would call me a dirty Jew or something, you know? And then I realized that there was a lot of antisemitism in Germany.  INT: Would you tell us about your religious upbringing? JB: Well, my father came from a very religious family. My grandfather was a rabbi, an Orthodox rabbi. And I remember my father did not drive a car, so we had a chauffeur. And then my father used to put on tefillin on the way to the hospital to Bernkastel and, and prayed in the-- in the car. 
INT: Did you practice any, any things at home? JB: Oh, yes, definitely. We used to go to synagogue, and we used to have, of course, every Friday night we had dinner, and we prayed. And every-- after every meal we said grace. That wasn't-- and actually, we were not allowed, for instance, to write on, on, on Saturday to write with a pencil. I mean, and of course, also not to ride a car or anything like that. It was-- my mother, on the other hand, was not brought up strictly. So when my father passed away later on, I-- the strictness lessened because my mother was not really that well versed in, in Hebrew and things like that.  INT: Did you and your family attend synagogue? Would, would you describe-- JB: Yes, we did. There was a synagogue not far from Muelheim, within walking distance, about a 20, 25 minute walk. And in fact, my father used to volunteer his services on the high holidays because since it is an all day affair, the one poor cantor cannot handle the whole prayer meeting. So my father used to fill in.  INT: What-- describe the synagogue for us. JB: Was a small synagogue. Since I would say that in Muelheim there were maybe 35, 40 Jews. Was a small synagogue. I remember you had to walk up a flight of stairs. It was more like a prayer room with a shrine for the Torahs and so on. 
INT: Would you describe for us what your education-- how it-- how it began? Your-- JB: Yeah, I went to public school in Muelheim. And I remember, in those days they used to have four years in one classroom. In other words, there was no separation. Because when he-- when the teacher taught one year, the next year would do some writing or do something else. And I remember, in those days we had a teacher there who was an antisemite. I remember he used to smoke a cigarette which was called Trommler, T-R-O-M-M-L-E-R, which means drama. And it had the SA sign on the package. It was a brown-- of course, brown package-- yellowish brown. And he was a-- even then a Nazi already, and this was in 1931.  INT: How did you experience or know-- was there any other way in which you knew that he was a Nazi or an antisemite? JB: Well, anybody who would smoke that cigarette had to be a Nazi already because it was the only cigarette which was manufactured by a Nazi outfit. And it said that there's no concern and no trust involved in the-- in the company. So it was strictly a, a cigarette that was-- would support the Nazi movement.  INT: What, what was it like with you being with the other children there in the school in Muelheim? JB: Well, at the beginning it was tolerable. But I found that after 1931, it got really to the point where no child would-- nobody would spend the lunch hour with me. And I was standing all by myself in the schoolyard, you know, because they had already probably been advised by some of the Nazis in town not to associate with Jewish people. 
INT: Did you know this for a fact? JB: Oh yeah, I'm, I'm sure. How, how would the children have known otherwise? I mean, they just stayed away from me.  INT: Would you describe to us what sorts of things you did do when you played with the other children? JB: Well, usually during the lunch hours we used to talk. And we didn't play anything. We used to talk, and sit together, and eat lunch together. And that was about it.  INT: Do you remember any of the children in particular? JB: Well, yeah. My, my father's chauffeur's son was also in, in my class. He was born the same year as I was. And he used to be a good friend of mine. I used to see him almost every day. Either I used to go to his house, or he used to come to my house. But after 1932, which was the year when my father passed away, he did not play with me anymore, either.  INT: What about any other of the teachers at the school? Do any of them stand out in your mind, your memory? JB: No, there was only one teacher. There was only one teacher for all the classes we had. And I remember going to a-- once in a while I-- we used to go to a small town like on a-- on a little trip, on an outing. And this teacher met another Nazi teacher there, and they used to drink there and talk. And I don't know what was going on there, but that's about all I remember. I remember also that they, they didn't particularly bother with Jewish students much, you know? 
INT: When you say they didn't bother with, what do you mean? JB: Well, we were not asked too many things. I mean, we did our homework, and once in a while, of course, in order to keep up the appearance of being a teacher, he would ask me something. But I-- he was not really-- it was not really as much as he would do with, with the non-Jewish children, you know. He would teach them more, so to speak. Ask them more questions.  INT: Did you go to any other school after that school? JB: Yeah. Then we moved-- after my father passed away in 1932, we moved to a town, it's called Trier-- T-R-I-E-R. And Trier's the oldest German town. It's about half an hour, 3/4 of an hour by car from Muelheim to Trier. And I went to school there, and I went to a-- was called a gymnasium. Was a high school, so to speak.  INT: What kinds of courses did you have there? JB: I had to take Latin, geometry, German, of course. [PAUSES FOR 5 SECONDS] That was about it more or less. Geography. Basic things, you know. And [INAUDIBLE], which was something like, how should I say, teaching about animals, plants, and so on and so forth.  INT: And how was that school? JB: Of course, German history. German history always played a big role in, in the German curriculum.  INT: And how was that school? How did that go for you? JB: Well, it was bad because in 1933 when Hitler came to power everybody-- the teacher would come in, raise his arm, and say heil Hitler. And then the other students would say heil Hitler, and I was the only one standing and didn't say heil Hitler. 
INT: What happened? JB: Nothing. As a Jew, you were not supposed to say heil Hitler.  INT: And where, where did you-- did someone tell you not to do that, or was that just your feeling? How did you-- JB: No, we knew because we were not-- a Jew was not considered a, a, a German. So when they said heil Hitler, we knew that-- all Jewish people knew who Hitler was and what he-- that he was against the Jews. So of course, we didn't say heil Hitler. I don't even think they would have wanted us to say heil Hitler, because a Jew was not considered a German.  INT: Do you remember the other students at the gymnasium? JB: Yeah, I remember some of them. There were some of them-- they were all in the Hitler Youth, of course. I remember one fellow was from a religious Catholic family and didn't want to go in, but he had to. He was forced. He was crying, but they forced him into it.  INT: How did you know that they forced him and he didn't want to? JB: Because if somebody cries joining it, that means that he didn't want to go in the first place.  INT: Did you see him crying? JB: Yeah.  INT: Can you describe what happened-- how that happened? JB: Nothing happened. He was just-- they just incorporated him in the-- in the Hitler Youth like anybody else.  INT: Where did that happen? JB: Don't forget, there was always a propagandistic way of teaching these kids what to do. And eventually, after a while they probably believed it, or maybe they didn't, some of them. But most of them did. 
INT: You saw him crying, you said? JB: Yeah, I did.  INT: Where was that? JB: That was in Trier.  INT: Where in Trier? JB: At the-- the school was called the Kaiser Wilhelm Gymnasium. That was Emperor Wilhelm High School, so to speak.  INT: Do you remember that, that incident? JB: I remember that incident.  INT: What was happening and who was there? JB: I remember it was a redheaded fellow, and he came from a religious family. I think one of his uncles was some kind of-- was either a priest or something. And I remember that he used to-- I think that the uncle used to give Catholic [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] history, and trained the Catholic students in religion.  INT: And did he talk about it? Did he say how he felt? How did you hear-- JB: No, he didn't say how he felt. I just saw him cry.  INT: Were other people talking to him that you remember? JB: No, I don't remember that. But I distinctly remember he was crying, being indoctrinated into, into the Hitler Youth or whatever it was called.  INT: What, what, what was the indoctrination that you saw? JB: I used to see sometimes a, a young fellow in uniform come to the school and talk to the students. And he had questionnaires, and he signed them up for the Hitler Youth.  INT: Did you ever listen to the talk? Did you hear any of what he said? JB: No, I didn't listen to the talk. 
INT: Do you remember any teachers in particular? JB: Yeah. I could not really say that the teachers really showed the antisemitic tendencies towards me, I mean, except for the heil Hitler. I remember one teacher, though, who taught us drawing, who was a Mr. Graf, G-R-A-F, and he was a real Nazi. I mean, he-- I remember at one time we were drawing pictures and he said that we should draw pictures of, of German people, or a German man, or German woman. And one kid got up and said, can I draw a picture of a Jew? He said, no, the Jews are not Germans. You draw German people only. That's what he said.  INT: Do you remember any other things he said or did? JB: No. I remember he also used to give us lessons in gymnastics, sports, and he was one of these types that really was already a real Nazi. He used to have these regular sports, like kids boxing, and hitting each other, you know, and preparing them already for the better things to come, so to speak.  INT: Did you do any of that? JB: Well, I had to, yeah. But he didn't pay too much attention to, to me because, first of all, I was not too athletic, number one. And being Jewish was the other thing, and he was a Nazi. Definitely I mean.  INT: Did he ever speak to you? JB: No, not really. Not really. 
INT: How about the other students? How did they treat you? JB: Well, I couldn't say at that time that-- there might have been some students, of course, that didn't speak to me. Or like in any class, there's some kids you hang out with and some you don't. But I found them more agreeable than the ones I met in, in the public school in Muelheim. I mean, I still had people that talked to me and sat with me. But [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] in those-- in 19-- that was in 1933, 1934, I would say.  INT: What, what kinds of things do you remember doing with your spare time during those days? JB: Well, in those days we used to play-- well, my sister and I, we used to go in front of the house and go do roller skating. And then we also-- sometimes there were kids that used to start up with, and call us dirty Jew, and things like that. But we more or less stayed amongst ourselves. Usually Jewish children, you know.  INT: When you say we, who-- JB: My sister and I.  INT: I see. [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] Do you remember any other kinds of things that you used to do with your sister or alone? JB: Well, we, we used to read books, and-- but in those days we really-- we didn't do much anymore because we had to be careful.  INT: In what way? JB: Because there were sometimes people that would make remarks or threaten you. If you come in this block again, you dirty Jew, I'm going to beat you up, or something like that. 
INT: Do you remember being threatened like that? JB: Yeah.  INT: Tell us about that. JB: Well, there were some, some men that used to do it in our day. For instance, there was one guy on the corner in Trier who used to sell was a pornographic antisemitic newspaper, which was edited by Julius Streicher, who's probably known to everybody. He was also Gauleiter of Franconia. And he always used to say, this Jew committed suicide. The Jude so-and-so had [GERMAN], which means committed suicide. And he would call to people the headline so that they would buy the paper, you know? There's one interesting thing which I would love to mention. In Trier was a cafe house by the name of Bley, B-L-E-Y. And these people were extremely friendly to Jewish people. First of all, most of their customers were Jewish because the, the Jewish intelligentsia and the people who were, were lawyers and, and doctors used to congregate in this particular cafe house. Was a very lovely cafe house. And Mrs. Bley was a very religious Catholic. So was her husband, of course. And every time a man would come into sell papers, she says, my customers are not interested in this paper. Please leave. And she was-- I would say she was almost as much in as Jewish people were. The fact was that all of her children were married to Jewish people. The daughter married a Jewish fellow, and she went to South America with him. That was Annelise Bley was her name. And the son married a, a department store owner's daughter, Ilse Haas-- H-A-A-S. Were-- there were two big department stores-- in fact, the only department stores in, in Trier. 
INT: When you-- did you go into the cafe house? JB: Oh yes, I did. My mother did. Yeah, we used to go there.  INT: Did you see her ever turn this man away that-- the way that you described? JB: Oh yeah, I've seen it. In fact, there was another thing. The Bleys ventured into making pasta, and they had all kinds of shapes, and stars, and you know, and whatever. And somebody came in and said, he has one for swastikas. She says, my customers are not interested in swastikas.  INT: And you heard her say this? JB: Yeah. And she was again in for that. They always had Mrs. Haas in  INT: Do you remember any other incidents in which you had experienced any antisemitism? JB: I remember at the beginning when Hitler first came to power, we lived in an apartment that was overlooking like a little park. And I remember that the communists and the, the Nazis used to fight there, and they used to knife each other. And people used to scream during the night, help, help, help, hilfe, hilfe, you know. That I remember, too. And then I remember that it, it ebbed a little bit. In Trier they show every 30 years the, the rope which Christ wore when he was crucified. And of course, there were people from all over the world there, from the United States, from Australia. In those days they would-- it somehow ebbed the antisemitism to a point where it wasn't so visible, you know, so people from other countries shouldn't report what was really going on in Germany. 
INT: What do you remember seeing during that time? JB: Well, I remember seeing the boycott of the Jewish stores. And they made one big mistake. We had a shoe store in, in Trier. The name of the people was Gelber, G-E-L-B-E-R. He went to school, he was a friend of mine, and I used to spend time in their house, as well. And his father came from Poland originally, and he had-- and he was still a Polish citizen. So one day we woke up and they had all written Jew, and, and, and Jewish stars all over the window. And he called up the Polish consulate, and it-- and it-- the German fire brigade had to remove it.  INT: Did you see any other events-- JB: Yeah, I used to see--  INT: --during the boycott? JB: Yeah, I used to see-- there was-- there was one street where we didn't like to go through. They had a restaurant there, a, a, a bar, a-- what do you call a [NON-ENGLISH], a beer garden, so to speak. And it was called [NON-ENGLISH], the Bell. And this was a Nazi stronghold. This was a place where they used to have meetings even prior to Hitler taking power, and they used to have all these antisemitic newspapers in a-- in a-- how should I say-- cage-like arrangement that you can read from outside. And there were a lot of times people hanging around there which we were afraid of. So we usually didn't go through that street. 
INT: But you went-- JB: I think the street was called [NON-ENGLISH].  INT: How did you-- how could you tell that they were-- that-- JB: That they wore Nazi uniform, and they looked as if they were drunk, drunk with, you know, pimps and the people like that hanging out there, you know. We were afraid to go through there. We usually used to turn into a side street and go around it so as to avoid it.  INT: We're going to stop this tape here. JB: OK.  INT: You're doing-- CREW: Bass.  INT: Is there anything else about your experience or life in Trier that you can think of that you might want to tell us about? JB: No, well, I-- did I mention the-- the story about the shoe store? I mentioned that-- I did mention it?  INT: About the-- I think so. JB: I mentioned on tape?  INT: Tell me again what that was about? JB: Well, this friend of mine who went to school with me, his father was a, a Polish Jew, and he was a citizen.  INT: Yes, and then the boycott on, on-- JB: Yeah.  INT: Yes, you did talk about that. JB: Yeah, OK. There's not really too much to report about Trier, except that a lot of Jewish people left-- emigrated to other countries, if they could.  INT: Did you already-- when you were there, did you know any people who left? JB: Yeah, the Goldsteins who had a store of embroideries and linens, and they left. 
INT: What did your mother-- did your mother say anything to you and your sister about what was going on? Do you remember any talk at home about things? JB: Yeah, of course. This was the only place where you could talk because you had to be afraid to talk outside. I mean, sometimes people would try to prod you to say something about the Nazis and then later on use it against you and go to the Gestapo. So we knew that on the outside we were not allowed to say anything. If somebody said anything, I would say, well, I haven't-- I'm too young to know about politics and things like that. And I would leave it at that.  INT: How did you know not to say anything? JB: Because--  INT: Did anybody tell you this? How did you learn that? JB: Yeah, Because there were reports of people being put in concentration camps, you know, in, in Dachau and--  INT: Where did you hear about this? JB: Some people that went in there-- Jewish people went in, and came out, and then they had to leave the country after that.  INT: Did you-- I mean-- JB: Some of them were only left-- they only let them go when they had a visa to, to emigrate to another country.  INT: Did you learn about these situations and these people from someone else, or from-- how did you learn about these things? Do you remember? JB: Well, I remember that sometimes people used to say you can't say anything otherwise you go to Dachau, they used to say. So people knew in those days already that there was a-- well, in fact, there were a lot of Jewish people that went there, you know? All these later experts-- annihilation experts started at Dachau, actually. This was the, the, the beginning of that-- all these camps was Dachau. 
INT: Would-- do you remember what your mother may have said about what was going on to you and your sister? JB: Well, of course, everybody was horrified, you know? But in particular, we were told-- I mean, in other words, we were taught how to behave on the outside. Don't do this. Don't use Jewish words when non-Jews are around, and don't do anything, and don't hit a, a child in the street, or play with them if you don't know them, and so on and so forth.  INT: Did you live in any other place after Trier? JB: Yeah.  INT: Where did you go after? Where, where did you live after Trier? JB: After Trier I lived a short while in Cologne, [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] and then I lived in Berlin.  INT: Did you go to any other schools after the gymnasium? JB: Yeah, of course I did. I went first to a school in Cologne which was called the Jawne. And I remember it was the school that put most emphasis on, on, on Jewish things like Jewish history, Hebrew, and things like that. But we also, of course, had German, and biology, and history, and so on. We had a complete curriculum. I remember it was a very demanding school, and you had to be really on your toes. I remember sitting and doing homework till 10:00, 11:00 at night. That's how exhausting it was there.  INT: Let's go back for a minute to the gymnasium. Were you able to finish? JB: No, no. 
INT: How many years did you go to the gymnasium? JB: It got-- it got-- I went about, let me see now, two or three years I went.  INT: What happened? JB: Well, it was-- we, we were not allowed to go anymore. In fact, if it wasn't for the fact that my father was a doctor and the first war, I would have never gotten into it because there was a quota. You could not go to the school. There was a certain quota for Jewish people that said to let in so and so many. But due to the fact that my father was in the war, somehow they, they let me go. Don't forget that this was at the beginning of, of the Hitler period.  INT: Tell us what happened while you were in gymnasium that you, you said you didn't finish? JB: No, you couldn't. You-- they-- I wasn't allowed to finish.  INT: What-- do you remember the-- JB: They told us that they should look for another school for me because they were not allowed to have any more--  INT: Who told you that? JB: I don't remember. My mother told me. She must have been notified by mail or somehow. That's when we moved to Cologne, and I went to this Jewish school there.  INT: I see. What else can you tell us about the Jewish school? JB: Well, not really that much. I, I was not particularly happy going there because I was never really interested in learning too much Hebrew. And they-- when I went there already, these classes were advanced already in comparison to, to my, my knowledge. And I felt kind of like an outsider, you know? 
INT: What, what-- do you remember any of the students there? JB: They were all Jewish, all the students, yeah. I remember students there, yeah. [PAUSES FOR 5 SECONDS] There was one Hans Bierman. I don't know what ever happened to these people. There was a Solomon Freilich who actually was-- first was from Trier, too. Was a very religious Jewish fellow. He was-- or his parents came from Poland, and he was also was a very intelligent, very smart young man. And he went to school in Trier as well, and then he had to go up there also because he could not continue. But he was the best in the class nevertheless when he left.  INT: Do you remember any of the teachers? JB: The teachers, yeah, yeah. There was-- the, the director of, of the Jawne school was a Dr. Klibansky, I think. K-L-I-B-A-N-S-K-Y. He-- in fact, a street is named after him in Cologne because he was supposed to have made it possible for a lot of children to go-- to leave Germany. And he was caught, and he died in a concentration camp.  INT: Did you go to any other schools? JB: Yes, I did. I went to Coburg. Coburg there was a Jewish school that was called [NON-ENGLISH]. It was run by a preacher-- I guess a preacher is somebody who is not a rabbi exactly, but-- he hasn't got the schooling, but he was the head of a congregation nevertheless. And I lived there, as well. It was about eight or nine hours away by train from, from Cologne, and I-- of course, there were all Jewish people. And we, we lived there, and we had a good time there, really. But even there we were instructed-- I remember we used to go to town and we were told that we shouldn't use Jewish words in conversation. And in other words, we should blend in as, as much as possible so as not to cause any friction or uproar there. [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] Is there anything else? Let me see, no. Well, they, they had also a regular curriculum. I, I took English, French, and German history was still on the program, even though we were not considered German. But was still a very important part of the curriculum. And so was, of course, arithmetic, algebra, algebra. 
INT: When, when did you attend this school? JB: That was in 1936. I remember because it was at a time when King George was crowned in England as the-- as the next king.  INT: What do you remember hearing or seeing about that? JB: Coburg was a very bad town for a Jewish person to live in, because Coburg was also yet under the jurisdiction of the [NON-ENGLISH] fame, you know, the antisemitic, pornographic paper. And the people there were-- there were a lot of Nazi. In fact, Hitler had already meetings in that town and party congresses long before he got into power in 1925, '26.  INT: While you were there, did you see anything go on-- anything happening in Coburg? JB: No, not really, because we were-- usually we were within the confinement of the school itself. So there was no way. Except Sundays we would go, or so-- it was Saturday or Sunday they let us go in the-- in-- into town for an hour or two. I remember that we had a synagogue in this place, as well. The, the room where we ate, the dining room, was actually a converted synagogue. So we had-- every day we had service, and you couldn't miss it because if you didn't go to services, [LAUGHS] you couldn't get breakfast. So everybody went.  INT: How long did you stay at, at that school? JB: I would say about a year.  INT: Where did you go after that? JB: After that, we moved to Berlin. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] And in Berlin, I, [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] I was finished with school over there, I guess, more or less. I went to trade schools. I went to a photography school, and I, I went to a wood-- woodworking school. 
INT: Tell us about those schools, about what, what your experience-- JB: The woodworking school was part of-- I think part of the ORT schools, which was a Jewish organization provided money for-- to train Jewish people, young people, to change professions and occupations by teaching trades.  INT: Do you remember any, any experiences that you had while you were at either of those schools that stand out in your mind? JB: No. In those days already, they had to have a non-Jewish foreman there. And-- but he was not-- I mean, we didn't really have any problems with him so to speak. I mean, we knew what to say and what not to say, you know, because we had to be extremely careful not to say anything. There were sometimes people that would ask if we know a joke about the government or so. Of course, we didn't know. Also we knew plenty, but we didn't-- we didn't say any because sometimes we would be turned in to the Gestapo.  INT: Where did you live at the-- at that time? JB: I lived in Charlottenburg in Berlin.  INT: With whom were you living? JB: I was with my mother and my stepfather.  INT: When you finished-- well, let's see. That was-- and, and when did you attend those schools? JB: I would say that was around 1938, 1939. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] I remember-- I remember the preparation for war, because this was near the famous Siemens factories. And Siemens was a big outfit which was-- in fact, had its own subway station-- two or three subway stations. That's how big it was. They used to make cable, ammunition, electrical appliances-- anything, you name it, and Siemens made it. And I saw that when they put the antiaircraft guns on top of the, the roof of the buildings and so on. It was already-- and then I saw the, the elevated trains. They got these, these black [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] things put in front of the light so it wouldn't shine up so that in case an airplane attacks, it wouldn't be seen from the air, and so on and so forth. 
INT: When do you think that was? JB: That was the beginning of '39, I would say.  INT: During this time, what kinds of things did you do for entertainment? JB: Well, we-- I used to have a, a little folding board kayak, and I used to go to [? Konigswald, ?] which is a suburb of-- well, I wouldn't say a suburb of Berlin, but it's not far from Berlin. And has a lot of lakes. And I used to go there and take my boat there.  INT: Did you have a group of friends that you went with? JB: Yeah, I had a group of friends. We used to go bicycle riding or boating.  INT: Can you tell us about any experiences you had while you were out with your friends? JB: Well, at one time I was alone and somebody-- a German told me I cannot come to the-- to the edge of the water because Jews were not allowed there. So I finally found another space where I could finally land the boat. And I remember in those days seeing already there, there was a restaurant that had a sign on that said, we enjoy taking care of customers, but Jews stay away, please. I mean, I think it said please, but said Jews stay away. And I remember once going to a cafe house with my mother and my sister. And we were sitting there, and it was crowded. And then the-- they wouldn't wait on us. The, the, the waiters came over and said we can't wait on you because you are a Jew. So we had to get up. It's very humiliating, you know, if you go into a place where there's so many people dining and you have to get up and just walk out. 
INT: Do you remember what you did then? JB: Well, we walked out. That's what I did. There was nothing else to do.  INT: Do you remember where you went? JB: No, I don't. It was-- it must have been one of-- you know, in, in Europe they have these-- especially in Germany, they have these parks, and they also run usually a cafe house in those parks, and this was where it was. I don't remember exactly where it was, but I remember it happening.  INT: During this time, did you and your sister talk about things that you were doing? Can you tell us what sorts of things you talked about? JB: Well, we didn't talk much politics, so to speak, but of course we knew things that happened. There were-- there were [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] people that all of a sudden disappeared in concentration camps, and some people left, and of course, we know what was going on.  INT: How did you know where they were going? How did you know-- JB: Well, they-- it, it-- word got around. They would say, oh, last night the, the, the Gestapo arrested a lot of Jews again. They brought them to Dachau. And then sometimes you used to get letter-- if they were in immediate family, you used to get letters from them.  INT: Did you get letters from any people? JB: No, I didn't. But I, I think my mother got once a letter from her brother-in-law, and he got out because he got-- he got a visa to go to Shanghai. 
INT: How did you hear about this letter, do you remember? JB: I remember that my mother was reading it. And by-- my stepfather's brother was-- later on came-- came back. And he was a day or two there, and then he left for Shanghai.  INT: What other things do you remember that you enjoy doing as a young man in Berlin? JB: At, at the beginning, we usually were bicycle riding, a lot-- friends of mine. We used to go to the forest there, the surrounding areas. And we used to listen to music recordings. That's what we did.  INT: What music did you listen to? JB: It was mostly classical. It was operas, some Strauss music, [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] symphonies, concertos, whatever.  INT: Do you remember any particular bicycle trip? Anything from-- JB: No, not, not really. I remember we used to go all around the-- this area, and I was-- I mean, I was familiar with the areas there because we used to go almost every week or so. We used to sometimes ride for four or five hours, and then picnic, and then come back again.  INT: Tell us what happened after you were finished going to the schools that you talked about in Berlin. JB: Well, this was already the time, it was-- Kristallnacht came. That was in 1938.  INT: Will you describe what you saw and-- JB: I was still in school then, though. I still went to the-- to the, the trade school. 
INT: What do you remember from that night? JB: I remember from Kristallnacht that we lived in, in Charlottenburg, and that the, the superintendent of the building rang our bell. And he said to me, don't walk in the street because they're all out there to beat the Jews up. And I didn't go out. And then we saw, of course, all the glass of the Jewish stores strewn all over the sidewalks, you know. And they also had-- made a lot of arrests then. And of course, the synagogues were burning.  INT: What, what was going through your mind at that time? Do you-- can you tell us what you remember thinking about? JB: I couldn't understand it. I couldn't-- I couldn't see-- I still couldn't understand it-- why they were doing it. Because it was-- I mean, we were not-- we were brought up in a peaceful, nice environment, and I could not understand it. I could not really-- I couldn't make sense out of it. We knew what it was, of course, and I remember passing by every day by a elevated train. We passed the [NON-ENGLISH], which was-- the main synagogue was there. And we saw that there was nothing left but ashes and burnt wood and debris.  INT: Do you remember seeing anything else going on in the streets during the time that you were in Berlin? JB: No, I didn't go in the street. We were afraid to go in the street. 
INT: After Kristallnacht, and-- JB: Oh, after Kristallnacht? And then, of course, they started to-- bringing out other laws, and-- because this was supposed to be as a event for a killing that took place in Paris. And a Jewish fellow killed some kind of a German official in the consulate there.  INT: How did you hear about that? JB: In the papers.  INT: You read-- you read about that? JB: Yeah.  INT: What, what laws-- JB: And this was used as a-- as a reason for starting this campaign. Besides that, it netted the German government a lot of money because they took-- I don't-- I don't know what the percentage was, but they had to-- the Jews had to come up at a million marks.  INT: What, what laws do you-- JB: To compensate.  INT: --do you remember affected your life then? JB: Well, what I-- the, the thing that mostly affected me was the fact I couldn't go to the movies anymore. And I think it was-- yeah. Afterwards they came out the Jewish star, but I don't remember exactly now. I think that was already at the beginning of the war when they came out the Jewish star. Couldn't go to the movies, couldn't go to libraries, you weren't allowed to go to a museum. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] You were restricted. The only place you could go was a-- there was a-- what was called a [NON-ENGLISH], which was run by Jewish-- by the Jewish organization. It was a-- they used to have events. Like they used to show a motion picture, and they would show a, a play. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] That was the only place you could go. And later on, this also was taken away. 
INT: What did you do when you couldn't go anywhere? JB: Used to read. Used to go to work, and you, you used to read when you came home.  INT: What work were you doing? JB: I was still going to that school there, [? we used to ?] do carpenter work.  INT: I see. And what happened after that? JB: After that the war started, I believe.  INT: Do you remember-- tell us how you first heard-- first knew that the war had begun. JB: Well, the war in Europe started in 1939, you know? And as we-- you could see there were a lot of German Army personnel in the streets and on trains. And you used to see a lot of guns, antiaircraft guns on trains that were moved to places, you know. And then, of course, they had the-- those-- these famous meetings in, in-- but Chamberlain.  INT: How did-- you how did you hear about those? JB: Through the papers. Through the papers. And then all of a sudden they took our radios away. A Jew was not allowed to have a radio anymore.  INT: Do you remember the day that happened? JB: I think that was-- [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] not exactly. I couldn't say exactly. I think it was right at the beginning of the war, I would imagine.  INT: Tell us how that happened. JB: Well, you, you had to go to the police station and bring your radios, and leave them there. And that was it. And you were not allowed to have a radio. 
INT: Did you go to the police station? JB: Yeah, I did.  INT: How did you know to do that? JB: Because we were ordered to. My mother sent me with the radio to [NON-ENGLISH], which was a-- which was a precinct in, in Berlin, in Charlottenburg.  INT: Describe what happened as you did that. JB: Well, the [NON-ENGLISH], the police there, they were very rough. You know, when you were-- we were standing in line, they had to go through. They would push us, whatever. And then after waiting so long, you came to a spot where all the radios were, you put the radio down, and you left. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] We were afraid because a lot of people used to say that the, the Gestapo could listen in if somebody had a radio. They could somehow listen to-- and we would listen to foreign broadcasts or things like that. So we all gave the radio away. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] We weren't allowed to have a telephone anymore, either.  INT: How did that happen for you? JB: I don't know how it happened. It was the law. They, they came out with these unusual laws-- you know, you were not allowed to have them. And then later on you couldn't even travel on the subway anymore unless you were going to work. You've got a pass stating that you were allowed to take one particular subway line or one particular streetcar line, and that was all you could do. And you were only allowed to use it from work and-- to work and from work. 
INT: Describe to-- describe how, how you-- your telephone was taken. JB: I don't remember anymore how it was taken, but I remember that we didn't have it anymore. [PAUSES FOR 6 SECONDS] And then, of course, during the war we were not allowed to shop anymore except from-- between 4:00 in the afternoon 5:00-- till 5 o'clock. And you can imagine what lines there were, and there were still about, I would say, close to 12,000 Jewish people in Berlin. So the lines were enormous. And if it was after 5 o'clock, you were just out of luck. And you were only allowed to shop-- if I remember correctly, you were only allowed to shop certain days.  INT: Did you do any shopping yourself? JB: Yeah I saw-- I remember there was a lady standing. She was old, and she had arthritis, she had a cane, and she was always watching that no Jew would enter the store before 4 o'clock or after 5 o'clock.  INT: Tell us what else you remember going shopping during that time. JB: Well, there wasn't much. A Jew was not allowed to have fruit. A Jew was not allowed to have meat. The only what we usually got were these beets that they have in Europe. You know, the one they, they grow-- I think they make sugar out of them, too. And that was about all-- and potatoes, you know. And we were lucky we had that. I mean, food was-- we were hungry already. There were-- was very little one could eat that was allowed. If they have special rations, like coffee for Christmas and things, a Jew was not allowed. In fact, what happened was the lady that ran the store right across from where we lived put my mother into the-- on the coffee list, and all of a sudden we got another letter that we had to report to the police. And when I went to the police, the policeman said to me, you've got to bring your mother with you. So my mother went with me the next day, and he happened to be from the same town my mother was from, so he was nice by just throwing that paper into the wastebasket. Otherwise, who knows what would have happened, because it was-- it was illegal for a Jew to receive coffee, or chocolate, or anything like that. 
INT: Tell us what he said. Do you remember? JB: He asked my mother why she didn't leave the country before. Because he caught-- it was an unusual thing. My mother was afraid because he caught us at an unusual time. I think was already 7 o'clock in the evening, but usually the business is conducted before 7 o'clock in the evening. But he probably did it because he was afraid that there were too many police officers around so he could talk to my mother.  INT: How did you know he was from the same town? JB: Because he told us.  INT: What else did he say? JB: He said why my, my mother didn't leave, and she should have left, he said. He said, she should have left the country. That's all I remember about it, but I remember that we were not fined or punished in any way because he swept it under the carpet.  INT: What kind of food did you-- you know, what did you have for your meals in the-- at home? JB: You had practically nothing. The only thing that you could do is get something on the black market if you were lucky. You had to pay inflated prices, or you had to trade. Sometimes you had a piece of jewelry, and somebody would give you chicken for it or something like that, you know. This was the only way because what they-- you couldn't sustain yourself on what they gave you. I would say, well, it was still better than what we got in the concentration camp, but it was still very meager. Potatoes, I think-- there was no variety. You get tired of it after a while, eating every day the same thing. 
INT: We're going to stop this tape now. JB: OK. CREW: --with Jack Bass.  INT: What did you do when you finished going to the schools in Berlin? JB: Well, we-- we had to do forced labor. In other words, the-- the Germans needed us for war work. So they made Jewish departments in each of these places, and we used to work there. We used to get less pay also, half the pay that the non-Jewish people would get. And those were all Jewish people with a non-Jewish supervisor.  INT: Would you tell us how that came about for you, how you first started doing that? JB: Well, in-- in Berlin, there, there is-- there is a Labor Department. It is one different than here because when they tell you you have to appear there and they have a job for you, you just had to go. I mean, there was no way of saying you don't go. So we went down there. My mother went down there. And she got a job in a leather factory in Berlin. And the work was not too bad, so she got me into it as well.  INT: How did you receive notice? What-- why did you go to the Labor Department? JB: Because I was told to report for it. And we knew that it was meant for a job, you know? So the supervisor in that leather factory gave my mother a letter saying that she-- that they needed me because I knew something about photography. And that's how I got into this particular company, which was called [NON-ENGLISH]. And it was in Berlin. In Milastrasse, it was. 
INT: Tell us about what you did in that job. JB: Well, we made what was called [NON-ENGLISH]. I don't know what it was really used for. It was a long, green strap that-- and we had to sew two-- some kind of a rope onto it in a U shape. And we made them by the-- by the hundreds and hundreds, you know?  INT: What did you do? JB: I used to do that too. I had an awl, and we used to pre-drill the material, and then we would sew it up.  INT: What was that like for you? JB: Well, it was-- it wasn't too bad, considering that some other people had jobs where they had to carry heavy loads, and bags, and-- and things like that. So it was not too bad. But it were long-- they were long hours, and you had to get up very early in the morning. I remember we started at 7 o'clock in the morning. So yeah, 7:00 to 5:00 in the afternoon. We worked 10 hours every day and-- But you were among Jewish people, so you didn't feel as bad because you had something in common, you know? The supervisor was-- was non-Jewish, but he was not-- he didn't treat us bad. Well, you can't treat the person bad that sews, or what could you possibly do? After I worked there, I had to work in a factory which made paint for airplanes. And what I did is I was expediting. In other words, I used to load all these heavy drums and cans on trucks. And [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] that was my job. In summer and winter, we were always outside, you know? And we had a foreman who was very antisemitic. He was a young Nazi, not an educated person. He was a very common person. And he always used to say that no Jew was allowed-- I remember my girlfriend once came to pick me up from work. And he said he doesn't want to see a Jew in that street, otherwise he's going to arrest me, and things like that. When I worked there, I had once-- I got sick on the job. I had an appendicitis, acute appendicitis. And when they called the-- the ambulance, they wouldn't take me because they were only allowed to give a Jew first aid. And since I wasn't bleeding or anything, they were not allowed to treat me. So I-- in those days, I used to go by streetcar to work. It was from one end of Berlin to the other. So I had to take a streetcar and go to the Jewish hospital. It took about over an hour to get there. And that's where they took my appendix out. And while I was there, all of a sudden, the Gestapo gave orders to take the linen and the blankets away from us. So we were just lying on the mattress there. 
INT: Who took them? Did you see people taking your sheets? JB: I saw the-- the-- the nurses had to-- they folded them up, and they brought them outside and put them in a pile.  INT: And how did you know what that was for, why they were doing that? JB: Well, they told us. The Gestapo is taking it because they need the linen for their soldiers, for the-- for the hospitals at the-- at the front, at the theater of operations, you know, war operations.  INT: What-- what happened then? JB: Well, I was out for, I would, say maybe six, seven days. You couldn't stay out any longer because-- what happened was, in this particular factory, this man I was just talking about before, he sometimes got people mixed up. For instance, if there were two people by the same name, he would call the Gestapo and they arrested the wrong person. And actually, the man had not done anything. But he didn't care. He was not too educated. And when I came back, I was back again on my job. I went-- the-- the boss saw me because I was walking slow, because I still had pain in-- in my stomach, you know, where the scar was, where the sutures were. And he said that I'm not doing the work good enough, and he's going to fire me and put me on the railway to harvest potato. Potato harvest was coming in. And I went there. And there, I had the first time the opportunity to see the Russian prisoners that they had there. And they were in terrible condition. I really mean it. They were-- there were-- they had water, and their-- their legs were like pipes, as big as-- so what I did is, usually, these people, these farmers, who used to put the potatoes in those-- in those trains, they also used to send their relatives fruit, like marmalade and other things. And I used to go in. And the Russians were there, so what I did is I took that-- the little cart that I had, and I pushed against the-- the package-- packages. And they opened up, of course. And then the Russians would eat it. 
INT: The packages of what? JB: Of what the farmer-- all the goodies that they sent to their relatives in Berlin. But of course, this was not enough to sustain these people because they were there by the hundreds. And they have-- they got nothing but water. I don't even think that they had-- I'm not sure, but I think they didn't even sleep in regular buildings. They slept in the open somehow. They were frostbitten and everything.  INT: Where was this? JB: That was in Berlin. At one of the-- I think it was the Stettiner Bahnhof, it was called. It was a freight train station where they used to unload the potatoes. They came in sacks.  INT: What was your job? JB: I unloaded too. And after the-- after the-- the potato harvest ceased to be, they took me to another railway station, and I worked there. That was [NON-ENGLISH] Bahnhof. That-- that was a big railroad station as well as a freight station. And when I was there, I loaded and unloaded freight cars. And we used to get, like, a list. And it would say, for instance, ammunition goes into the car number five. And I would put it in car number nine, which was going in the opposite direction. Sometimes I had airplane propellers. For that, we needed more than one person. We had to load this. I used to load them in the wrong-- wrong thing there too, once in a while. You couldn't do it on a regular basis, because they would have gotten wise to it. What I still remember is that we had one-- on-- there were two parts to this station, one on the left side were tracks. And then you crossed a-- a street like. And on the right side, there were other tracks. And each of these parts were run by somebody else. So in one of them, we had a real bad antisemite who used to call the Gestapo for every little thing. Of course, I used to work with the-- with prisoners there too, Belgian prisoners and so on. And they used to tell us which of the train had marzipan in it or chocolate in it. So sometimes, we would open it up. But it had to be done very carefully. Because if they saw you, they immediately reported you to the Gestapo. On the other side, which I was lucky to get, to was a very nice person. A-- he was actually in charge of the whole operation there, Mr. Seiler. And he was very nice to us. I mean, to all the Jewish people. We had-- we were not-- we were separate. Our lunch rooms were separate. We were not allowed to eat lunch with the-- with the other workers. Only the Jews had their own-- their own lunch rooms. And he used to come in there and talk to us. And I remember that before Christmas, he said to me in front of all the others, he said, I want you to help me move some furniture in my office. And when I came in, he gave me a piece-- big piece of cake and a big sandwich. And he said, the Jews are not getting anything. I want you to have a nice, merry Christmas, which was very nice. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] Then I worked there quite some time. And this goes already to the part where I was arrested. I was-- I-- I walked with my mother to the subway station, and she took a train to a different part of-- a different part in Berlin. She was still working in that leather factory, and I was working on the railway. And that's the last time I saw my mother. We came to the railroad station. We were working, when all of a sudden we were ordered to assemble in a different part of the station. And when we got there, there was all SS standing, and they were Hitler's bodyguard, the Leibstandarte. This was the day when they arrested all the Jews because they wanted to give Hitler, as a birthday present, a Jew-free Berlin. 
INT: How did you hear that that was why it was being done? JB: It was said openly.  INT: Who-- who-- how did you hear it? JB: The SS used to say.  INT: What-- JB: We got you out before the fuhrer's birthday, they used to say. And we were thrown into that-- into those trucks there. And I got a kick there too. I remember when I went up there, one of the guys kicked me, one of the SS. They were all big, big guys, you know? It was for the elite of the-- of the SS. And we went in there. And they-- I remember that these trucks, they had, like, a-- what do you call that material, like you have tents? It was-- you couldn't see anything on the outside, in other words. They were covered. And they brought us to-- I don't remember which exactly. They had so many-- there was one in the Grosse Hamburger Strasse. That's where my mother went. Because I-- I saw somebody after the war, a half-Jewish girl, who saw my mother there. And she told me that she was there. But I was in a different place. And I remember-- I don't remember what street that was now. I remember distinctly also that this was the first time there was a big air raid on Berlin, and that everything was shaking there. And we were there.  INT: Tell us-- JB: And I remember there was a couple with me, a doctor and his wife. And he gave all his coats and beautiful things he gave to one of the fellows there. And the next morning, he had committed suicide with his wife. He injected himself with something. He was a doctor. And we stayed there. I don't know how many days we stayed there. When all of a sudden, we were ordered to assemble in the courtyard. And they took us to a railroad station in Berlin. 
INT: How did you know that they had committed suicide? JB: Because they were laying there dead.  INT: Did you find them there? JB: I didn't find them, but we saw them dead. The people were like sardines there. I mean, everybody was on the floor. And they were dead. That's why they-- why he gave all his suits and his-- and his coat away, because they didn't need it anymore.  INT: With whom were you-- had you gone there? JB: Yeah. I was actually with most of the fellows that I worked with. We all came to this-- to this particular assembly, the stage there. And I was with one fellow who was a very good friend-- friend of mine, a fellow by the name of Heinz Rodler. And his wife had just given-- given birth to a boy. And we had-- prior to our arrest, we had saved already-- I remember, he had a little wall clock with a door. And we all put ration stamps in there, bread rations stamps, so we could buy some and have a little party, you know? And-- but we were arrested before. And his wife was still in the hospital after having given birth. And she joined. Now, let me explain to you. There were some supervisors, Jewish supervisors. They were mostly from mixed marriages. They were used as supervisors. If you used to give them money or some valuables, they would smuggle a letter out to somebody, because they were still free to go. And my friend gave him something. I forgot what it was he gave him. And he sent a letter to his wife. And of course, his wife joined him. And then his wife was standing with a tiny, little baby. 
INT: You saw them? JB: Yeah. [PAUSES FOR 6 SECONDS] And I saw-- in fact, I saw him even in concentration camp, yeah, because he went with me to Auschwitz.  INT: What happened from there in Berlin? JB: All of a sudden, we-- we had to go in the courtyard. And then they put us again on trucks. And they shipped us to some remote railroad station in [NON-ENGLISH] or somewheres around there. It was on the outskirts. Tegel or [NON-ENGLISH], wherever it was. And there were empty cattle cars standing, freight cars. And they shoved us all in there. And they shoved us in so many. There was-- you couldn't even-- you couldn't even sit down. We tried, at first, to get a little order into the chaos by sitting down and opening our legs and have the next person-- but there was always about 30 or 35 people who couldn't make it. I mean, couldn't-- couldn't sit because there was just no space. And then they sealed those-- those trains up. They put the seals on the-- on the wagon, on the doors. And then off we went. I don't exactly remember how many days it took. But it was, I would say, at least two days to get from Berlin to Auschwitz. Maybe it was even longer. I remember that we didn't know. We were tired. We couldn't-- it was hot. We had nothing to drink. We had nothing to eat. And people, of course, had to relieve themselves, and they had to do it in the-- in the train. Because there was no way that you could-- it was in the winter. And there was no way that they would let anybody out. I mean, it was sealed up. And the-- the-- the SS was riding with us, you know? They had-- of course, they had a special railroad car, but they were all with us. They-- and this was going on. All of a sudden, [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] after two days or so, we heard a commotion outside. And they opened up, and let everybody out. Aus raus, like they say in German. And we went out, and there was a big ramp. And I remember it was dark yet when we got there. And they were-- there were big lights, you know? And I heard people screaming, and people were beaten up, and all kinds of things. And there was an SS man standing there, an officer. And he told me, you go over here, you go over that one over there. This one over there, this one over there. And before I knew it, they-- a truck came. And trucks came. And they-- we had to go on the truck. And they-- I remember throwing my wristwatch out there because I didn't want them to have it. It was dark so-- I had a wristwatch on, and I threw it out, out of the truck. And we arrived at a camp, at Monowitz. I really-- I couldn't say how I felt really because it was the most unusual thing. It was like a bad dream or something, worse than that yet. I mean, I had never seen anything like it. People were beating up, the SS were beating up the people. They were bleeding, and some were screaming and hollering. It was horrible. It was a nightmare. 
INT: This is-- where was-- JB: It reminded you of Dante's  INT: Where was this? JB: That was the ramp at Auschwitz. That's where the selections were made.  INT: Did you know at the time that it was Auschwitz? JB: No. I didn't know. I didn't know. I didn't know how close I came to being killed. I didn't know. I thought that they made this selection because women-- they wanted to separate the women from the men. And I figured since the babies go usually with the mothers, I figured the mothers and the babies go on one side and the men go on the other side.  INT: Is that what was happening? JB: This was what was happening. But then all of a sudden, I saw that some men were going on the other side too. So I couldn't understand. You couldn't ask anybody questions there. I mean, that was out of the question. So what happened is then, all of a sudden, I arrived at Monowitz. And the next thing I remember is that I was in line to be tattooed, and I was very tired. I must have fallen asleep standing up. And all of a sudden, somebody hit me in the face. And my face went from one side to the other. And that was my time to being tattooed. And that's when they gave me this number here.  INT: Would you-- would you show that to us? JB: And after this-- 
INT: Tell us-- did you see it long enough? CREW: Yes  INT: Tell us how that went. JB: Well, there was a-- a guy standing there. And he had a pen with a needle or something, you know? And he would-- he would just make dots until the number came out. And the little triangle on the side was-- meant Jewish, you know? Actually, the German prisoners did not get that. The Poles-- some of the Poles were tattooed also, but they didn't have, of course, the Jewish star.  INT: So what other prisoners were there that you saw? JB: Well, there were-- there were, first of all, our supervisors were former criminals that were released from-- from the penitentiary, then was supposed to be our supervisors in-- in the concentration camp. In other words, after they did their-- their term in the penitentiary, the Nazis put them as our supervisors in the concentration camp.  INT: How did you learn that? JB: Well, you could tell. These guys were very rough and very bad. They used to beat you up, and scream, and holler, and push you. And hit you with a-- a rubber-- piece of rubber there. It looked like a rubber hose.  INT: Can you tell us more about what happened when you got to Monowitz? JB: Yeah. And then-- all of a sudden, we were told to go into a bathroom-- in a bathhouse. And they shaved us, shaved our hair. Shaved our whole body hair, everything. And then they did some-- used some kind of de-lousing agent, they poured all over us. And then the-- the kapo, which is the-- was one of the supervisors said, now you're like little babies again. You have no name. You are nothing. He said, I'm your daddy, and I'm going to take good care of you. And he start to beat people up. And after this happened, I remember it was around lunchtime when I saw all these people. I still didn't know what was going on. I saw all these undernourished people in-- in blue and white striped uniforms. They looked grotesque, like-- they looked like something that you see in a horror movie. And I couldn't eat anything because I-- I had about had it, you know? So they thought that-- that little-- what do they call this little schüssel, a-- a bowl, a red bowl that was already all-- all the-- the paint was-- had come out. And it was rusty already. And inside-- that's how these bowls were. They were made of inferior material. And they took them. They fell over. And I couldn't understand what was going on. So later on, I learned fast that people are hungry.
And that you had to do it in order to survive. So what we got then was just a thin, watery soup with rotten potatoes. And it had a bad smell to it too. And I think there was also a little sauerkraut in that soup. Anyway, I didn't feel like eating. And so these-- these people fell over. I mean, they were fighting over it. It was horrible, just unbelievable. And then we had to go in the barracks. And they taught us how to make the beds. They had to be all in line, you know? They-- well, actually, they weren't beds. They were bunks. There were three bunks on top of each other. And a straw mattress. And they had a lot of lice and fleas. And I remember when you lied down, they were just like an army, creeping all over you. And I remember the first time then-- the second time that I was standing for food in line. I didn't know. I was standing in the front, and these people were hungry. And they came with these big vats, with the bad smelling-- I don't know what it was. It was all rotten. Things that they-- like, the SS used to get the-- let's say if they had some kind of vegetable and the outer leaves that weren't good and were rotten, they used to put in our-- in our soup. So what happened was-- I didn't know any better. And I, all of sudden, they started pushing from the back. These people were hungry. If you have 200 people pushing you from the back, you-- you have to move. I mean, I got in the front. They used to beat me up with these rubber hoses, you know? So then I knew already-- in other words, when you get there, you have to learn. It's like a unique way of being schooled to avoid being seen or being in the way of somebody, you know? Sometimes, of course-- a lot of times, you couldn't help it. I mean, somebody would just pick on you, you know? Say come over here and then they would hit, you know? But there were ways that you could eliminate some of the-- the heavy blows by using your head, you know? By being concentration camp wise, so to speak. And the second time around, I was not standing in the front anymore. I would go in the back myself. And I remember the nights were-- it was a horrible thing. In the winter, we-- we were in barracks. And of course, the people had to urinate. And what happened was that they had, like, a big marmalade to-- pail, you know? And the last person, whenever it was full, the last person had to go to the latrine and empty it out. Of course, nobody wanted to go. It was bitter cold there in Poland, and there was snow and things. And if somebody wouldn't go there, all of a sudden, somebody would beat him up terribly. I mean, I don't know where they were hiding the-- the kapos. But they usually-- every time they were there. When-- when it came to beatings, they were always there to do it, to dish it out. So-- 
INT: Now, which camp was this? JB: That was in Monowitz. That's the first camp I went to. And Monowitz was, in those days, really-- there-- there were no-- in other words, what we did was real basic work because there was nothing actually-- there was-- something was built. There were a few walls standing that was supposed to be the IG Farben factory, later on, where they were supposed to produce Buna. That's why Monowitz also was known under the name of Buna Concentration Camp. Buna was some kind of a plastic material which was used for shoes, soles, and anything that was supposed to last a long time, you know? It was a tough plastic.  INT: How did-- JB: When we started building, we used to-- we used to have, I remember, these long, long metal pipes we had to carry. They were about, let's say, about 20, 25 prisoners. And then-- that would go uphill. Of course, the person was at the end had all the weight on them. The others were on top of the hill, and you had all the weight to carry. Then they used to beat us up if you couldn't let it fall. You had to go to the bathroom, they would watch you, how long you took. There was no toilet paper. We had to use cement bags, empty cement bags, to clean ourselves with. And if somebody was sitting too long on the latrine, they would throw a metal rod right on-- on top of him, on his head. Or-- 
INT: When you say they, who do you mean? JB: The-- the kapos and the SS. And then when it came to lunch, if you can call it that, we used to get a watery soup. But here was the thing. They used to do the same. They had these long-- these big vats. They were filled with this unbelievable garbage, what they had in there. And by the time you were standing and getting your food, sometimes the lunch hour was over already. So you couldn't even eat it. They would take it right out of your hand, and you had to go hungry. That's all.  INT: We need to stop this tape now. JB: Yeah. CREW: --9, 1997. We're talking with Jack Bass.  INT: You were talking about your experience in Monowitz. And you had started talking about construction at the camp. Could you continue? JB: Yes. As I said before, we had to carry heavy cement bags. And we used to carry iron pipes and things like that. And it was very-- the work was very hard. And we were driven on on one side. And when you finally got rid of one item, you had to, right away, run back to get somebody else, put it on your shoulder, and then you had to walk around again till you got up the hill. And of course, we had all that pressure on there because a lot of people were on the front. And then when you were down in-- in there, you had all the weight on your-- on your shoulders. Then we used to also do work on roads, you know? And we used to put rocks and stones and-- on roads to make-- make it accessible for-- for vehicles, and cars, and so on and so forth. 
INT: Can you describe other prisoners there and-- and how people behaved with each other? JB: Well, the-- the prisoners, they came from all countries, you know? I mean, they were-- we had French prisoners, I mean Jewish people from France, from Belgium, Poland, and some from Russia. And everybody was trying to keep their head above water, so to speak, and not to get killed. Because a lot of people got sick. They got dysentery, and they started to bleed from the rectum, you know? All these things are connected with typhoid and-- and other ailments that you'd get there. And a lot of them just died. You know, they lost weight, and more weight, till they were next to nothing. And they died of starvation, so to speak. Because there was really nothing to eat there. It was hard work, and they-- they just couldn't exist the way that it was.  INT: Were there any group gatherings that-- JB: No. Not in Monowitz.  INT: No? JB: Not in Monowitz. There were no-- no group gatherings whatsoever. It was a primitive camp. They had barracks. And there was actually-- besides the barracks, the latrine, and a kitchen, there was nothing there really.  INT: Do any particular incidents that occurred while you were there stand out in your mind? JB: Well, of course, after all these male prisoners were there and they-- some of them were married and had children. They used to ask the guards sometimes when they would see their wives and kids. And the guards would say, sooner than you think, because they knew what it meant. Because they figured they're going to die anyway, so they're going to be reunited with their already dead ones, dead families. 
INT: Did you hear guards saying that? JB: Yeah. Definitely. Yeah. In Auschwitz, or Buna, whatever, you never said somebody died. A person went through the chimney. That meant they were-- they got killed. If somebody-- if you saw somebody that you-- and then all of a sudden, you didn't see them anymore. Somebody would say to you, you know what happened to him? He went through a chimney, which meant that he was either gassed, or he died and he was burned. You know, that's the way they got rid of the corpse there, by burning.  INT: What kinds of things did you see prisoners do [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] while you were there? Any-- anything that you saw? JB: Well, you had to be very careful with the little that you got. There were some people that used to steal the food from you. And you had to be sure that when you got the food, you would eat it right away. Otherwise, if you would go to sleep and hide it somewhere, you would wake up in the morning, you wouldn't find it anymore.  INT: Did you ever hide your food? JB: Oh, sure. We all did.  INT: What happened? JB: Well, if you were lucky, you had it. And if not, then somebody stole it. There's nothing you could do about it. Although, there was actually the SS said anybody who steals food will be hanged. But in most cases, they couldn't prove anything, you know? You didn't know who stole the food. 
INT: Where did you hide it? JB: Under-- in that mattress, in that straw mattress. I mean, little piece of bread. Of course, you couldn't hide the soup there, but a little piece of bread.  INT: Did you ever hear what was going on, as far as the war was concerned? JB: No. We didn't get any newspapers. We didn't know anything about the war. We didn't know what time it was. We didn't know what day it was. We didn't know what month it was. We knew what year it was because it was within the time when we-- when we left Berlin. We knew what the year was, not we're at the end of winter, and the summer, we knew it was the same year. But we had no-- no watches. We had no newspapers. We had-- we didn't have anything. Needless to say, there were no radios.  INT: Do any particular individuals stick out in your mind? JB: No, no. They were all these-- these kapos that we had, they were all bad. The fact was that when I was there about five, six months or so, I don't know exactly the time, I transferred to Auschwitz. I didn't even know that it was really a dangerous thing I undertook there because you never-- you never knew where they would bring you. They could have brought you right straight to the crematorium as well. But I took a chance. And they took me with a-- like a Red Cross car, they took me to Auschwitz. And I-- they put me in the sick bay there. And then that same day, they-- they put me to work. 
INT: How did you transfer there? How did that come about? JB: They said if anybody wants to transfer, they need people in Auschwitz. And that's how I transferred. Because over there, they-- it was really bad. The situation was very bad. I think it was worse than Auschwitz because first of all, there were less prisoners than in Auschwitz, in the main camp. And the supervision was very strict. And they-- they-- they saw everything. And it was very primitive. In Auschwitz, at least they had toilets within the building. And in-- in Buna, you had to walk outside. In fact, I remember once when I was still in Buna, I had to empty out one of these famous marmalade cans. And all of a sudden, I felt somebody-- someone was tickling me in the back. And when I looked up, somebody-- one of the prisoners had committed suicide by hanging himself from-- from-- from the rafters. At-- the-- the-- [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] toilet there, in the latrine. So when I was there, I-- we had, at least-- there was no hot or warm water, but there was running water. And they had toilets. They were all in one line. I mean, there were no separate cubicles or anything. It was one row of toilet bowls there.  INT: When you say there, where do you mean? JB: In Auschwitz.  INT: Uh huh. Why did you go to the infirmary there? JB: Because that's where the first place where they would bring you because they want to make sure that you didn't have any disease or anything that-- because the SS were afraid that they would catch it as well, you know? 
INT: And how did they-- how did you-- how did they examine for that? JB: They didn't really examine. An SS doctor looked at you. And he said, all right. You can go to work. And they would just tell you to go to that and that building. And that-- that's where you were.  INT: When you say-- I just want to clarify. When you say they would tell you, do you-- do you mean you? They told you that? That's what you heard? JB: Yeah, of course. They-- they sent you to a different-- to a-- to a working battalion. Because you were-- you were isolated when you were in the-- in the sick bay. Not that they did much in the sick bay for you, but that was the place where they sometimes also selected people for the gas chamber, because somebody was-- even-- it was a matter of luck, just-- [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] just how it-- it so happened if they needed people, you were in luck. Then they would take you out. And if they didn't need people, they would-- they would attach you to one of the groups of people that were gassed, that they would gas.  INT: So where did you go? JB: I went in one-- I don't remember exactly which building I went to. I think it was building 18. I believe 18A. 18 was the-- the main floor, and 18A was the top. And-- [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] but I'm not sure if it was 18A. I was in 18A once I worked in the-- in the wood factory. I was in 18A. But at first, we used to work also in the fields, and build roads and things like that. And then after a while, when they asked-- they would ask well, does anybody know anything about woodworking? Or does anybody know how to-- how to repair shoes? And then when people volunteered, they would put them in that particular battalion there. I think the first-- when I went to Auschwitz first, I worked in human hair. That's the first thing I did there. 
INT: Wait. Tell us. JB: In other words, all the hair that was cut off the-- the women was put in one big room. And we had to sort it because they-- I think they filled mattresses with it or whatever they did. They shipped it to Germany. So we had to put it in-- in order, you know? And then they would ship it out.  INT: How did you know what to do? JB: Well, they told us. You saw the others, what they others-- you did the same what everybody else was doing. I remember there were mountains of hair that we had to take out and--  INT: What did you do with it? JB: I don't remember exactly what I did with it. I think we put it-- we put it in a big pile it came. And then it was like a mountain. And then we had to put it in piles, like-- it looked like packages, you know? That's what we did.  INT: What-- how was your-- how was your living situation there? JB: It was bad too. I mean, not-- the food was just as bad as anywheres else. We used to get in the morning about two slices of bread. The bread consisted of some kind of a chestnut flour. And they put sawdust in it to hold it together. So If you took that bread and you hit it against a piece of wood, all the sawdust would fall out of it and you had nothing left almost. But that's what we got. And we had to make the most of it. So the two slices of bread we got, and a little herbal tea they used to have in the morning. And we didn't get nothing until about 1 o'clock in the afternoon or 2 o'clock. When we were working, they would bring out some kind of a soup or whatever it was. And that's what we got to eat. And then the next morning, we got the bread again, a piece of bread. 
INT: How did you figure out that it was sawdust in the bread? JB: Well, you could tell.  INT: How? JB: It fell apart. That's-- it was-- it looked like sawdust. It was sawdust. It was a black piece of e And it was-- when you hit it against something, it would fall apart. The-- the sawdust would come out. It looked like if you take a piece of-- of wood and you-- and you saw it apart, you get these-- these little mountains of sawdust. That's how-- that's what it looked like. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] And that's exactly what it was too. This is not new with the Germans. They used to do that, I understand, in the first war too, that they used to use sawdust to hold flour together, whatever it was.  INT: Tell us about the other work that you did. JB: Well, after I was there a while, I got into-- they asked if-- if I knew anything about woodworking. And I told them, yes, I do. So they put me in this factory where they built the beds for the SS, you know, the bunk beds. And I worked there. And I used to work a night shift. I used to go out at 10 o'clock. I used to come back at 8:00 in the morning. And this was a little better because it was always night. It was dark. The supervision, as far as the SS or the SS was-- the SS was always on the-- on the posts outside. You know, they were over the whole area to watch that nobody would escape from-- from working battalions. Because in the daytime, there was a chain of posts all around the-- the working areas. But at night, they would pull the posts in. And the posts would go to-- in the concentration camp, in the towers, and man the machine guns there. In other words, each street had two towers. The camp was laid out so that each-- each block had a street, you know? In other words, there was a street between two blocks, between two buildings. And on each end, there was, of course, barbed wire that was electrically charged. And there were guards on top, and that's where they were. But at night, there-- the only guards that we had were the ones that went with us to work there. And there were not that many. And they would stand-- be around the watchtower, right near the factory and that's all. So I remember working there with Gypsies. And I remember taking one back that was-- got killed. Because the Gypsies, they could not stay in-- in a place long.
I mean, they were-- they were used to roaming around. You know, they were famous for that. The Gypsies used to go in wagons all over Europe, from Romania, to Germany, and so on. And this young fellow there left. And all of a sudden, we heard shots. And in the morning, they told us-- we had, like, a little wagon with two wheels. And we put him on there, and we brought him back into the camp because they-- they had to be counted in, you know? Because the-- the tally had to be exact. And some of them, they were not really that good, I mean, in-- in counting. So sometimes we had to stand for hours and hours till it was finally OK. And then-- then they would let us go and have that little water or tea that we got there in the morning and a piece of bread. But there was always a roll call, in the morning and at night. When you came in-- anybody who got killed had to be accounted for. They used to bring them in. They used to lay them out. Each-- let's say, if I would belong to Block 18 and they had five dead or 10 dead, they had to put them down there. And they had to be counted in, because otherwise, that total-- they wouldn't have known who escaped, or who tried to escape, and so on. Of course, then we had also-- Block 18 also faced the-- the kitchen. And in front of the kitchen was the-- the place where they used to hang the people and beat them up. We had something that was called a [NON-ENGLISH]. I don't know how you would call it that in English, because I don't think-- it was a special-made wooden contraption that you had to lay down on. There were two people who would hit you on the-- on your rear end. One with the rubber-- a piece of rubber hose, and the other one with a stick. And they would hit you 25 times. Of course, by that time a person would-- the skin and everything busted. And we had to watch this, you know? Every time-- that was always done during roll call, the hangings and-- and the-- the beatings that were done. Then we had something else and was called a [NON-ENGLISH]. I had a friend from-- from Berlin who had to go. He got sick, and he couldn't hold his urine. He used to run to the toilet, but he couldn't help it that he spilled a little of his urine. And when they saw it, they gave him what is called [NON-ENGLISH]. The [NON-ENGLISH] was something like-- you would call here-- it looked like a little latrine. You could only stand in it. You couldn't fall down because it was so tight. So after you worked all night, he had to go in that thing and stayed there till he had to go back to work again. I can't imagine. The people-- you couldn't fall. I mean, there were-- there were nails on the bottom too. That's what the people told me. I didn't see that, but I saw that if in case that he would fall or they would fall down, he would fall on the nails, you know? 
INT: Did you see this little building? JB: I knew the guy. I knew when he was in the [NON-ENGLISH]. He used to told us-- tell us about it. Every day, that was going on for, I think, for a week or 10 days. He had to go every night. And every night-- I don't know how he even survived it because he couldn't-- you can't sleep. You're standing up. I mean, you could sleep maybe a little. But after working all day long, and that little food, and then standing in there in the summer, in that heat, it was unbelievable. I never had any-- any of these things happen to me. I was lucky, I guess. That I had to go into a [NON-ENGLISH] or in one of these places where you had to stand all night, and then go back to work the next morning.  INT: What did you have happen to you? JB: Well, I got beaten, like everybody else. I was one of the-- like the rest, the run of the mill. I was-- I was just-- I got hit when I got hit. And but I was never in a situation where I was in-- in-- like-- like that I had to go stay all night in a-- in a-- in a little confined little hut there. I got beatings too, I mean. But not-- not that-- this kind. Not 25 on the rear, like they used to give as punishment there. And-- 
INT: Would you tell us on-- about an occasion where you did get a beating? JB: Yeah. I-- it is an unusual story because we used to have-- we had no hair. We had to have the hair clipped every week. And nobody wanted to clip my hair because my hair is very thick. And it would dull the-- the machine. It was like a little hand clipper. And so they used to take me at the end. And it meant that it was near the end, that the thing was so dull. It just wouldn't cut anymore. So there was nothing I could do. I went to work. I came back the next morning. And we had this SS bigshot there, man by the name of [NON-ENGLISH]. He saw me coming in. He took me out, and he hit me in the face. And-- but I was lucky. He didn't do anything else to me. So I walked in the things and back into my barracks. And of course, I was red in the face. I mean, they-- when they hit, they hit. And but that's actually the only thing I can say about [NON-ENGLISH] himself. But I-- we got hit all the time. I mean, it was just a matter of trying to escape the main blows, you know? In other words, by just making yourself inconspicuous, or I don't know how I should say. When somebody came over, let's say, from the SS, you had to work doubly hard. Your-- just to show that you were still alive and doing something. 
INT: Do any particular individual prisoners stand out in your recollection? JB: No. I mean, I-- there was-- we had one ober-- it was oberscharführer I believe, a man by the name of Sauer. He was a-- he was a dark-haired man with glasses. And he always liked that people would address him in Jewish, in Yiddish. I don't know why this was. So when he talked to me and I spoke to him in German, he says to me, I want you to talk to me in Yiddish, not in German. So I spoke to him in Yiddish because I had learned over there-- it's very similar to German, you know, and it has some Hebrew words in it and things. My Yiddish is not perfect or fluent, but I can understand and I can speak it, to some extent. And he was known to be very strict to people. I-- I-- he didn't hit me. I was working in that-- in the woodworking place there, and was sawing the wood apart. I also met Hoess. I mean, I didn't meet Hoess. I saw Hoess when I marched out. He was the camp commander after Hoess. When Hoess left-- I don't know where Hoess went. Hoess left, and [NON-ENGLISH] took over. [NON-ENGLISH] was-- I don't know. He-- they all were bad. I mean, there's nothing good to say about them because they were all bad. But at least I couldn't say anything in detail because I hadn't-- I had no way of talking to him or addressing him. He never asked me anything, so I couldn't really say. He was the commander then, camp commander. 
INT: What-- when you did talk with Sauer, what-- do you remember the occasion, what it was about? JB: I don't know what was the occasion. He just-- he sometimes, he got to be talkative. He talked to prisoners. Sometimes he used to hit them too, but I-- he just-- he just enjoyed to talk to people, I guess.  INT: Did he speak German back? JB: I spoke Yiddish when he told me to speak Yiddish.  INT: Did he speak German back to you or-- JB: No. He said sometimes sentence in Yiddish as well. [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] There were some SS we had that spoke Yiddish. Because they-- later on, they-- they had SS from-- from the Ukraine. Anyway, some of these towns had a lot of Jewish people. We had some SS, they spoke Yiddish. They-- they were in a town where maybe there were 200 Jews and 50 Gentiles, you know? So some of them did speak Yiddish.  INT: What other kinds of work did you do while you were at Auschwitz? JB: I was in Auschwitz and-- then after I did the-- I worked in the-- in the bunk bed, that thing there, in that woodworking place, I used to-- they used to use me, at times, also to-- they had a furnace in that- in that place, you know, to heat the-- to the heat the-- the rooms. And this was a very modern place. They had-- all the-- the wood shavings and the sawdust was all drawn out by an exhaust. And it fell on the outside of the building. There was a big mountain of sawdust and exhaust. And they-- that's where they used to go. And I used to go outside and fill it up and then bring it down into the-- into the heating room there. 
INT: Fill what up? JB: It was like a box with-- with four handles on it. One guy was walking in the front. There was a fellow I used to work with there by the name of Isa Klein. He came from Cracow. And we used to bring the wood shavings in. And then that was-- that's what we did all night. And then after the situation got a little tight, I guess the Germans had lost territory already. All of a sudden, they laid off a lot of people from that-- from that woodworking company. And they put me in the place. It was called the bauhof. That was a place where they stored all the material, like bricks, and iron, and all kinds-- sand and things to build-- to build the-- the roads and all this. And I worked there.  INT: What did you do there? JB: Well, carrying bricks and all kinds of things there, carrying sandbags and-- and then after a while, I got into the place which was called the [NON-ENGLISH]. This was the place where they made grenades for the-- for the army or whatever.  INT: What did you do there? JB: I was working with another fellow whom I had known from Berlin too. And we worked on a machine. I remember that you had to put these detonators into a cutout hole, and then they would-- they would put powder in it or something. They were sealed in, and then they-- they would go in-- in boxes. And they would bring them to the front or ship them somewheres. [PAUSES FOR 5 SECONDS] And that was in the winter. I remember that was-- the-- the Russians were very close then already. It was-- the Russians were in Cracow already. And we saw already the-- we saw already the-- the lightning from the front, the-- the cannons and everything. We heard the shooting. And that one night, we-- we come back. No. In the daytime, it was. I was still in the-- in the [NON-ENGLISH], in there working, when all of a sudden, we-- they said everybody back into the camps. So we went in the camp. They each gave us a piece of bread and a blanket, and we had to start marching. And they took us out of the camp. And the SS took us there. I really don't-- I-- I-- I must have been sleeping while I was walking. It seemed to me that I was always walking around in a circle. Every time I looked, it was snowing and the landscape looked the same as when I started. And this was already hours and hours later. Anyway, this was when we marched to Plec. Because the Russians were close to Auschwitz, and the Germans evacuated us from Auschwitz to put us in another concentration camp, which they did. 
INT: We're going to stop this tape here. JB: OK. CREW: --Bass.  INT: Going back to your experience at Auschwitz, were there any-- ever any social gatherings that you can remember participating in? If there were, would you tell us about them? JB: No, I wouldn't exactly call it social gatherings. What they did have in Auschwitz was an orchestra. And this orchestra used to play when we used to go to work and used to play when we came back. And they also, at very rare occasions on a Sunday afternoon, they would play in that same place, in front of the kitchen, where they usually had the hangings and all this. And they used to perform works, classical music. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] Of course, the situation was such that while you were there, you could always smell the burning flesh there, because the-- the crematoria in-- in Birkenau, the-- the smoke drifted across-- across-- Birkenau was only maybe a mile away from Auschwitz, from the-- from the main camp. And we used to, when we used to walk, the ashes used to settle on our-- on our clothing and on our arms and on our bald heads. But the SS had a unusual way of doing these things. When we-- we used to march back, and we had so many dead people, and they used to play the 'Merry Widow' or something, you know, that orchestra. And in the-- I remember when it was raining, they would play inside a hall. And they would keep the-- the windows open, you know. So when we marched out, there was always an orchestra playing. But they had a lot of musicians. There were a lot of Jewish people who used to be formerly musicians. And-- 
INT: What-- what kept you going during this time, do you suppose? JB: I just didn't want to die, I guess. Nobody does. And I guess it's-- it's a matter of luck more than anything else. I mean, because sometimes, I mean, you do-- I was sometimes really near, near out completely. I mean, I had dysentery as well. And then when you got so weak you had trouble later on going back to camp because you had to walk for miles to get back to the camp. And friends of mine sometimes used to help me by holding my arm so-- so that I made it back. And then I just made it, so to speak. I mean, it's-- it was a matter of-- you can't really say what made me live. I guess one of those things-- maybe I was strong in those days, stronger than I thought. And I-- I survived it. But there were people that were much stronger than I am. I mean, friends of mine that really died in there, and they were hardly-- they weighed something like 60 pounds or so. I saw them. They were terrible to look at, these people. They could hardly keep themselves up straight. And eventually they-- the SS saw them, and they got rid of them.  INT: Did you ever observe any acts of resistance in the camp? Did you ever see any? JB: No, I didn't see the act itself. But I know that at one time, that a crematorium was detonated by-- by explosives. And I remember that the SS was all over the place with dogs and going through the forest there to-- to catch people and-- and things like that. 
INT: Where were you when they were doing that? JB: I was working and-- you could see them going, you know, because the SS was-- all the-- the-- that whole area was surrounded by SS. And they had people with the-- SS with dogs there. They had to a-- a unit or a platoon going out with dogs, you know, barking dogs. And we heard about the-- the-- the crematorium story from other prisoners. I mean, I haven't seen it myself, but it did happen.  INT: Do you remember what you thought when you heard it? JB: No, I really-- I didn't think at all. That's the worst thing in a concentration camp you can do is think. Because if you think, you really go to pot. You can't think. You have to just think for the moment. What-- what are you doing next? How can you escape getting hit? How can you be sure that you have the bread? You know, or-- and so on. When you think of-- this was the worst thing you could do. Especially some people, they used to think of their wives, and they used to tell stories on what they ate. They thought about big meals and things like that. That's the worst thing you can do if you're hungry, if you don't have it. That makes it even-- puts you in a-- in a more graver situation to die because you have nothing to eat. And it-- your gastric juices start to flow, and there's nothing there, nothing to eat. 
INT: You started talking about leaving Auschwitz. Would you continue with that? JB: Yeah, we did. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] We left Auschwitz, I think it was in January. [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] And we went on this march. And I don't know, we-- we just had-- what we had was a slice of bread. We got a little piece of bread and a blanket. And we had to assemble. And the SS took us to the forest. And I don't know where it was really. I remember that, on the way, anybody who couldn't walk got killed, got shot. I remember seeing a man sitting in the-- in the snow with his eyes shot out. And the blood was running over-- over his body into the snow. The whole snow was red. And then finally another SS man came and finished him off, you know. And there were a lot of shootings and killings going on. I remember, when I was on this march, they said we get a half an hour to rest up. And there was like an old barn. And I fell down, and I fell asleep. And I remember when I woke up, I had all ants and some-- everything in my mouth because we were-- that was old straw that was in there. And probably they had animals in there before, like cows or something. I don't-- so we just got a half hour. And then they took us back. That day we marched again. I don't know how long I marched. I don't know whether it was a day or two days, or three days. I couldn't really say. Finally, we arrived at a place that was called Plec. 
INT: On this march, do you remember passing any people? JB: Yeah, of course we passed people. The-- the-- we-- there were-- everybody did, the whole camp was evacuated. So you saw people. I-- I saw women. And I saw men. But, of course, we were not in contact with them. We marched here, and they marched another way or things, or in another direction. I mean, every-- everything was-- they were all afraid that the Russians would overtake us.  INT: Did you ever pass any civilians? JB: I don't remember. I don't know. I don't think so. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] I mean, nobody would walk around there at that time of day in an-- in-- it was snowing. And it was cold. And I would imagine a lot of people either were evacuated, or they-- they moved away themselves, I guess.  INT: How were you dressed? JB: I was wearing a-- a-- a prison garb, a blue and white striped pants and a-- and a jacket.  INT: And on your feet? JB: We had a thin coat, if you can call it that. And I had a blanket. I put a-- I wrapped a blanket around me.  INT: What about your feet? JB: I had the wooden shoes. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] They-- we-- in-- in the concentration camp, they had these wooden shoes for people. They were a piece of wood and a little something to hold together.  INT: And where did you arrive? JB: I arrived in this town that was called Plec. 
INT: How did you find out the name of it? JB: I saw the name on the-- on the-- on the railroad station there. I saw 'Plec.' I-- I distinctly remember it was called Plec. And there they put us in railroad cars. And I don't-- I don't know exactly how long it took to get there. We arrived at Gross-Rosen, which was another concentration camp. That was in Lower Silesia already.  INT: How did you know the name of that place? JB: What they all-- when you were there you knew the name of the place. I mean, everybody would say if-- if-- we are in Gross-- Gross-Rosen.  INT: What-- JB: And I guess Gross-Rosen was also the name of that-- the railroad station.  INT: What happened there? JB: Oh, this was the-- this was really the worst of them all. This camp, I remember, was situated all the way on top of a hill. And I don't know, for some reason the kitchen was on the bottom of the hill. And it was slippery. And we had to get in the-- go in the morning and get that tea. And if you spilled any of that tea, if you slipped, they would beat you up. They would beat you to a pulp. I got beaten up there too, because I had to help too, bringing these-- these vats with the herbal tea up. And I wasn't there long. I don't know how many days. I wasn't there long. I would say maybe one or two days, when all of a sudden they-- they assembled us again and marched us to the railroad station. And they put us again in-- in-- in cattle cars. 
INT: Tell us about that trip. JB: Oh, this was another thing. Again, the same thing like when I first went to Auschwitz. There were so many people in there. I remember, we had no-- the people that died in the-- in the-- in the cars, we took our blankets and we strung them up because there was no space on the bottom for them. I mean, they were dead. So what we did is we used to take-- somebody sacrificed his blanket. And we tied it up to the-- to the metal bars inside. And we made like a hammock out of it. Most unusual situation, but every time the train was-- was moving, their heads would-- would shake. And it was horrible, just awful. I remember that when we arrived in Augsburg-- I think it was Augsburg-- they opened up the-- the-- the cars. And they said, if we get rid of the corpses, they are going to give us some coffee or tea, whatever it was. And I helped to throw out. We had one guy that used to take the feet, and I used to take the heads or the hands. And we used to just roll them out in the-- in the snow, you know. And then they gave us something there, like a coffee, or I don't know what it was, water with herbal tea or something-- and a little piece of bread. And then they sealed us up again. I remember it was a long trip due to the fact that they had air raids. I mean, the Americans were already bombing the-- the railroad. And all of a sudden, in the middle of nowheres, the trains-- the trains would stop for hours. Nobody would move. And then all of a sudden it would go maybe for 15, 20 minutes. Then they had to stop again. And then, probably, they also had the-- the German army, the Wehrmacht were probably also retreating from the front. They had them let-- they had to let them through as well. It was a long trip, I remember. I don't know exactly how long. I remember I-- we-- I used to stand on people. You couldn't help it. I mean, if somebody was weak and couldn't stand and, well, he would fall. And you'd-- there were so many people, so many legs, you were standing there. You had just a little space to balance yourself. So sometimes you would stand on somebody's head, on somebody neck. You couldn't-- just couldn't help it. There was no other way. I mean, not intentionally, you-- you didn't even know about it. And then sometimes you just-- I remember there was one guy, my friend and I, we-- we straightened him up. And he was all bloody because everybody was standing on his face. You know, blood was [? running. ?] And then he stayed there for a couple-- I don't know what happened to him later. But I didn't see him anymore. A lot of people died in those trains because they suffocated. They-- they were so overloaded, these-- these cars. 
INT: Where did the car-- where did the train finally stop and you got off? JB: The train finally stopped at Dachau, [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] near Munich.  INT: Tell us about the arrival there. JB: Well, the arrival there, we-- we got there. We had to get out. They marched us into the camp. And they put us in a quarantine. In other words, we were not allowed to leave the-- the barracks except for roll call. And all of a sudden, my number had no meaning anymore. Everything there went by name for some strange reason. I don't know. Maybe they had that in Dachau or not prior to us arriving there. And we were there a couple of-- I don't know how many days I was there. I remember that they put me on a train. And I went to upper Bavaria, to Mühldorf. I can't really say much about Dachau because I was never out of the barracks. And we got very little to eat. I mean, that was-- that was nothing new. That was in every camp. You didn't get anything to eat. But I remember that I arrived at night in a place that was called Mühldorf. Mühldorf is somewheres near Rosenheim. That's already near the Austrian border. And I remember if-- I walked. We-- we-- we had to-- we had to hold hands or link our arms together, the prisoners. And the SS took us through a forest there. I don't know. We marched all left, right, things. All of a sudden, we got to a place that wasn't really a place. We came to a barbed wire. And there was a gate, and we went in. And they had no barracks at all. We-- they had, like, tunneled underground, like a little, maybe 20, 25 feet in the sand. They had built bunks, you know. No, they weren't really bunks. It was just pieces of wood. And that's where we had to sleep. It was cold. It was winter. It was terrible. I am not sure really what I was doing there. I remember that I-- I mean, I know what I was doing there. But the purpose of it is not known to me, really. We had a-- there are big columns, and they would load these wheelbarrows with cement. There were wooden planks going up. And you had to take that wheelbarrow and then turn it-- hit it into the column. 
INT: Is that what you were doing? JB: That's what I was doing. Sometimes people would fall in too. I mean, people were weak. When they turned that-- that thing over that weighed a lot, they fell into the thing too. And the next guy would throw the cement on him. You couldn't do anything. You couldn't say somebody was stuck in there. I mean, they would have killed you. And we did that for quite a while. [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] I don't know the purpose of it. There were rumors, I mean. But I'm-- I'm not sure that that was supposed to be an airport, underground airport. And that's what I did there. And when they came back, there were no barracks or anything like that. It was just this-- it was like some-- a mole dug under-- under the sand. That's what it was. It was a big hole, and that's where you were. There were no heat or anything. What we did is we would almost lie on top of each other to keep from freezing. It was really bad. We had a-- one blanket, we had. All right, but that was about it.  INT: How long did you do that? Do you have any sense of how long that job continued? JB: I would have to say I was there close to half a year, five months, at four or five months at least.  INT: Do you have any idea how many columns got filled with cement? JB: No. It was-- I couldn't say for sure. 
INT: How many columns you helped fill, do you have any sense of that? JB: Yeah, but you couldn't tell when they were full because you don't know whether-- because we all thew it in. And then it was like-- it was like a-- a circle. You started, go up, throw it in, come back. They would fill it up again. You would go around and round and round, you know. And there were people behind you too, you know. So this was going on for a while. And then all of a sudden, I got sick. I had typhus. But that was already near the end of the war.  INT: How did you know it was almost the end of the war? JB: Well, I didn't see any more German airplanes. They used to fly there. There were no airplanes. There were a few airplanes. And then, as soon-- as soon as it was around 10 or 11, o'clock when the Americans came, there were no-- it was no more German airplane. And then people used to talk about it. We had one guy who said, you know, I heard from a worker that the Americans are in-- in Vienna or somewhere. Or the Americans are near Munich. So that's how we knew. But there was no real way of telling whether that was true or just hearsay, you know. But, of course, when you're in a situation like this, you like to believe that. I mean, since there was nobody who said-- and then when-- then I knew. When I got sick, there was, all of a sudden, it was very quiet in the camp. There was nobody around anymore. And when-- I remember, one day I looked outside, and there was police there. There was that-- it wasn't SS, they were police guarding us. And-- 
INT: What kind of police? Do you know? JB: Regular German police, I think they were. They were regular German police. And then, of course, I was also-- one day I was outside, and it was already a little warm. It was in-- in April. And then all of a sudden, the Americans came. The planes, they threw bombs. And I-- I didn't get hit, but I could feel the pressure, you know, the air pressure from the-- the bomb going off. And then all of a sudden it was quiet. And I was really sick then. I-- I started to lose, actually, my consciousness in a way. I had the-- I-- I was telling the other prisoner that I had killed the camp commander, and I was hiding his body under my bunk. And I was always looking under the bunk to see whether he was still there because I wasn't-- I was delirious I guess. I had a high fever. And-- and then all of a sudden, the Americans came. And I was very disappointed because they took part of the camp out, and I was still there. And they didn't take me the same day. I was still there. I thought they forgot me. [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] And-- but then the next day, they took me out. And they-- [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] they had taken a building away from the Germans and made it like a hospital out of it. And they had the American doctors there already, you know, people of-- army personnel. And I remember that I had pus in my fingers. And he cut my finger with a knife, you know. And he took all the pus out. And then they-- I think that they also gave me-- what do you call this again? Penicillin. Because I was-- I weighed next to nothing. I was really-- I was about down to 67 or 70 German pounds. I remember that when we got out and there was They used to take pictures on this. And we had to sit, and I couldn't sit because I had no flesh. It was so painful to sit, you know, because it felt as though I was sitting on a nail. I couldn't sit long. They used to take picture. I was always afraid when they came to [INAUDIBLE] take some more pictures. Movies they took. I don't know what ever happened to them, but they did take them. And every time I had to sit down, I-- I-- it was real, really painful. I remember. 
INT: Do you remember when you were at the camp, when you saw the first American who came in? Do you remember what, you know, the first liberator, what your contact was? JB: Do I remember? The guy over me started to go crazy. And he fell right through the bed on top of me. Sure, I remember that.  INT: Tell us about that. JB: Well, I was-- I was really sick there. And this guy saw an American there. And they came in. And I remember, there was a lady. She had a-- some kind of a pump with some kind of powder, delousing agent or whatever it was. And when he saw the Americans coming, he started to hop around in that bed. And the-- the-- these beds were only a [INAUDIBLE] of straw. It was only held by-- by pieces of wood. You know, there were pieces of wood across. And the pieces of wood fell down on me. And then he fell on top of me. Of course, you couldn't blame him in a way. He was so happy.  INT: What did you think? Do you remember? JB: Oh, I was happy too, of course. I mean, I was happy. But I still insisted that I had killed the camp commander and had him under my bed. But they took out people. And I was looking, and I saw outside. I saw the-- the doors were open already. It was-- it was already beginning of-- of-- of spring. And I saw the red cross on the-- on the-- on the cars. And they took people. And all of a sudden they drove off, and I was still in the camp. So I think I was-- I don't know what happened. I think I might have cried. But the next day they took me. They took me out. 
INT: Where did they take you? JB: Well, they-- they took me somewheres near-- in Mühldorf or near-- not in Mühldorf. It was not in Mühldorf proper. It was some kind of an outskirts of Mühldorf. They had requisitioned some kind of a building that used to belong to the-- to the party or to the Nazis. And they had hired young German girls. Or they-- I don't know whether they were forced to do it. And they had to take care of us, you know. They used to bring us-- and then I was very disappointed at the first meal. They didn't bring me anything. They brought me just like a little-- what do you call it? Like cereal. Some-- I said to myself, that's what they eat up in the United States is this? And I was so hungry. But the fact was it was a very wise thing because we hadn't eaten for so long. The Russians made that big mistake with my friend. He was freed by the Russians. And they fed him right away steaks and things like that they confiscated. And the people died. They just couldn't take it.  INT: How did you learn about that? JB: My friend told me. I had a friend who was freed by the Russians. He was in Riga. And he got freed there.  INT: How long did you stay at the hospital? JB: I would say it was close to a month. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] It was maybe even longer. May, June-- could have been longer, even, than a month. And then finally, after I gained a little bit of my strength back, [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] I met another fellow there. He was a married fellow. And he was also in Auschwitz. And we both decided to go and look for our relatives. He wanted us to find his wife. And I wanted to find my aunt, the one that was a schoolteacher in Nuremberg. So I was already in-- in Bavaria. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] We took-- there were no trains going in those days. They were just cattle cars. They were empty. They had carried coal and all kinds of things. So the one thing you did is you went to the track, and if there was a train standing, we'd hop on it, jump up, go on it, and sit and hope for the best. You didn't know where it was going. I remember one night, I was-- the-- that was the first train I took. I started. I was in Augsburg when I woke up. Then I fell asleep again. The next morning I was again in Augsburg. The train was going on. I don't know how that happened, but it was. I-- in those days, the bridges, they-- they were all blown up. They-- they-- they had only the rails going across that. The rivers was kind of scary to look, you know, to see that. But we were happy together. So finally, I did arrive in Nuremberg. It finally did arrive in Nuremberg. I must had switched trains. And my friend-- and then we went to a Jewish committee there that took care of the-- the prisoners, former prisoners, you know. And my friend was there with me. And then [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] I worked for them for a time. 
INT: What did you do? JB: Oh, I did-- we had all the-- all the food that came. It was a good job. We had all the food that came from the United States. The people, Jewish people, would send packages. And we-- we would distribute it, you know. Let's say there were, I would say, 150 prisoners. So we made up-- we distributed all the merchandise, all the food, so that everybody got the same, more or less the same thing.  INT: What did you mean prisoners? JB: Ex-prisoners I should say. Ex-prisoners I meant. And [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] I was there for-- yeah, and at first I had-- I had a problem finding a room because everything was bombed. So one night I had-- there was no place to go. So finally somebody said to me, I should go in one of the bunkers that they used for during air raids. You know? And I was in that thing. And it was dark, [LAUGHS] and I couldn't find the door anymore to go out the next morning. But I finally did find it. And then-- then I went down to the-- to-- to the office, and I told the-- the-- the mayor's office or some kind of an office-- and said if they could please find me a job-- a room. And I found a room in someplace there in-- in Fürth. [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] And I stayed in Fürth for several month. Before coming to the United States, I stayed in Fürth for about a year. 
INT: What did you do while you were there? JB: Oh, after-- when I was there, I became an assistant to a motion picture projectionist. There was a movie house. And I always wanted to learn that. In fact, when I was still in Berlin before the war, I wanted to take a course in how to run a-- a-- a motion picture projector. And at that-- in those days, it was not-- I wasn't able to anymore. And I did this for a year till I came to the United States.  INT: Did you ever find your aunt or any-- hear of any-- JB: No, my aunt was-- got-- was shot in Riga. In Riga, they used to-- to-- to-- to-- disburse of the Jews by shooting--  INT: How did you learn about what happened? JB: --in-- in the forest.  INT: How did you learn about what happened to your aunt? JB: Because people told me. I'm-- I-- my friend was in Riga. And he said they all took them out in the forest, and they shot him there. [PAUSES FOR 6 SECONDS] And they never came back, I mean. So they must have been-- must have gotten killed.  INT: We're going to stop this tape here. CREW: --Bass  INT: How long did you stay at-- in Fürth? JB: About a year, maybe a little more than a year.  INT: And where did you go after that? JB: I had written to my cousin, who was in the United States, who lived in New York. And he contacted a relative of mine, a distant relative so to speak, a relative of my mother's, who had flower shops in Atlanta, Georgia. And he sent me papers to come over here. And he sent me a ticket to-- the ship's ticket to come over. Unfortunately, when I left Nuremberg, we had to go to Munich first. It was like a staging area for-- for-- to go to the United States. You had to see a doctor, you know. And they-- it was very strict. In fact, there were a lot of people that wanted to come over there, and it took a long time to see the doctors actually. I remember seeing a-- seeing the doctor, and he, when I told him where I was born, he-- he pointed to a map of Germany and he wanted me to show him where it was, which I did. And I had to-- I had to tag wool, different colored wool, and tell him which one was green and which one was blue, because they checked for color blindness as well. And [PAUSES FOR 5 SECONDS] during this time, when I was in Munich, they finally took me to Bremen, Bremerhaven, Bremen. It was Bremen. Because that was another staging area. That's where we were supposed to take the boat. Unfortunately, at this time, there was a shipping strike in the United States. It lasted for about six or seven months. And I was sitting there and sitting there. And I was learning English. And there was actually nothing to do, you know. I mean, I read a lot. We had magazines and newspapers. And I was sitting about six, seven months in-- in Bremen, just waiting to get over here. 
INT: You said they took you to Bremen? Whom-- whom do you mean by 'they'? JB: Well, the Americans took us to Bremen. And actually-- I don't know. We-- we again, we had the cattle cars, but it was only about 10, 12 people to a car, you know. And they stopped, and you could get something to eat and all this. But I really didn't-- well, but this was-- and then I remember seeing a-- the German soldiers coming back. They said where are you going? [INAUDIBLE] It had written on it-- every card said USA on it, you know. And we said, we're going to America. He said, oh, I was a prisoner there. I wanted to stay there. They wouldn't let me. [INAUDIBLE]. And I remember going from there, from Munich, to Bremen. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] I used to have even pictures, but I haven't them anymore. And we were all friends. We all knew the people there, you know. Because we had been already six months in Bremen. So you met a lot of people there. And after six months, I went one day to the movies, and all of a sudden, a girl comes in that I knew, a friend of mine. And she said, Jack, you're leaving tomorrow for the United States. And I went out at the movie. And that's really what happened. The next day the strike was over. I went to Bremen. They brought me into Bremen, the Americans. And then there was a troop ship waiting. They had these liberty boats. Remember them? No. These were all these boats that they used to-- the troop ships, they called them. And I remember we had a very stormy crossing. It took 12 days to get there. They stopped for us in Gdynia, which is in Poland, and Le Havre. And then, oh, it was stormy. I was seasick and everything. It was my chance to eat, for the first time to eat good food, and I couldn't. But I made it. 
INT: Where did you arrive in the States? JB: In New York, New York harbor.  INT: And what did-- and how-- how did things go for you then? What did you do? JB: Well, my cousin, of course, was at the boat. And I stayed with him two or three days, and I got myself a job. And I got myself a room. And I started to work.  INT: How did you communicate with them, Americans? JB: Well, I spoke English. I mean, my English is still, even today, not fluent. But it is-- it was still good enough for me. I could read the newspaper, and I could speak. I probably did make a lot of mistakes, but people understood me.  INT: What kind of work did you find? JB: Well, at first there were jobs. Like, I worked in a-- in a factory. I-- I mean, they made baby sterilizers, and I was welding the-- these metal pieces together, where they used to put the milk bottles on. I remember the pay was very little. Because in those days, usually when you came off the boat, you used to get the most menial jobs. And the-- they didn't pay much. But I managed.  INT: How did you find that you were received by Americans? JB: Very well. I-- I had no complaints. Americans were very nice to me. And I-- I had no complaints at all. I took a room in an old lady's apartment, a-- a Mrs. Smith. And she was very nice. She let me make breakfast so I could save a little. At least I didn't have to eat out, have breakfast out. So that saved me a little money. And [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] I had a few jobs when I first [? was there. ?] Then finally I had a job in a-- in a place where they developed films and things like that, in Brooklyn. I managed. 
INT: What did you think about being in the United States? JB: Oh, I loved it. I loved it. It was such a tremendous difference between being in Germany and being there, regardless of the war. I'm not talking about the destruction or anything like that. But the people are so-- so much different, so much nicer. They're not as stringent. You know, the-- the Europeans are very stringent in their-- in their upbringing, in their thoughts. Everything has to be just the way they think it is. And here, people were easygoing.  INT: How did your life proceed? Tell us about what you did. JB: Well, I was here a couple of years, I got married. And I had two daughters, which I still have. Thank god. And it was all right. I couldn't-- I can't complain. I liked it. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] I still like it here.  INT: What brought you to the South? JB: My daughter, my youngest daughter, lives in Fultondale, which is right outside of Gardendale here. And we came once to visit her. And my wife said to me, you know, my first cousin lives in-- also here. So we visited her cousin in Birmingham, and we visited my daughter. And my wife thought it was time for me to retire at the young age of 72. Or was I 71 maybe? So I retired, and we bought this place here. And we are living here ever since.  INT: And how-- how do you find yourself-- how do-- how do the people here in the South respond to your being-- JB: Oh, I think the people here are very nice. They're very laid back. And they-- I never-- I mean, even in comparison to the North, they never fight. I've never seen a fight here in three years. This really amazed me. See, usually in the North, when you go to the supermarket, this one says, well, I saw it first. Or you hit me with your-- with your carriage or something like that. But here they don't. They don't bother at all. They're very nice. I like it. 
INT: Have people asked you at all about the number on your arm, about your past experiences? JB: No, they don't. I don't think they know about it, really. A lot of people don't know these things.  INT: What do you think about that? JB: Well, if somebody asks me, I tell them. And if somebody doesn't ask me, I'm not going to burden them with the story. I mean, because, if he was interested now, he would have known prior to me telling him. And therefore, I figure if somebody wants to know, I'll tell him. It's nothing to be ashamed of, I mean.  INT: Did your experience during the Holocaust have any effect on-- on how you feel about Judaism? JB: Yeah, definitely it has. It definitely has. I'm not really-- I-- I can say that I do not really-- I'm not really a believer in God. I am trying to-- I figure out, for instance, like, when it comes to the Bible, that these things were all natural things, like a-- like that-- let's-- let's say, for instance, Moses talked to the burning bush. Maybe lightning hit the bush, and who heard what he was saying. He said God spoke him. But the people didn't hear it. It says in the Jewish Bible always, and God spoke to Moses. But the people didn't hear it. So I think that all these things, like the parting of the Red Sea, I think that's all a natural thing. Because there are some oceans and some bodies of water who, during-- during low tide you can walk through them them, like you have it in the Baltic Sea. That's where they can walk for miles. And then [INAUDIBLE] when the-- when the-- the waters come back, then you drown. 
INT: You think-- JB: And I would imagine that happened to the Egyptians.  INT: Do you think this-- the thinking this way, your thinking this way had-- is related to your experiences? JB: Definite-- definitely. And I could never understand. We had such religious people in the concentration camps. Some of them-- we had one guy there, he always prayed. This guy hardly ever slept. He was always standing there praying, and praying, and praying. And I didn't see God helping him any, any more than he did me. I believe-- I think that Judaism is not a religion but more a way of life, you know, a traditional thing. But I don't think that-- it's like, almost like a nationality, you know? But it's not a belief like-- like Catholicism is a belief. But I think that being a Jew doesn't-- [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] doesn't have-- hasn't got anything to do, really, with being religious.  INT: What did you tell your daughters about your experiences? JB: Not really too much. I-- I don't think that people here can even comprehend it because it is too unbelievable. It sounds unbelievable. It's the truth, but it sounds almost incomprehensible because people have never seen anything like it. The whole world has never seen anything like it. And I feel the same way. I cannot understand that today Jewish people settle in Germany. I just can't see it. Germany-- I have read so many books after-- since I came out of a concentration camp about the history of the Jews in Germany. And if you live in a country that, in every century, persecuted you and accused you of poisoning wells and creating typhoid fever and typhus and being responsible for the plague and being maimed and killed and having to live in ghettos, how can you live in a country like this? I had no choice. I had to live there because I was young. But if I had a-- I would never go back there. I would maybe go back to visit my father's grave, who died before Hitler came into power. But I would never stay there. 
INT: Did you go back ever? JB: Yeah, I was back in 1972. And I found the people just as bad and-- as they were in-- during Hitler's time. Now, of course, it is-- its more or less cloaked in different-- in different languages, in different ways. I-- I went into a restaurant in Berlin. And my wife ordered a whiskey sour. I'm just bringing this up because it's interesting. So the guy brings her a whiskey and a lemon. So I said to him, this is not a whiskey sour. He says, well, you people are all alike, which meant you Jews are all alike. You know? So I said to him, look, I said, if in the United States, when you buy a drink and they bring you the wrong thing, they change it, no questions asked. They smile, they change it, and they bring to you. If you don't know how to make it, you should have told me. I would have ordered something else for my wife. And things like that really annoyed me. I was glad-- when I left Germany and I went to England, I was happy to visit my sister there. I find them just as bad and as antisemitic as they were. Of course, now they have to be a little more cautious about expressing themselves because there's no more Hitler. But I don't think that their character has changed any. That's why I feel very much afraid of Jewish people who settled there. I wouldn't want to see my grandchildren go in-- in a-- in an oven. And I'm sure that the Germans find-- maybe this time it's not an oven. Maybe this time they're finding something more modern. But eventually this is going to-- this is going to come to a head again. Because the Germans cannot see anybody getting ahead. Like the Jews over there were in the-- in the arts, and the-- they had-- you know that the Jewish population in the world is only 2%. But yet 17% of all Nobel Prize winners are either Jewish or have one Jewish parent. That's not the Jews' fault. So therefore, I can't see-- here the people are not that envious. Over there they envy if people-- and-- and if they have something-- if-- if they should have any setback over there, like monetary or food-wise or anything, they're going to blame it on the Jews again. Because they have nobody else to blame it on. They're not going to blame it on themselves, because even the first war, they said they were stabbed in the back. They-- they lost the war. They took on the whole world, like they did in the second one. They lost it. Of course they lost it. But they will not admit it. It was always somebody else that-- who spoiled it for them. And it was always the Jew. 
INT: Would you tell us why you decided to give your testimony in an interview? JB: Well, this is-- my daughter insisted. She said, Daddy, I heard on the television that Mr. Spielberg is looking for people to testify and to talk about a concentration camp. And I think you should do it too because maybe someday people want to hear the story. And so she kept bothering me. And she called and said to me, you still have the phone number to call Mr. Spielberg? I said, yes. And then once I really lost it. And she says to me, I'll give you the phone number. I wrote it down, and then I called.  INT: Is there anything that we haven't asked you that you would like to talk to us about, to say as a personal statement? JB: Yeah. I-- I can only say, in conclusion, that I'm very happy to be here. And I think that the biggest legacy I gave my children and grandchildren is the fact that they were here and not over there. [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] That's all I've got to say, more or less.  INT: All right. JB: This is my aunt, Hermina Bassfreund. She was a high school teacher in Nuremberg. I imagine this picture was taken probably right after the first war. [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] And this picture I probably got through one of our maids, the cook in particular, who had sent me a lot of pictures after the war, to New York. 
INT: Which one is your aunt? JB: My aunt is the lady in the white dress. Yeah, that's correct.  INT: Do you know where this photo was taken? JB: Yeah, I said in Nuremberg.  INT: OK. And the other people? JB: I don't know any of the other teachers on this picture. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] They're all unknown to me. Show them-- [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] this picture is a picture of my father, Manfred Bassfreund. He probably had this picture taken in the early '20s. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] I don't know where the picture was taken. And I also got this picture either through my sister or through our cook, who sent me a lot of pictures. This picture is a picture of my mother. I am on the left, and my sister is on the right. And the lady in front of us is one of our maids. The picture was taken in Belgium, I believe in Heyst-sur-Mer. And the picture must have been taken in the late '20s. I would say '27 or '28. [PAUSES FOR 10 SECONDS] This is me when I was about four or five years old-- four years old, I would say. [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] And this is my mother. [BACKGROUND NOISE]  INT: What's that sound? CREW: Telephone.  INT: Wow. JB: And this is my sister.  INT: [INAUDIBLE] sound. UNIDENTIFIED SPEAKER: That may be weather radio. Always give you a signal on Wednesday. JB: This is a picture at a dinner party at our new built home in Mühlheim at the Mosel River. My father is on the left. There are-- I don't remember everybody on this picture. But there is Dr. Steinberg, Dr. Forenberg. [PAUSES FOR 9 SECONDS] This is my father on the left, with the hands on his-- on the side. And this is my mother in the center, and her uncle and her aunt. But their name was Kahn, and they lived in Pirmasens, which is not too far from Frankfurt. [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] This is George-- George Loese, a friend of the family. That's the man on the left there-- [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] this gentleman here, right above my mother. And this is my sister and I. 
INT: [INAUDIBLE]. JB: And-- This picture was taken in the Black Forest, in Freudenstadt, to be precise. This is my father and me when I was about five years old, six years old. [PAUSES FOR 10 SECONDS] The people in the back, I do not know. They were just passerbys. This picture was taken in Trier. It's a picture of my mother and myself. I would say I was about [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] eight or nine years old. [PAUSES FOR 10 SECONDS] The occasion I don't remember. It was taken by a photographer. This is a picture of a girlfriend of mine in Berlin. It was taken in Berlin at the beginning of the war. The girl's name is Ellen Wolf, and she-- she died in the Holocaust, in Auschwitz. This is a picture of me in the National Guard. The year was 1947. The picture was taken at Cape Cod in Massachusetts. And it was at that time called Camp Edwards. It's now Otis Air Force Base. These are my two daughters. On the left is Irma-- [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] Irma Rogers. And on my right is my youngest daughter, Susan Whalin. The picture was taken in Bricktown, New Jersey. And the occasion is unknown to me. I guess it was just a snapshot. [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] The year, I couldn't say for sure. I would say this picture is about four or five years old. This is my grandson, Jason, my oldest daughter's son. The occasion was our birthday, because Jason was born on September the 29th, and I was born on September the 30th. So we celebrated together. The picture was taken at my daughter's house in Bricktown. [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] The year, probably, was 1994-- '93. This is my youngest daughter's son. This is Benjamin Whalin. This picture was taken recently. I would say in 1970-- 1997. It was a school picture. And it was taken in kindergarten, rather. Well, with the exception of my oldest daughter, Irma, this is my family. I have my wonderful wife on the right, whom I love very much. I have my beautiful, beautiful grandson, Benjamin Whalin, right next to me. And of course my lovely wonderful daughter Susan, my baby. I love her very much too. And unfortunately, my daughter Irma is not here. She is in New Jersey. That's where she lives. And so is my son-- my grandson, Jason. CREW: OK. [? Anyone? ?] JB: Do you have anything to say? SUSAN WHALIN: No. CREW: Thank you very much. 
INT: OK. JB: People watch this thing, it's a foreign movie. They're waiting for the subtitles, [LAUGHTER] which never come. SUSAN WHALIN: No, no. No, no.