INT: Today is July 7, 1997. The interview is with Walter Tick. The name at birth was Tikotzki. My name is Robert Silverman. We are in Decatur, Illinois in the United States. This interview will be conducted in English. Today is July 7, 1997. This is Walter Tick. My name is Robert Silverman. We are in Decatur, Illinois in the United States. The interview will be conducted in English. WT: OK.  INT: To begin, would you please state and spell your name? WT: My name is S. Walter Tick. And you want it spelled?  INT: Yes. WT: T as in Thomas, I-C-K.  INT: And what was your name at birth? WT: At birth, my name was Siegbert Walter Tikotzki.  INT: And could you please spell that? WT: That last name is spelled T-I-K-O-T-Z-K-I.  INT: Did you go by any other names or nicknames? WT: No, I didn't.  INT: And what is your date of birth, and how old are you today? WT: My date of birth is March 6, 1922, and I'm 90-- I am 75 years old.  INT: And which city and country were you born? WT: I was born in Berlin, Germany.  INT: What is your profession and training and education? WT: I was educated at Millikin University in Decatur, Illinois as my higher institute of learning and have a degree in chemistry.  INT: What languages do you speak? WT: I speak German and English. I can speak Yiddish. I have a passing knowledge of reading and writing and speaking of French, and I am familiar with the liturgical aspect of Hebrew. 
INT: I'd like to ask you now about each member of your family. What was your father's name? WT: My father's name was Isador Tikotzki or Isador Tick.  INT: And when was he born and where? WT: He was born on February 3, 1886, and he was born in Lyck-- that's L-Y-C-K-- in East Prussia in Germany.  INT: And when did he die and where? WT: He died in Decatur, Illinois on August 26, 1966.  INT: And what was your mother's name? WT: My mother's name was Hedwig Tikotzki. Her maiden name was Leopold, L-E-O-P-O-L-D.  INT: And when was she born and where? WT: She was born on February 19, 1887, and she was born in Bad Honnef on the Rhine River in southern Germany.  INT: And when did she die and where? WT: She died in Decatur, Illinois on October 5, 1950.  INT: Do you have any siblings? WT: I have a sister whose name is Margot Hersh, and she lives in Glencoe, Illinois, just north of Chicago.  INT: And when was she-- when was she born and where? WT: She was born in Berlin, Germany on November 17, 1926.  INT: Could you please tell me what life was like for you and your family in Berlin as you were growing up as a boy? WT: I grew up in a very, you might call, Jewish type of surrounding. My father had a business in Berlin, in the very center of Berlin, not too far from the famous Jewish quarter in center-- in the center of Berlin. And also was brought up in the shadow of my grandmother, my father's mother, who was a very religious woman. And I attended, with the exception of a year and a half, I attended Jewish parochial schools in Berlin that were run and administered by the Jewish Community of Berlin. 
INT: Could you remember the address of your father's business? WT: My father's business was in the center of Berlin in the Alte Schonhauser Strasse, number 42.  INT: And the name of the school that you attended, the Jewish school? WT: The name of the school was the Grosse Hamburger Strasse school run by the German Jewish community. I meant the Berlin Jewish community.  INT: What was your home life like? WT: My home life was a very structured and orderly type of life. We had a rather large apartment that was located about a block and a half away from my dad's business across this-- on the other side of the street so that you could lean out the window and-- and look at my dad's store from a distance. My mother was busy most of the day in the business with my father, and, therefore, the household, when we came home from school, was run by a live-in maid who did the cleaning and the cooking. And while we were-- until my sister was probably about the age of five, and I would have been about nine, we also had a live-in governess whose sole job it was to take care of my sister and I.  INT: Do you recall the names of them? WT: No, we had several of them, and I do not recall their names. I recall only one lady who was a-- the-- the live-in maid that my mother had toward the very end of our residence in Berlin. She was Jewish. My mother, at that time, because of the antisemitism that was propagated by the Nazis, did not want a woman employed in the house who was not Jewish, because that created all sorts of problems. And so she hired a elderly Jewish woman, who needed a room and house and board. And she-- her name was Frau Levensohn, and I still remember her. She was a diminutive type of person and was always amazed at the amount of guests, visitors, and relatives that stopped by at all hours of the day and night, especially in these last years. 
INT: How would you describe your relationship with your mother? WT: My mother's-- the relationship with my mother was really a very good one. My mother was very benign, but at the same time, very strict. And my mother's word, without us feeling in any way-- [PAUSES FOR 6 SECONDS] my sister and I just-- my mother's word was law, and that was so natural that we really weren't aware of it.  INT: Did your mother work outside the home? WT: She worked in my dad's business. That is correct.  INT: What did she do? WT: She probably took-- took care of the cash register. My dad's business was mostly retail, although he had some wholesale business also. And behind the-- his business, he had an extended several rooms that were full of sewing machines. And he had ladies there who manufactured men's shirts and ladies' undergarments and so on and so forth, sometimes made to order.  INT: How would you describe your mother's religious identity? WT: My mother's religious identity was very peculiar to me, and she talked about it a lot, because my mother's family originated in southern Germany on the Rhine River in a small town, where her parents, grandparents, and great-grandparents were all laying buried, I still remember, in a small Jewish cemetery, going back I don't know how many generations, and was brought up in a very religious atmosphere but different from my father's. My father's religious background and my father's father were Eastern European who had originated in Poland in the town of Tykocin, after whom the word-- the name Tikotzki is-- is named. And my mother always told me that when she married my father and moved to Berlin after World War I, that she had to learn her Judaism all over again, because the customs and the ceremonials were very much different in the Eastern European mode than they were in the southern German Jewish mode. 
INT: Can you describe some of the differences? WT: My mother always told me that, for instance, it was customary the way she was brought up that women did not, at a funeral, go into the cemetery. They would accompany the-- the corpse of the person to be buried to the gates of the cemetery, and the women would then turn around and go home, and the men would complete the funeral, which I remember was one of the customs. But my mother also told me that she was told on-- I can't necessarily say that the information is 100% correct-- by her grandfather that during the Spanish Inquisition and expulsion of the Jews from Spain at the end of the 15th century, the Jews-- many of the Jews that left Spain wandered north along the Rhine River. And that's how the Sephardic community in Amsterdam came into being. And as they wandered up the Rhine River to the north, here and there many of them settled down in the little towns that they found along the way. And that's how the Jews in Honnef really originated.  INT: Was this group a Sephardic community? WT: Well, their ritual was different from what I was used to, for instance, in Berlin to the synagogues that I went to, because I used to go with my mother to Honnef to see her cousins that were still living there when I was small. And on Saturday mornings on Shabbat, we would go to the very small synagogue in Honnef and attend services. And even though services-- I recognized the liturgy, there were differences that I could notice. But when I was small, I ascribed those differences, really, to the fact that it was such a small community, and-- and-- and there was no such thing as a rabbi, and there was no cantor that I was used to. And one of the people acted as a leader in the services. And therefore, I-- the differences, at that time at least, I ascribed to that rather than to anything else. 
INT: Do you recall the name of the synagogue? WT: No, but what I recall that is-- excuse me-- very striking or struck me was I remember one time, maybe the first time, that my mother, on Saturday morning, said, we are going to go to services. And we walked and walked inside what was obviously a church, because it had a church spire, although very small. And I evidently hesitated and quizzed my mother. I thought we were going to temple. And she said, well, she said, this is the temple. She said, the Jewish community here bought this building from the Catholic dioceses, because it got too small for them, and they abandoned it, and it was for sale. And once we were inside, of course, I could immediately tell that it was-- had all the earmarks of a-- of a synagogue.  INT: And to ask you about your father, what was your father like? WT: My father was brought up in a household of 12 children. And when my grandfather, so my father told me many times, moved to Berlin from Lyck in Germany in East Prussia, he rented an apartment, and he rented a small store or shop on the-- on the ground level of that same building. And the apartment was one floor up. And he went to the market, and he bought a few barrels of various types of fruits, such as apples, pears, or you name it, and put them into the store and told my grandmother, now, this is your-- will be our business, and you will run it. And he was actually occupied practically all his time just studying the Talmud, and-- and he had many, many people come up to the apartment and some of the rabbis, and they would sit almost daily for many hours and just study. 
INT: Do you recall the names of some of these rabbis? WT: The only rabbi that I know, my father told me about, that was rather well known that came very frequently to my grandfather's house to help him study was Rabbi Hildesheimer. And my-- my grandfather also was a-- had a hobby of studying the Kabbalah. And I still have a Kabbalah scroll that was printed in Warsaw about 1860, something like that, that my father remembers my grandfather studying, because when he brought that scroll out, in order to study it, he made all the children leave, including my father.  INT: How would you describe your relationship with your father? WT: My father was a very stern person, but it was a very pleasant and-- and correct relationship. I saw my parents really, on a daily basis, only in the evening, because in the morning, I would, of course, go off to school, and they went off to the business. And my parents' store business hours, as I recall it in those days, went until 7 o'clock in the evening, at which time, by law, you had to close your retail business. And then my parents came home at 7 o'clock and would sit in the dining room, and-- and-- and the live-in cook and maid would serve their meal, their evening meal. And by that time, my sister and I had already eaten our supper. We ate it usually with the maid and with the governess. And now and then, as a treat, when my parents were ready for dessert, then we would come in and-- and-- and-- and partake with them of dessert and spend some time with them. And then, of course, weekends we were together with them practically all the time. 
INT: How would you describe the religious identity of your family in your home? WT: Well, my grandfather was very, very strictly Orthodox, and so was my grandmother. My grandmother was a very deeply religious woman. She wore a sheitel. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] I remember her making the rounds before each Rosh Hashanah to all her children. And I remember her coming up to my father's house, and that happened every year, and she would come to make up with him. She would say, if I've done anything in this past year that offends you, I want you to forgive me. And that was her way of squaring herself with her family before the high holidays. She would also, many times, see me coming home from school. She would sit by a kind of a bay window and watch the traffic downstairs. And she knew about the time that I would pass on my own-- way home from school, and I would see her arm coming out motioning me up, and I knew exactly what was going to happen, because I would obviously go up. And she would have some sweets for me to eat, but at the same time, she would open the book, some Hebrew passage from the Chumash or something like that, and she would say, start reading. And she wanted to see my progress in being able to read.  INT: Did-- was your family Orthodox? WT: No, my father and mother were not Orthodox. I would call them, by today's standards, Conservative. And that was kind of a compromise between the way my mother was brought up-- even though my mother was brought up in a kosher home and my father was brought up in a kosher home, my parents did not keep kosher except in a very circumspect way. They would obviously not serve any pork or-- or anything of that nature. But it was not strictly kosher, but the temple that we attended was also in the traditional manner, not Orthodox. 
INT: What was the name? WT: Not rigorously Orthodox.  INT: What was the name of this temple? WT: The temple that we belong to happened-- it was the Friedenstempel, which was on the Rykestrasse in Berlin. And according to the system of the Jewish community in Berlin at that time, if you were a member, you could really attend any of the 20 or 30-some synagogues that the Jewish community ran at any one time, except for the high holidays, when you had to go to the one where you actually had a claim to a specific seat.  INT: Do you know the names of any of the other temples or shuls in-- in your area? WT: In my area? Well, there was a Hasidic shul not far from us, about two and a half blocks away, which was in the old Jewish quarter in what was then called the Grenadierstrasse. And I don't know the name of the congregation, but it-- the street number where it was located was number 37. And in the common lingo, if you needed to go and say a Kaddish, morning, noon, night midnight, or whatever, you would just say, I went to-- I went to 37, because there was always a minyan there, no matter what.  INT: Do you remember the day that you became bar mitzvah? WT: Oh, yes, very well.  INT: Would you like to describe that? WT: I was bar mitzvah on March 15, 1935, and in that temple, the Friedenstempel, in the Rykestrasse. And [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] I studied for that event approximately nine months prior to that date. I, twice a week, went to a special teacher who helped me almost memorize the entire Torah portion for that particular Shabbat. And I was able to almost chant it from memory by the time my-- [LAUGHS] that day rolled around. And the rabbi that was officiating so happened, at that particular Saturday morning, it was rabbi Max Nussbaum, who later on became the rabbi in Hollywood. And, you know-- and he died about-- probably about five years ago. In fact, I remember meeting him in Hollywood, looking him up when we were out there visiting. 
INT: Did he remember you? WT: He seemed to remember me, although I'm not sure whether that was necessarily just politeness. He was employed by the Jewish Community of Berlin, as were probably 25 or 30 rabbis, who then rotated pulpits from Friday to Saturday all the way around each week. And therefore, you had to read the weekly bulletin that was printed and sent out by the community, and you could tell who the rabbi would be where at any particular time.  INT: Do you recall any of your ceremony? WT: Do I recall the ceremony? Oh, yes, very well. And-- and what-- what do you mean by ceremony? [? I mean-- ?]  INT: Would you like to share any of it with us? WT: Well, my-- my-- the section of the-- that I had a chant was from Leviticus or Vayikra, the first chapter or the first parashah. And my father gave a big party in our apartment, and [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] after services that Saturday, by maybe 1 o'clock or so, the festivities at our apartment started, and they didn't really end until with breakfast Sunday morning and just went all night. And of course, all the relatives came, not only the ones that lived in Berlin, but cousins that lived out of town, and family from as far away as Copenhagen, Denmark came.  INT: Were you part of any organized Jewish movement or group? WT: Well, after Hitler came to power, it was almost impossible to be a member of a group that was secular. And so practically all of us joined Jewish organizations, particularly Zionist organizations, and there were many of them. There was the Betar, and there was the-- the Habonim and the Hashomer Hatzair and the-- the Mizrahi. And I remember being a member of the Habonim movement. And while I was not necessarily ideologically choosing that one, it was just because my friends were there, and I wanted to belong with them. 
INT: And you mentioned going to a Jewish school. WT: Yes, sir.  INT: What was that like? WT: Well, going to the Jewish school-- I went to the Jewish school as in-- in the-- in the grade school, because that seemed to be very convenient. At that time, I started school in 1928, before Hitler came to power. So I could have gone to any school. But my father sent me to that school. It was fairly close, and that's a choice he made. And according to the school system over there, if you wanted to go on into secondary education or high school, you would leave the grade school after four years. And so after four years, or in 1932, I enrolled in a public gymnasium or high school or its equivalent of a high school here, although it's a little more than that, actually, and went there. And then in 1933, of course, the power grab by Hitler occurred. And then things began to be rather uncomfortable, because many of my classmates then already came to school in Hitler Youth brown shirt uniforms with armbands with swastikas. And the class that I was in probably had about four or five Jewish boys out of maybe 35 or 40. And it became rather uncomfortable as the days rolled by. And I would-- many of us would get into scrapes, because of various harassments that were exacted upon us. And I had the good fortune to become the target of one particular person. And I would almost get into daily scrapes with this particular individual and, many times, would come home with a bloody nose and bloody clothes. And at-- at first, my mother was quite aghast and very concerned. And then after a while, it became almost secondary. And all she wanted to know was whether the other guy got just as much as I. 
INT: What was the name of the school that you attended? WT: That was called the [GERMAN] Gymnasium, which was no more than about two blocks from where we lived. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] And there's only a remnant of it standing today, but I was just there about a year and a half ago and tried to find it and almost didn't. [LAUGHS]  INT: Did this school have any ideology attached to it? WT: No, it had no particular ideology. It was what was called a Realgymnasium, meaning that instead of teaching the humanistic side of education, such as the classics, Greek, and Latin, they taught English and French as the first two foreign languages.  INT: We will now end this tape and start up on the next tape. WT: Thank you.  INT: Number two. You were speaking about your experience in the public school. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] Are there other things that you would like to talk about that time? WT: Well, I recall the day that Hitler was named chancellor of Germany, and they had a-- a [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] ceremony regarding that that was engineered by Hitler or by Goebbels, his propaganda minister, that took place in Potsdam which was outside of Germany. The same place where in 1945 President Truman, Churchill, and Stalin met. And it was at that place that the ceremony took place, and the old, doddering German president Hindenburg [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] named Hitler chancellor. And I recall that in the school they herded us into the auditorium. And we all had to listen on the radio to what was taking place. And-- 
INT: Do you recall what day that was? WT: That would have been in January of 1933, I believe. And of course, prior to that, there were many elections in Germany. And my father, I remember, was watching with great consternation. Of course, the fact that in-- in election after election and all the cabinet crises that preceded it under the Weimar Republic laws that were then in effect that the Nazi party kept getting larger and larger share of votes. And my dad couldn't understand why the Social Democrats, which had been ruling up to now, and the leftist parties such as the Communist Party, which was quite strong in Germany, didn't combine forces to try and defeat the-- the-- the Nazi party. But they didn't. They fought among themselves, and-- until the very end. And the Germans were able to-- oh, the-- the Nazis were able to grab the majority seats. And actually, Hitler came to power quite legally by just garnering the most votes in Germany. And-- and then subsequent to him becoming chancellor, and a few months later, Hindenburg, who was the president, died, and Hitler made himself the sole power in Germany. There was no more president elected after that, and asked the German parliament, so to speak, to grant him total power by decree. And they absolutely sat and voted themselves out of power. They still-- there was still a parliament, but from that moment on, it was nothing but a sham and a-- and a rubber stamp. 
INT: In 1933, you would have been 11 years old? WT: That's correct.  INT: How did you experience that change of power as an 11-year-old? WT: It didn't quite sink in to me why-- the severity of it. But then the severity of it didn't sink into the adults either, I don't believe. The events that followed that eventually culminated in the Holocaust were so unimaginable that-- and there were so many governmental crises immediately preceding Hitler coming to power that people in Germany, and certainly among the Jewish people, had every reasonable reason to believe that this was just a passing thing-- that this craziness that these people were preaching would-- would not be tolerated by the public, and that therefore, in a couple or three months or so, they would hold another election, and they would boot these people out. Now, it was an obviously blind and vain hope, but in those days knowing what they knew, and in the events that unfolded, that was not unreasonable to-- to assume.  INT: You mentioned at school some of your classmates arriving with brown shirts and swastikas on. WT: Right.  INT: How-- what other changes did you see that affected your life? WT: Well, we were-- for instance, there were some teachers who were obviously-- they would march into class. That was in the public school. They would march into class with a little pin, the Nazi party pin, which had-- was about the size of a quarter in roundness and diameter. And they would obviously allude and sneer at the Jewish students and-- and-- and make them targets. Now, they wouldn't call them that, but it was very evident to everybody that these people were singling out the Jews for ridicule in front of their classmates. 
INT: Did that ever happen to you? WT: Oh, yes. Oh, yes.  INT: Can you describe an incident that happened to you? WT: Well, it was customary, and the school system was such that students did not move from class to class. Teachers moved, and you stayed in the same room in your same seat. And in the interval from one-- the end of one class session when the teacher would leave till the next teacher would come in, there would be what they would call a small [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] intermission, so to speak, between classes, or pause. And they would have two or three students assigned who would stand at the front of the class near the blackboard, and you were supposed to sit in your seat, and not speak, and not talk, and do nothing untoward. And they would-- and if they caught somebody speaking, they were supposed to write your name on the blackboard. And then if they caught you speaking again, they would underline it, and then underline it again if necessary, and so on. And they would just write the name of the Jewish students up there even though there was no reason for it, and then put a couple of lines under it. And then when the next teacher came in, he would see those names and they had long wooden sticks that were really to be used as pointers to point at a map or something. And they would take these, and they would call the Jew-- not just the Jewish students. They would do the same thing to the other students, too, if their names were up there, but not to the same severity or degree. And they would make you march up to the front and, of course, we had no girls in our class. They were all-- they-- the girls were separate from the boys. And they would make you bend over with your rear end high up in the air, so to speak, and they would use that wooden stick and whack you across your tush. And depending on how many lines you had under your name, that is how many more strokes you received. And the Jewish students obviously were singled out for severity. And you just had to endure that. There was nothing you could do about it. 
INT: Did you have any non-Jewish friends? WT: I had some non-Jewish friends up until about the time that Hitler came to power. In fact, they were neighbors of ours. The father was a musician, a pianist, and conductor. And they were really rather nice people, I thought. And one of the things they would always do, at Christmas time, they would hang all kinds of goodies-- cookies, and-- and-- and sweets. Was a custom to hang them on Christmas trees. And then the day after Christmas, they would let the kids raid the tree, which was a big treat for us. And this neighbor youngster who was my age would always invite me over to raid the tree. And he and I had good relations, but that lasted only until about 1933, maybe a few months after Hitler came to power. And then his parents called a halt to that I believe not so much because they didn't want to have anything to do with Jews personally as the fact that they wouldn't want it known that they had something to do with Jews, you see. So for sociopolitical reasons, they cut those cords without ever explaining and didn't have to.  INT: Do you know if your parents had non-Jewish friends? WT: My father had a lot of acquaintances that were not Jewish through his business almost to the very end. That was one of these real [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] paradoxes of that type of situation. And-- but they were only friends of his in the sense that they knew him, they had shopped and bought from him, they knew that what he sold was good quality, and the prices were reasonable, and they were treated right. But that's about where it stopped. And then many times people would come in even in uniform-- in Nazi uniform, you know, SS or brown shirt uniform-- and shop in my dad's store. My dad knew them well. They lived in the neighborhood. They would have no problem in shopping there, and they would always say, well, you know, Herr Tikotzki, we don't mean you, [LAUGHS] you know. And my dad, of course, knew better. 
INT: How did those relationships change over time? WT: Well, they changed only because the screws were tightened. You see, each year, things became a little worse. And by 1935, they would put out certain restrictive laws. And by '36, I believe it was when the Nuremberg laws were promulgated, that already-- Jews no longer could-- Jewish doctors could not treat non-Jews. Jewish lawyers could not advise non-Jews. The propaganda was put out, don't buy in Jewish shops. That was day and night. And then they had this infamous, almost obscene pornographic type of antisemitic hate sheet, which it was an-- [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] It's unbelievable, I mean, what was printed in them. And in order to make sure that the public read it, almost on every street corner, they would post under glass show boxes with the paper spread out each week the new issue. And I would stand there, I would read that, you know. And I would read that the Talmud says that you can kill non-Jews and it's fine. And the Talmud says this, the Talmud says that, and had stories about Jews raping Aryan German girls. And-- and I mean, the unbelievable [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] vicious hatred propaganda and all that. And Germans would stand and read that. And I as a kid, or youngster, stand right there and read that also, you know. I mean, it was almost unreal. But after a while, that sort of incessant propaganda seeps in. Beside the fact that the Nazis used to have a tremendous time marching, and they would march through the street. In fact, they marched through the streets many, many times I recall where we lived. On Sunday mornings, they would march the battery of-- of-- of-- of Brownshirts, and they would sing these Nazi songs, many of them which were viciously antisemitic. I recall one particular one that I can almost sing yet. There were-- had many stanzas, but the refrain was always the same. And the refrain always said, when Jewish blood spurts from the knife, then we'll really feel well. Then things will really be good. They would march through there on Sunday, and you know, I would lean out the window and watch the march. [LAUGHS] 
INT: Did you ever witness any dangerous things happening, or did anything dangerous happen to you? WT: Yes, as-- as time went on, you see, the-- the-- the party, the Nazi party, even after the government was already firmly in their hands, it was the party that ruled the government, that ruled, then, the people. The party was always the ultimate seat of power, and the party was composed of companies of SA, or SA, and SS black shirts who each had their own precinct, so to speak. Each company of Brownshirts would have maybe two or three square blocks that was their territory. And they would headquarter usually in a tavern, in a neighborhood tavern. That was their hangout. And that's where, you know, they would plan the activities that they would get their directives from their leader. And they would fan out, and I've seen them break out of some tavern and just grab somebody who was obviously Jewish-- many times an orthodox person, in-- in-- in orthodox garb, and just beat them mercilessly. I've seen that happen.  INT: Did that happened to anybody that you knew personally? WT: It happened to some people that my father knew. It didn't happen to anybody and-- and-- that was part of my family, except for the fact that I had an uncle who was married to my father's sister who was born in Poland and had a Polish passport. He was not a German citizen. And one morning, it must have been 1937, I believe, the telephone rang at 5:00 in the morning. And my aunt, his wife, was on the phone screaming that they had come at 4 o'clock that morning, gave my uncle 15 minutes to get dressed and throw something in a suitcase, and took him away, and carted him off together with 2,000 other 3,000 Jews of Polish citizenship, put him on a train. The train ran to the Polish border, and that's where they dumped him across the-- across the border. And my aunt did not see my uncle again until they both saw each other in Israel in 19-- would have been probably 1940. He was able to make his way to Israel, to-- which was then Palestine in 1940, and my aunt finally escaped across the border. She-- she couldn't get any legal-- you couldn't get into Palestine legally. The British wouldn't let you in. And she-- no other country would let you in necessarily except if you were lucky. So she ran across the border by some people who-- that made it their business to smuggle you and-- into Belgium. And she was in Brussels for probably close to a year before somehow or other, and I don't know the nearest circumstances, she was able to go to Palestine because he was already there, I think. 
INT: Were you or members of your family attending synagogue at this time? WT: Oh, yeah, we were attending synagogue. I personally-- my father's business was open on-- on Saturday, so my father did not necessarily attend on a regular basis. But I did, and the reason that I did was because number one, I was in a Jewish school. That was after I was expelled from the gymnasium, which I didn't really touch on yet. And all my friends were there. [LAUGHS] So as a youngster, if you had a day off, you-- you wanted to be with your friends, and they were all attending services.  INT: Would you like to speak about being expelled from the gymnasium and switching schools? WT: Well, the reason I left the gymnasium in-- in 1930-- at the end of '33 was because I got into those daily fights with this one individual. And one day, my father got a call from the school's director or principal to please come for consultation. And my father went to the school, and the school principal told my father that he better take me out of the school or they were going to expel me because I was a disturbing influence in the school because I got into daily scrapes. And of course, the reason I got into daily scrapes was because I was attacked on a daily basis, and all I did was try to defend myself. And so my dad took me out of the school, and that's when he switched me over to the Jewish school in the Grosse Hamburger Strasse, where I went until I graduated in 1937. '38, sorry. 
INT: And what was that school like in Grosse Hamburger? WT: That school was a really fabulous school because first of all, it had a great attraction for us budding young men. I mean, at that time, you know, I was already getting into be 15, 16 years old. And even though they kept the sexes separate-- girls were in one class and the boys were in another class. But during recesses and otherwise, we obviously were able to mix with girls. We were all Jewish, and it was a just really a great thing for us. The teachers were really fabulous teachers. Most of them were really college professors who had been fired from universities because they were Jews. And in order to earn a living, they condescended to teach in a Jewish school.  INT: Do you recall the names of the teachers? WT: Oh, I recall many of them, yes.  INT: Who were some of your teachers? WT: Well, we had, for instance, a very, very-- I mean, the people that still are impregnated in my mind, a mathematics teacher whose name was Lanestedter who was fabulous. We had a-- a what would call here a homeroom teacher, Dr. Wiener, who was tremendous. There were so many of them. We had a-- an art teacher whose name was Geismar who was a-- really a fabulous character on his own, and [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] that school was more than a school to us. It was-- it was absolutely home away from home. It so happened that the school was right next to a oldest Jewish cemetery in Berlin. There was a small cemetery that had gravestones from the 1600s-- people buried there. But the most famous person buried there was the Jewish philosopher, Moses Mendelssohn. And during recesses, we would go from the school into that cemetery and just walk around there because it was very nice. There were many trees, and grass, and it was very nice and peaceful. And-- and I knew that cemetery like the back of my hand. 
INT: You mentioned in synagogue, you would meet your classmates there. WT: Right.  INT: Do you recall anything happening during this time in the synagogue. dangerous things happening? WT: The only thing that everybody knew, and that is the Gestapo agents, when they were in-- in-- not in uniform, but were, you know, in-- in-- what you call, in mufti, they would have a telltale sign you could tell that it was a Gestapo agent. Number one, there would be somebody whom you didn't really recognize who would sit in the back row of the synagogue, and they always wore hats with a little brush type ornament coming out of the headband. And they would be there strictly to listen to the sermon of the rabbis. And it was not unusual after the service was over for them to garner the rabbi, and take him down to headquarters, and interrogate him, and wanting to know how come he-- his sermon was such and such if they didn't like the contents.  INT: Did you ever see-- WT: And the rabbis had to be careful what they said, and many of them really-- and once again here you see it depended on the year. Because things got worse gradually-- rapidly, but gradually. And therefore, the rabbis in the beginning, and many of them even afterwards, they would say what they wanted to say not worrying about their own personal safety. They wanted to impart their thoughts to the congregation. 
INT: Did you ever see a rabbi be taken away? WT: I've seen that once, yes. But it was common knowledge that that happened frequently.  INT: Who was the rabbi that you saw taken away? WT: I don't recall exactly that, but it was a very common thing. Not-- they would usually release them, And-- and they-- they would be back.  INT: Do you recall the names of some of the rabbis that would-- WT: Well, the most-- we would of them would have our favorites, and we would look at the bulletin to see whom we wanted to hear. And that's the synagogue we would maybe sneak off to. But there was Rabbi Nussbaum, who was a fabulous speaker. There was a Rabbi Swarsensky, who for many, many years was the rabbi later on in Madison, Wisconsin, where he found a pulpit. And he was there until the day he died. There was Rabbi Dr. Joachim Prinz, who wrote many books, and was very famous in the-- later on in the World Jewish Congress. Those were among-- really among our heroes. They were young, they-- you know, we had many older rabbis, too, whose vitality and force could not match these fiery young speakers.  INT: Do you recall the events of November 9th and 10th in 1938? WT: Oh yes, very well. I remember I-- I mentioned before that one of my uncles was carted off and dragged off to Poland because he was a Polish citizen, and these people were dumped there without funds. And if you didn't have any relatives there that could help you, you know, you were really there destitute. Because the Polish government wasn't about to do anything for you. And there was a young student in Paris by name of Herschel Grynszpan whose parents were dragged off, I think, or whose father was dragged off to Poland. And this kid got so incensed by what he saw going on in Germany that he visited the German consulate or embassy, I don't recall which, and got a hold of a third-rate consular official, and asked to speak to him. And when he was taken to the guy's office, he took out a-- a revolver and shot him. And this guy hung on for probably four or five days between life and death. And while he was hanging on in Paris, we all knew and the newspapers, the German press kept getting worse and worse by the day. And they had morning editions and evening editions. And one was worth-- with more dire warnings than the next. And we all knew, and my father kept telling us, if this guy dies, watch out. 
INT: Did you have any personal connection to this event in Paris? WT: No. That was just something that happened that we knew from the radio and the press. And [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] I recall it-- I'm not sure, it seemed like it was a Friday or a Thursday, but don't hold me to that, that I happened to be in my dad's store, and he had an office in the back of the store and the phone where the telephone was. And the phone rang, and my sister, who in 1938 would have been-- let's see, four-- [PAUSES FOR 5 SECONDS] well, she would have been about 11 years old-- was on the phone. And I remember she said, he's dead. That's all she said. She had heard it on the radio that-- at that moment. And my father decided then, he said-- well, he said, we're not going to sleep home tonight. So he told my mother to go on home and gather up my sister, and I stayed in the store. And when my dad closed the store, we headed for the next railroad station. Because my father had a sister who lived in the western part of Berlin several-- I don't know, short train ride away with-- with the-- with the elevator train. And this sister of my father's was married to a Gentile, and therefore her last name was a very German Gentile sounding name. And we decided to go there for the night. And I recall walking to the train stations, and by that time it was already dark. In November, gets dark very early. And on the corners, I saw the SS and the SA troopers, and they were handing out axes and crowbars. That I recall very distinctly. And we went to my aunt's house, and I remember many of my other aunts and uncles also did the same thing. We all gathered at this aunt's house to spend the night there, and we were in her living room and in her-- in her family room, and anywhere in the house at all on-- on blankets and pillows, bedding ourselves away for the night, and spent the night there. 
INT: What was the name of your aunt? WT: Her name was Selma Friese. F-R-I-E-S-E. She-- she died-- she-- in fact, she was the last survivor of my father's siblings. She died about five years ago in Florida.  INT: And the name Friese was her married name? WT: Yes.  INT: This will be the end of tape two, and we will continue this story on tape three.  INT: --Tick. This is tape number three. At the end of tape number two, you were speaking about being in the living room with your aunt on the night of November 9, 1938. Would you like to continue telling us about this? WT: Well, we spent the night there, which really passed by very uneventful. Nobody bothered us there. It was safe there, as we had hoped and anticipated, and except for the fact that it was all crowded. But to me, at least, I was young enough, and that there was a certain, I don't know, a degree--it was almost like camping out, you know. There was a-- it, it, it had a certain degree of excitement, I suppose, although I knew exactly the reason why and the gravity of it all. But we heard on the radio, then-- very early the next morning, the radio was blasting away at the fact that the people of Germany rose up, in spontaneous anger, during the night and avenged the brutal killing of this German consulate official in Paris. And pretty soon, perhaps through some telephone conversations, my father found out that practically all the Jewish stores had been wrecked. What we didn't know yet was to what degree, and we didn't know of the burning of the synagogues. That we didn't realize. And where my aunt lived, that was a rather quiet residential section so that noise-wise that was all far away. And my dad decided that he better have a look-see and see what happened during the night. So he asked me to get dressed, and he and I went downstairs. And he took a taxi. And he told the taxi driver to drive through the heart of West Berlin. That was the heart of the shopping district-- even today, a very fashionable district, the Kurfürstendamm and the Tauentzienstrasse and the adjoining neighborhoods, which even today are, you know, highly commercial and very fashionable, with many specialty stores, boutiques, department stores, and so on. And the, the driver very obediently drove us through these sections. And as we drove through, we could see, and the cab driver, himself, was telling my father, quite innocently, he said, boy, they really did the job well during the night. And we just saw store after store with the glass literally broken and zillions of pieces glistening on the sidewalks.
And that's where the-- in history, then that, that's where the name, 'Kristallnacht' or 'Crystal Night,' originated because you could see these big pieces of glass, from all the show windows and, and, and appurtenances of these big stores, in millions of pieces on the sidewalk. And the stores looked totally plundered. I mean, you could-- even from the-- from the seat of a cab, you could see that there was nothing left in those stores. All you could see was the interior walls, so to speak. And my dad turned to me, and he said, well. He said, after a few blocks, he said, we've seen enough. He said, at least now I know what our store will look like when we get there. So he told the driver to drive to the street where we lived, the Alte Schonhauser Strasse. The cabbie very dutifully obeyed and turned into the street where we lived, which was not only the site of my dad's store, but many other Jewish-owned stores were on the same street. And the street was just in, in, in, in perfect order. Nothing had been touched. My dad's store was just very nicely there, nothing broken, nothing taken. None of the other stores had been touched. And so my dad couldn't quite understand that. And he-- you know, you really weren't sure just what all would or would not take place. So he said, well, we've been spared. And he told the driver to drive to the apartment house where we lived, which was just two blocks away, a block and a half. And we got out and paid the driver and went up to the-- to the apartment, and then went to the front window to look down on the street. And on the other end of the street, all of a sudden, we could hear the noise, and a huge crowd. And you could hear the blows, and with axes and crowbars and whatnot. And my dad said, oh, my God, here they come. And-- but they were far enough away. And my dad remembered. He said, I remember that in the cash register, in the store, in the bottom, underneath a little drawer there, there is a gold watch, which somebody left me as security, because I, I loaned him some money. And he says, I hate like the dickens for them to get a hold of that watch. It isn't mine. And he said-- what he asked me, would you please quickly run down, go into the store, and grab the watch and come right back. And I said sure. And I-- didn't, didn't mean anything to me. I ran down. And of course, I didn't go through the front door. There was a side door that had a couple of padlocks that you could get into from the side. And I undid those and went into the store, went to the cash register. And he kept no money there-- maybe some copper pennies, but nothing of any consequence-- and opened up the little-- or lifted up the little top drawer. And there, sure enough, was this gold watch. [LAUGHS] I stuck it in my pocket, put everything back, locked the door-- I probably wasn't in the store more than two minutes-- and padlocked the side door and ran back to the apartment. And it wasn't very long after I was back in the apartment, we were looking out the window, and must have been a crowd that I would estimate to be, I don't know, maybe 500, maybe 1,000 people. It was very hard to be sure. I mean, a good crowd. But not just men. There were-- [LAUGHS] what struck me, and I still remember, there were many women there with baby buggies, except that the baby buggies, they, they didn't have any children with them. They used the baby buggies like shopping carts. [LAUGHS] And pretty soon you could hear the blows of the-- my father's windows could be covered with rolled down-- what do you call those, blinds? And of course, they were made out of kind of wood or bamboo or something like that. They would not withstand too much. And they used those axes and crowbars, and you could hear the wood splintering, and pretty soon you could hear the glass shattering and the screaming of the crowd, and, and particularly the high pitched screaming of the women. And I would say in about, oh, 15 minutes, it was all finished. They went on. And my dad's store didn't have-- they even took some lumber and dragged it that was shelving. They [LAUGHS] dragged that away. 
INT: And you were able to see this from the window? WT: Oh, I watched it from our window, yeah. That was like a block and a half away. The street is not that wide. So it gave you a very, very clear bird's eye view.  INT: Did you recognize any people that you knew? WT: No, but they were all from the neighborhood. That didn't mean anything, I'm sure. Many of them, I'm sure, were customers [LAUGHS] of my dad's store, very familiar with it. My dad had been in that location since he came home from World War I. You know, he, he rode on a horse in the German Army for four years in World War I. [LAUGHS]  INT: Do you believe the purpose was to break down the windows or was the purpose to loot the store? WT: Well, the looting of the store was an extra incentive. The purpose of the government instigating that action? I mean, it was all over Germany in the-- you know, on the same night. That didn't happen just in Berlin. That happened all over. And again, what we hadn't realized yet, even at that moment-- and the time of day that would have been might have been like 10:30, 11:00 in the morning. What we didn't realize was that they had burned all the synagogues down. That didn't really come to the fore until a day later, maybe that night, I don't remember exactly. But no, no. The, the willingness of the average German to participate in that was strictly-- first of all, it was sanctioned by the government, so they had nothing to worry about. There is some excitement there in looting, I suppose, the lure of free goodies, [LAUGHS] you know. 
INT: What did you and your family do that night? WT: Well, we went back, and my-- got my mother and my sister, and we went back to our apartment and, and, and slept that night there. But it was then that we heard, on the radio and on the-- in the newspapers, that the German government promulgated a decree that read as follows. The Jews had to restore the businesses that had been destroyed, totally. They had to repair the damage, repair the glass, the wood, the appurtenances, everything, just like it was before. They had to restock the store with merchandise, to the same degree that the store was stocked before, that-- out of their own pocket, and that those who have riot insurance, which my dad carried, the insurance companies had to come forth with the payment for the restitution of that damage. But instead of making the payment to the policyholder, the payment was made to the government. And on top of all that, the German government put out a decree that they were going to levy a special punishment, punitive tax on the Jews for what they did. So my dad had to reach into his own pocket, restore the business, which, by the time-- probably by the time Christmas rolled around, he probably had it restored. I mean, it didn't take long. You know, they were very quick workers. [LAUGHS] And, and had to pay for that, had to buy merchandise and restore the store. And then the German government decided that Jews no longer could engage in commerce, with the world at large or with, with the German population, and that stores that were owned by Jews had to be-- and they invented the term-- 'Aryanized.' And toward that end, a so-called appraiser, expert appraiser, who was named by the party, appeared in the store, and I-- he appeared in my dad's store. And according to what my dad was telling me, he went-- entered into the front door, never went any further than a few yards, turned around 360 degrees, and decided that the business was worth 360 marks or something, which would have been, like, 90 bucks, I think, by-- in the days of conversion, and had to sell it to an Aryan. And that's exactly what he had-- what he had to do. He had no choice. 
INT: What did your family do after that? WT: Well, my father had already-- probably by that time, it had been almost a year since my dad had registered with the-- with the American consulate to immigrate to this-- to the United States. And since I wasn't sure that they were ever going to get permission or visas to emigrate to the United States, I had already applied, through the Habonim youth organization, to get what in those days was called a certificate from the British to go on youth aliyah to Palestine. And the United States immigration laws, in those days, were based on the population mix of the United States, I think, like, in 1921 or '22, which resulted in the immigration quota from those who were born in Germany, Austria. And they combined those two quotas, since Hitler had already annexed Austria in 1936, that 27,000 people were admitted to the United States, annually. And what you did, you went to the American consulate, and you got a number, just like you do at a meat counter, where you grab a number and-- or a bakery. And the number that you had assigned to you then served as the-- as the vehicle for your turn to be considered. And if you wanted to know how long it might take, you would ask them, well, what number are you working on now? And then you looked at your own number, and knowing that 27,000 a year was the limit, you could figure out roughly how long it would take for your number to come up. And just by providence of the Lord, I guess, our number came up toward the very end of 1938. And my father then had to go to the American consulate and had to-- they examined-- had an American doctor examine you. And I remember that my father was quizzed as to his state of his health, his family, how many, ages. And, and, and, I remember my father said the consular official, who was very nice, when my dad said, I'd like to get-- you know, how quickly can I get the visa, and why is it that you only admit [LAUGHS] 27,000? That was an obvious question. And he's-- just told him. He says, do you realize how many unemployed Americans we have in the United States? And the unemployment situation in 1938 was still very severe, and the country was just beginning to turn a corner from the Great Depression. So-- but it was not true of the United States alone. The world at large just simply-- all they did was wring their hands and express sympathy, but nobody wanted them. Nobody wanted them. 
INT: When did your family leave Germany? WT: We finally left Germany in 19-- in 1939. I think we left to go to Holland, to Rotterdam, to catch the ship at the very last of February, 1939, and arrived in the United States on the 12th, I believe, of March.  INT: And what happened when you arrived in the United States? WT: Well, when we arrived in the United States, we first were picked up on, on, on, on, on the docks of the ship by my mother's brother, whose name was Martin Leopold, who had come to the United States about six months prior and had a small apartment in New York City. And so that's where we went. And that's where we all bunked, because we obviously [LAUGHS] were very meager of funds and, and needed to conserve every dime we had.  INT: How long did you stay there? WT: Well, my father looked around New York for probably about 10 days and decided that he did not want to stay in a big city like that. He said, I've had all the-- Berlin, at that time, was a city of four million people, New York probably 12 million. And my dad just was all done with big cities, didn't like it. And he decided he would want to have a look at Chicago. But his real eye was on central Illinois, because we had distant cousins who had emigrated to the United States, probably in the 1890s, and who incidentally-- at that time, the first one that came to the States, the first Tikotzki, evidently decided that Tick was a much more easily remembered name than Tikotzki. He changed the name from Tikotzki to Tick. And we went to Chicago, my dad and I, by train. My mother and my sister stayed with my uncle in New York. And my dad and I were in Chicago, I think, one day, and my dad decided that he didn't like Chicago. [LAUGHS] And we took a ride with the Chicago elevated. And at that time, it seemed like the Chicago elevated train gave you a bird's eye view of all the, the backs of all the houses [LAUGHS] in, in Chicago, which is not the prettiest of sights. And my dad didn't like that. And we took a train from Chicago to Decatur and met one of the American cousins. 
INT: And what did your father do in Decatur? WT: Well, we landed in Decatur, and my father then had my mother and my sister join us here. My father decide-- my father had saved and scraped together, I think, something like around $3,000. And even that was illegal under German law. The Germans were so short of foreign currency, that they had put out a decree that, under penalty of death, you could not own any hard currencies, because anything that the Germans imported, they had to pay with hard currency. Nobody wanted to ship anything and sell anything to Germany for, for marks as payment. So you had to use dollars or Swiss francs or, or English pounds. And my dad-- we-- he had cousins living in Copenhagen, Denmark. And they would come visit us, and my-- and they would shop, quote, unquote, in my dad's store, for many, many times, beginning, probably, in 1935 and '36, and never pay for anything and put [LAUGHS] the money in the bank in Copenhagen. And that's how he scraped those few bucks together. And so my dad wanted to invest those in some sort of business, if he could, since he had been in business all his life. But he was already in his early 50s age-wise and didn't know the language. I mean, outside of a few words, he really couldn't speak. And he took a job here in Decatur with the cousin, who operated a chicken produce business, where they actually-- where the farmers brought the chickens, and they would process them and sell them to the food stores. And my father worked there for probably, oh, two years. And he did that only-- and he said he didn't want to go into business without knowing the language, and he didn't want to go into business not knowing anything about American ways of doing business. And so he did that until 1941, when he bought a small business. And even then he couldn't buy it. He had to go with a partner of his and pool their money, so they could afford to buy it. 
INT: And what was the name of this business? WT: That business was Kelly Food Products, which was a small business housed in a kind of a two-car-- two-car garage, size-wise, and they-- was really a hand operation making potato chips.  INT: And what did you do when you arrived here? WT: I went-- well, I had graduated the high school, the Jewish high school in the Grosse Hamburger Strasse, in Germany. And I wanted to go on to college. And here, in Decatur, there's a university, James Milliken University, and I wanted to go there. And I decided that I would go there and try to enroll. The reason I chose that school is because, obviously, it afford-- we could afford that, because I could stay at home. That way-- that way my father wouldn't have to pay any room and board elsewhere. And I went to the registrar and told him that I wanted to enroll. And the registrar said, you cannot enroll without a high school certificate. And I told him that I had a high school certificate, but it was a German one. And he said, oh, no. He said, that won't do. He said you're going to have to get a high school certificate from an American high school. And in my naivete, I figured, well, that would be no problem. All I have to do is go to the high school here, show him my German certificate, and they'll issue me one. So I went to the high school [LAUGHS] told them that I wanted a high school certificate on the basis of my German high school certificate, which I had with me. And the-- principal of the high school just laughed at me, and he said, yeah, I can't do that. He says, you got to enroll in the high school here. Now, he said, if you tell me that you have had all these courses and know all this, we'll let you take tests as you go and issue you credit. And if you amass, I think, it was 360 credits that it takes to graduate, we'll issue you a, a high school diploma. So I enrolled in a high school. And I remember being very disappointed and very mad at the guy. But in reality, I think he did me a big favor, because [LAUGHS] my language skills and English were really pretty wanting, and I would have probably had an awful time in college at that point. So I went to high school, here, for one year. And along the way, they gave me tests in various subjects. And after one year, they gave me a certificate. 
INT: And what did you do after high school and college? WT: And then, when I went to college, then, of course, the war broke out and after Pearl Harbor. And the draft-- I had to register with the draft board, even though I wasn't a citizen yet. It took-- takes five years to become a citizen, and we got here in 1939, so it would have taken at least until 1944 for us to become citizens. But I found out that, you know, you had to-- you didn't have to be a citizen to be drafted into the-- into the Army. And I wouldn't-- I didn't objective being drafted anyway, although I hated to disrupt my studies. So I showed up at the draft board. And lo and behold, the same high school principal was also the head of [LAUGHS] the draft board. And by that time, I was already at Milliken. And he kind of smiled at me, and he said, well, he said, you at Milliken? And I said, yes. And he said, well, what is your major? And I said my major is chemistry. And he said, oh, well, he said, you know, the country and the war effort is going to need chemists. And he said, I'm not going to draft you. I, I didn't even realize, at the time, that he could do that, but that was in his province and in his power. I won't draft you until you get your degree, provided that you make it in three years instead of four. He says, I will not keep you out for four years. [LAUGHS] So he gave me a deferment. And he said, I want you to come here, every semester, and show me your report card and make sure you-- I want to make sure you passed. If you don't pass, that's it. You're in. And as a consequence, every summer, I went to summer school. In fact, I spent one summer at Columbia University in New York, because I needed some subjects that I couldn't get here in Decatur during the summer. And the reason I went to New York is because I had an aunt, one of my dad's sisters, Hedwig Reises, lived in the Bronx, in New York, and I could room and board with her free. And, therefore, it was reasonable for me to go to school there. And I graduated in three years, all right. And the day of my last class, my mother greeted me at the door saying, here's your induction. [LAUGHS] And, and so I didn't even go to my own college graduation. My mother went and picked up my certificate. I was already gone. 
INT: And could you describe your military experience? WT: Well, I was drafted into the Army. And some-- somebody in my induction at Fort Sheridan, in Chicago, asked me what my major was in college, and I told him that it was chemistry. And he said, oh, he said, good. He says, we need you in chemical warfare. And I really had no idea what chemical warfare was. I thought maybe I'd be-- I'd wind up in some lab, or maybe even in a research lab. It sounded kind of exciting. And I found out that it really has nothing to do with knowledge of chemistry, because all you have-- what they train you in is in how to detoxify contaminated areas and uniforms and ground that might have had mustard gas or lewisite or anything like that on there. But the training did not presume any knowledge of chemistry whatsoever.  INT: This is tape number four. You were speaking about your military experience. But there is one thing I wanted to ask you about. The ship that you left on from Germany, do you recall the name of the ship? WT: Yes, it was a ship owned by the Holland America line called the From what I understand, it was already then an old ship and is no longer being used. But there is a new one now out, by that same name, that the Holland America line runs.  INT: And were you able to take your belongings with you? WT: We were able to take some things. We were able to take what is called a short container or liftvan, which arrived probably three months later, after we came to the States. And, and because of the very limited space involved in it, really, my father decided to bring things that were most dear to him. And that were his books, some of the documents that he wanted to save, pictures of family, and certain objects, particularly Jewish Judaica, and things of that nature. My mother had a lot of things, but she left all that with the relatives that were left behind. 
INT: Now, speaking again about your American military experience, what were your primary duties once you went through basic training and-- WT: Well, I was in basic training and then was assigned to what they call a chemical mortar battalion, which is a 4.2 mortar, which the reason they call it a chemical mortar is because it was designed to fire, in the main, white sulfurous shells, and so on and so forth. And we trained with that. But all of a sudden, out of nowhere, I was-- got orders to be yanked out and to report to a another camp, Camp Ritchie in Maryland. And really, at that time, I had absolutely no idea why, what, how. In fact, people kept asking me in my old unit, you know, why? Why are you being transferred out? And why are you're now going to Maryland? You know, who's pulling strings for you? [LAUGHS] And, of course, I hadn't the faintest idea. But I took the train to Maryland and found myself in this very small camp that was half officers and half enlisted men, all of which spoke a foreign language. In fact, the camp was loaded with, what I couldn't, at the time, understand, and only learned later why, people running around in German uniforms and Japanese uniforms and Russian uniforms. And, [LAUGHS] and, and soon found out that it was a training camp for military intelligence. And you went through a certain class there. They named the classes like the 17th class, the 18th class, and so on and so forth. And after training, then, you know, you-- they assigned you overseas. 
INT: What-- WT: But there were many Orientals, for instance, in the camp, also, that spoke Chinese, Japanese, and so on.  INT: What was the name of your class? WT: I think I was like the 17th or 18th class. I don't remember exactly.  INT: And what did you do from there? WT: Then I was shipped overseas and assigned to the Seventh Army under General Patch. And they had an interrogation center housed in an old German kaserne in Weinheim, not far from Heidelberg, in Germany, where prisoners of particular rank were questioned and, and interrogated on the orders of Washington, I think.  INT: And what was your responsibility? WT: Well, you were assigned a prisoner and a specific list of questions. You-- it wouldn't necessarily be a German soldier or-- and although we had many German commanders and generals, but they could be industrialists, or they could be professors at the research institutions of Germany, who had information that, that the United States government wanted. And they would prepare a list of questions that this particular person was supposed to answer. Not only did you have to elicit the information from them, through interrogation, but you had to also judge whether that information was, in your best estimate, credible and, secondly, whether you thought that the person answering the questions thought they were telling the truth but really didn't know the full story. So it was judged in two ways for accuracy.  INT: Do you-- WT: And it had to be corroborated by others. 
INT: Do you recall the names of any of the people that you interrogated? WT: Well, I interrogated, for instance, among others, a professor, who was engaged in German research for weapons production and new weapons and so on and so forth. And I interrogated a German general, who was in charge of what was called the National Socialist Ideological Order. And that is that every German company and every German regiment had one or two people assigned to them who made sure that, ideologically, everybody in that unit thought correctly, [LAUGHS] according to the party line. And they also did classes in education of National Socialist ideology. And they wanted to also make very sure that there were no anti-Nazi or anti-National Socialist ideologues running around spreading their ideas.  INT: Do you recall the name of the industrialist and of the general? WT: The industrialist was a professor by name of [? Fischer. ?] And the German general's name was Neumann.  INT: Could you spell that name? WT: I think that name was spelled N-E-U-M-A-N-N.  INT: Were there other people that you saw in the interrogation unit that-- WT: Oh, we had many rather famous people. For instance, in the Seventh Army interrogation center had the former Hungarian prime ministers, who had served at the-- at the behest of Hitler. Imrédy was one of them. And the regent of Hungary, Admiral Horthy, was also one of the guests [LAUGHS] that we had. And then we had one person. You could always tell when they had somebody of, of-- they had a guy that was-- was nicknamed the 'Butcher of Warsaw.' His name was Meisinger. And whenever he ran to the-- I didn't interrogate him, but you always could tell when-- who he was and where he was walking simply because they wouldn't allow him to have any shoelaces or suspenders or a belt. And he was holding his pants up, because they were afraid he would use these to commit suicide. 
INT: You were quite young, at that point, even then. Do you remember what you were thinking, having a responsibility like this. WT: Well, by that time, you see the whole horror of what really took place. Even at the time of my leaving, even though we knew things were really getting very bad and that anybody who couldn't make it out might possibly pay for it with their life, but not in the way that it unfolded. They might not get any food. They might not have any way to earn a living. They might become homeless, you know, beggars or, or, or outcasts. The Holocaust and the, the machinery for, for this, for, for what happened was still almost unthinkable. Maybe it was lurking over the horizon, but it was almost unthinkable. But when I got back and in, in the service, then by that time, that whole story had unfolded. And therefore, you know, we used to run into so many, many hundreds of people that were the DPs, the Displaced Persons. I mean, they, they ran around by the hundreds trying to find their way along. And, and, and then some of the scenes were unbelievable.  INT: When you be-- when you became part of the Seventh Army Interrogation unit, did you know of the-- the full story of the Holocaust at that point? WT: Perhaps not the entire picture, you know? There were still probably names that I hadn't heard of. I don't know whether, if you'd have told me Sobibor, whether I would have ever heard it at that moment or not. But the fact that, that people were, were, were done in by the millions and killed and tortured, yeah, that was already known. Just the places and the methods and, and, and that-- the details that unfolded were not all there yet. Although, Dachau had already been liberated. And of course, Auschwitz which had been liberated. But even then, I'm not so sure they knew just how many people died at Auschwitz. That was almost unimaginable. 
INT: Being Jewish, did that have a-- did that play into the way that you were treated in the US military? WT: I can't say-- No, no, that had no-- I had no problems there at all. Of course, the unit I was in, because they needed German-speaking personnel, or for that matter, we had-- if we needed somebody that spoke Hungarian or Polish or, or Romanian, we all, we-- you know, we had somebody that could do that. But we were all Jewish boys, all had arrived in the United States. The military intelligence was just studded with Jewish boys because of that fact. Now, we had some regular Army people. The colonel in charge of our camp was a regular Army man, who didn't speak German. [LAUGHS] But, but the rest of us were all immigrants.  INT: Did you work with any official or unofficial rescue operations? WT: No. I had to follow assignments that we had. And and now, another thing that we were called upon is to be, for instance, interpreters at court martials, when there was a court martial. Maybe, an American soldier had committed some sort of crime and was before a court martial that involved German witnesses. Then, obviously, they needed an interpreter. And I would, certain, I would do that.  INT: Where were you at when the war ended? WT: When the war ended, I was in Bad Hamburg at the center, or the central station of the-- of, of military intelligence, which reported to the headquarters in Frankfurt, where Eisenhower was the supreme commander. 
INT: And what happened to you after the war? WT: Well, I left the war in June or July-- I can't think of it right now-- 1946. And even though they tried to get us to stay, because they had lots of work to do, we all wanted to get home and back to civilian life. And I was discharged at Fort Dix, New Jersey and came home. Joined my dad in his business.  INT: And then what happened to you after that. WT: Well, then I had met my wife. When I was at camp Ritchie, I was not too far from Baltimore. And my wife was born and raised in Baltimore. And I used to go on weekends and date her. And after the war, in '46, I came home. But it took me until 1950 [LAUGHS] before we got married.  INT: What is her name? WT: Her name is phone Frona, F-R-O-N-A. And her maiden name is Goldman.  INT: And when did you get married? WT: We got married in September of 1950.  INT: And where did you live after you got married? WT: We lived in Decatur. We lived in a small apartment for the first three years, until my oldest son got to be about, I think, two years old or so on. And then we had to do something. We were in very small quarters. And we decided to build a house.  INT: What are the names of your children and how-- when were they born? WT: My children, the oldest one's name is Marvin, who was born in 1955. And my daughter is the next oldest, who was born in '57. 
INT: What is her name? WT: Her name is Hedy, H-E-D-Y. She was named after my mother, whose first name was Hedwig. And my youngest son, the third child we have, whose name is David, was born in 1958, I believe. Don't hold me to that. My wife always chides me for not remembering those dates.  INT: Did you belong to a synagogue in Decatur? WT: I belong to the synagogue, here, in Decatur, the temple, Temple B'nai Abraham. This was a small Jewish community, and we have one temple. In fact, I, some years ago, served as its president for two years.  INT: Have you ever returned to Germany since the war? WT: Yes, I have. I returned in 1958, for the first time, with my wife, and went to Berlin and engaged a lawyer, because my mother left a piece of land over there, which, however, was in-- was then East Germany. And therefore, there was-- it lay beyond any reach of being able to do something about it. And then we returned, again, on a trip. That would have been probably in 19-- in the early 1960s. And I went back to where I was stationed in the service and showed my wife where I was stationed. And then went back, again, with my children in 19-- [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] would have been 1992, I believe. And that was when my son got married to a girl who was born and raised in Copenhagen, Denmark. And the wedding was in the synagogue in, in Denmark, in Copenhagen. And my sister and her husband and her kids and spouses and my kids and their spouses, we all took two vans and traveled through Germany. And I showed my kids where we lived in Berlin, where I went to school, where I went to temple, and then drove to southern Germany to the town where my mother was born and showed them where she originated. 
INT: Did your family own property in Germany other than what your, your grandmother had, did you say? WT: No, my mother owns some land and that my-- that was acquired in 1929, near a lake, about an hour and a half train ride from Berlin. My dad was going to build a summer home there. But when Hitler came to power, he abandoned those plans.  INT: Did your father own property in Berlin? WT: No, other than the business.  INT: Is the business still standing? Is that building? WT: No, no, no. That building got bombed away. And there is now nothing there but some grass, some wild grass growing.  INT: How has living in Germany and being affected by the Holocaust changed your life? WT: Well, first of all, I'm among the lucky ones that not only got out and, and, and didn't have to go through the worst of it. You know, those who survived the camps obviously had to endure things that are beyond my imagination, even though I've heard lots and read lots about it. I don't know. I, I, I have lived so many years now in the United States that I feel like an American. But obviously, you can never escape your childhood and your past entirely.  INT: Why did you-- WT: That stays with you.  INT: Why did you want to do this interview? WT: I think this interview needs to be done for the same reason that I go into the schools, here, in Decatur, when they call me, and I do that to talk to the children and tell them about the Holocaust. If we say 'never again,' you can't ever be sure of that. But you've got to try. 
INT: Is there anything else that you would like to say that was not mentioned during this interview? WT: Well, I know there are lots of things that could go on for hours and hours. But I think you got the gist of it. I have some things that you might want to see in the way of some documents. Really, my, my story with the Holocaust, personally, did not end with my coming to the States. I had an aunt, my mother's sister, who was a-- her name was Selma Leopold. She never got married. She was a beautiful lady, one of my favorites, whom we tried to save and tried to get her out after we had already arrived here. And we tried to get her an American visa. We tried to get her into Cuba. And all these attempts-- I have lots of correspondence on that-- failed. She finally wired us that she was being-- or, I rather have a message from the Red Cross, which was the last communication from her, saying that she has to leave and go east, been commanded to go east. And we all know what that meant. And it was only, I think, five years ago that I found out from the German government, who kept meticulous lists of those things, that she did-- just did not survive the trip to the concentration camp. They used to lock them into cattle cars like sardines, without food or water. And if you weren't among the strongest, physically, many of them didn't make it. And it might have been a blessing that she didn't. 
INT: In closing, is there any last message that you would like to leave on this interview tape? WT: Well, I hope that future generations, not just Jewish generations, but future generations period will [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] find that it's easy for people, under the right circumstances, to turn into animals. And that you can slip into that mode. All of us are, are, are capable, I think, of doing that unless you have certain safeguards that hold you there-- religious teaching, ethics, democratic ideals, sanctity of human life. They're very fragile, but without those, that's what happened. And we have witnessed things similar to that in Cambodia, Bangladesh, Africa.  INT: This concludes the interview with Walter Tick. Thank you very much. WT: You're welcome. The photograph on the left is of my maternal grandmother. Her name was Lena. Her maiden name was [? Laufer. ?] She was born in Worms, Germany. And the picture on the right is my mother's father. His name was Benjamin [? Joseph ?] Leopold. They lived in Honnef in southern Germany. And I would believe that that's where these pictures were taken. But I can't be sure. That photo, both photos, came into my possession from my mother. This is a photograph of my father's mother, my grandmother, whose name was Sarah Tikotzki. Her maiden name was [? Goldsman. ?] And it's one of the pictures that we brought with us from Germany. This picture was taken, to my best knowledge, in the early 1930s. And she was in Bad Kissingen, I know, in Germany, where this photo was taken, because this is from a postcard that had that Bad Kissingen on it. This photograph is of my grandfather, Sholem Tikotzki. I cannot say exactly where the picture was taken or when. It was one of those we brought with us from Germany. He died in 1920, some two years before I was born. This is a picture of my mother, whose name was Hedwig. And her maiden name was Leopold. This picture is a more recent one than the others. It was taken in the United States. My mother died in 1950. I would suggest that this picture was taken probably in 1948 or near there. This is a picture of my father. It was taken in the United States. My father died in 1966. I would suggest that this picture was taken in the early 1960s and is an enlargement of a snapshot taken by one of my cousins, who was a very good photographer. This is a picture taken in 1936 of my sister and myself, my sister Margot, who now is married. And her married name is Hersh, and lives in Glencoe, Illinois.
This picture is the last class picture taken of the Grosse Hamburger Strasse school before graduation. I am the one in the third row, fifth from the left, leaning slightly forward. This picture is of my dad's store as it looked prior to its destruction in the Kristallnacht. This picture is of my Aunt Selma Leopold, my mother's sister, who was left behind and we tried to rescue, without success, and who was later on deported east, toward the concentration camp in Poland and did not survive. This document is the last communication we received from my Aunt Selma. It is by way of the Red Cross and addressed to my mother and father. And her message, which is near the bottom portion of this document, reads, 'My dear ones, I am well before my trip to the east. I wish you all the best and hope you are well.' And then she says, 'Moritz and Hedwig are going along with me.' Those were other cousins that were also deported at the same time. And that was the last we heard. This is my last German passport that I was-- issued to me before my departure from Germany to the United States. It shows the infamous red J, which branded you as a Jew for any official to see before even going further into the passport. This is the inside page of that same passport, showing my picture, at the time of March 1939, that I used to travel from Germany to the United States. This picture shows a group of people, with myself in the middle, who were members of my intelligence unit while I served in the US Army. This is a war memento, who this individual is Professor Willy Messerschmitt, the famous designer of the Messerschmitt airplanes that were used by the Germans. And it's his ID card. And on the lower right, you see it is signed by Dr. Ley, who was one of Hitler's cabinet ministers. This is the front cover of the ID card of Professor Messerschmitt that you saw in the previous picture, the front cover. This is a war memento of one of the interrogees, a Karl Weckerlein, whose personal ID you see here. He was a member of the bodyguard for Hitler. And his ID is signed, on the bottom right, by Heinrich Himmler, the infamous chief of the SS. This picture was taken in 1989, at the wedding of my son David, in Copenhagen, Denmark. Standing, from left to right, is my daughter, Hedy, my wife, Frona, me, my oldest son, Marvin, and his wife, Barbara. And seated are the bride and groom, my son, David, and his new bride, Laina. This picture was taken in 1995 and shows my oldest son Marvin's children. The girl's name is Adriane Tick. And the boy's name is Ira Tick. This is a picture taken in 1997 and shows my son David's three children, from left, his daughter, Madeleine, in the center, the newest arrival, Joshua, and on the right, his other son, Alexander. This is my wife, Frona, who's married-- maiden name is [? Goldman. ?] She was born and raised in Baltimore, Maryland. And we were married on September 24, 1950. FRONA TICK: Yes. 
INT: Is there anything that you would like to add to this tape? FRONA TICK: Yes. I'm very, very happy that you are doing this, because I think it's very necessary for this sort of thing to be done for posterity. And I'm glad to be part of it. And we thank you.  INT: Thank you very much.