INT: Today is August 12, 1997. We're interviewing Fritz Schnaittacher I'm Mark Gross. We're in Floral Park, New York, USA. The interview will be conducted in English. It's August 12, 1997. We're interviewing Fritz Schnaittacher. I'm Mark Gross. We're in Floral Park, New York. And the interview will be conducted in English. Could I have your name, please? FS: My name is Fritz Schnaittacher.  INT: Could you spell it? FS: S-C-H-N-A-I-T-T-A-C-H-E-R.  INT: And spell your first name for me, please. FS: F-R-I-T-Z.  INT: And your name at birth? FS: My name at birth was Martin Schnaittacher. And my mother didn't like Martin. And so it became Fritz.  INT: Would you spell Martin for me? FS: M-A-R-T-I-N.  INT: Your date of birth? FS: July 9, 1913.  INT: And your place of birth? FS: My place of birth was a small village of about a population of 1,100 by the name of Forth, F-O-R-T-H.  INT: And in what country was that? FS: That was in Franconia, in Mittelfranken of Germany, in the vicinity of Nuremberg.  INT: And what is your age? FS: My age is 84.  INT: And your parents' names? FS: My first name?  INT: Your your-- parents. FS: My parents' name was Salomon and Frieda Schnaittacher.  INT: Would you spell their first names for me, please? FS: Salomon-- S-A-L-O-M-O-N, and Frieda, F-R-I-E-D-A.  INT: And how many brothers and sisters did you have? FS: I had one brother by the name of Michael, Mikha'el, who died in 1972. 
INT: And would you spell his first name for me, please? FS: M-I-C-H-A-E-L.  INT: I'd like to get a picture of the-- the time, the early time in Germany when you were a young-- young boy. Could you-- could you tell me about your house? What-- could you describe your house to me? FS: Yes, indeed-- my house, I considered at that time to be a rather large house. It had two stories. In the lower left of the house was a textile, a piece goods store. The right half of the house, there was a living room and a chamber. And then towards the back of the house on the right-hand side, there was a kitchen. And in the hallway, because after all, we didn't have running water, there was a large vat which we kept filled by filling it every day, ever so often, from a non-running well by a hand-held bucket.  INT: And did you say it was-- it was filled from a well? FS: It was filled from a well. The well was immediately to the right of my house. And we had a bucket attached to a long staff with which we reached the well, and thereby were filling pots and carrying devices in order to fill the big vat in the-- in the house.  INT: What-- what about the upstairs of the house? FS: The upstairs of the house consisted of three bedrooms and then a large, beautiful room for visitors, living room for visitors, and then a kitchen that theoretically was to be used on Pesach holidays. 
INT: Did you-- did your father work in the house? FS: No, he didn't work in the house. My father, [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] whom I got to know only for a very brief period of time because he got into the German army for World War I in 1914, got out in 1918, and died, to some degree as a result of World War I, in 1919, so I really had gotten to know him only for a few months. My father, when he came back from the war, together with his brothers, pursued the purchase and sale of hops. Hops was an important product in the area. And Nuremberg had the largest hop market in the world, obviously for the brewing of beer. And my mother and my aunts, [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] spinster sisters of my father's, they took care of the textile store.  INT: Where-- where was the textile? FS: It was on the ground floor in the left half of the house. And later on, after my father had died and some of my uncles, my mother was pursuing also the purchase of textiles from places in Nuremberg, where we bought at wholesale prices, in order to then really canvas the neighboring villages in order to sell from house to house. It rather, it was a comfortable but relatively primitive way of existence.  INT: Was your mother able to-- to support the family doing this? FS: She-- largely she did. But then when my brother had gone to school and I went to school after my father had died, and we went to school in Nuremberg, living in a-- in a boarding house, then to the best of my recollection, our uncle from America supported some of these expenses. But it always-- that I do remember distinctly. From then on, it was my deep desire to become self-supporting and support my mother, not that my uncle at any time would show any ill feeling by virtue of the fact that he had to support us. 
INT: What was your uncle's name? FS: Pardon?  INT: What was your uncle's name? FS: My uncle's name was Herman. And he came to America in 1900. And Uncle Herman founded a business for the manufacture-- being a bachelor-- for the manufacture of sanitary napkins. And then he developed a unique idea for nursing brassieres. And then he went into partnership with one other man in order to form a company by the name of Acme Cotton Products, which manufactured absorbent cotton bandages, ultimately adhesive tape and Band-Aids and a large variety of products. And that's the company that I ultimately joined in around 1935, '36, where I started working in the factory and ultimately-- ultimately became president of the company.  INT: Let's go-- let's go back to-- to your boyhood in-- FS: In the village.  INT: --in-- in the village, yes. Tell me about about-- about the school with-- FS: Right. At the beginning, when I started going to school, we had yet large enough a Jewish community so we had a Jewish teacher. We were maybe seven or eight pupils, one teacher, and one classroom. It didn't last too long. It lasted for, I believe, 2 and 1/2 years. And then the community could-- the Jewish community could no longer afford the teacher. And so we were being transferred to the government school, which was the Protestant school. We also had a Catholic school in the village. And the Protestant school where we went, and which accepted us kids, Jewish kids, had two classrooms, each one with a-- an attendance of maybe 25 pupils. [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] It created a separation at the beginning when we went to Jewish school as separate from the government school. Did we notice at that time antisemitism? I'm inclined to say, no, we didn't. But yet, we were ever more aware of it because of the feelings within the family and the fears within the family. It was during those years that the only secretary of state who had any-- who had been Jewish within the German government was killed by the so-called Feme, a-- an organization designed to commit acts of atrocities and killings. 
INT: What was his name? FS: Walther Rathenau-- R-A-T-H-E-N-A-U.  INT: How-- how old were you when you went into the-- when you went into the Protestant school? FS: How old? I was eight and a half years old. And I remained there until I was 11, so for 2 and 1/2 years. And then because it was a village school, and as I had indicated, with lot-- lots of students and relatively little teaching assistance or supervision, I stayed one year longer than would have been necessary in order to transfer from the village school to high schools in Nuremberg. And I first, which is interesting, I had first applied to be transferred to the so-called realschule. But there was one teacher in that school, coincidentally right next to the famous courthouse, who had been a most active antisemite. And so the director of our boardinghouse prevailed upon me to transfer to the reform gymnasium. And he had quite a number of meetings with the principal of the school there to make sure that we would not be subjected to the vicious antisemitism which already existed. Then there, I started to study English and French. And then after three years, I was transferred to the so-called handelsschule, which is a commercial high school, where in addition to foreign languages, I studied bookkeeping, commercial English, and a large variety of other subjects.  INT: When you were-- you were back in-- in Forth as a-- as a young boy, how did you celebrate the Jewish holidays? FS: My family and the other few Jewish families in those days were able to make minyan within the-- the synagogue that had existed for over 100 years. There had been seven or eight Jewish families. And all the families on the high holidays went to the synagogue. One of my aunts didn't. She was a unique homebody, she would never-- she would never leave the house. But my mother, who loved to sing, would not miss a day of the high holidays within the synagogue. 
INT: Did you-- did you get together for-- did the family get together frequently? FS: For?  INT: For to celebrate in-- in the home? FS: Oh, yes. Even after I lived in Nuremberg in the boarding house, I would come home for the high holidays to be with my mother and my aunts-- my father was dead-- occasionally my uncles, as long as they were alive. I had been fearful that every four years, one of-- first, my father and two uncles in succession died within the span of every four years.  INT: Did you-- did you have friends when you-- when you were in Forth? FS: I-- yes, I had, of course, the few Jewish kids, cousins of mine, and a second cousin whose name was also Schnaittacher. And then there were some non-Jewish kids with whom we had become friends and with whom we played soccer, and particularly after an uncle of-- after the uncle of mine from America paid his first visit to Germany in 1922 or so, and he brought the first soccer ball for the village.  INT: Did you get to play soccer very frequently? FS: In the afternoon, yes, we played soccer quite frequently.  INT: What else did you do after school? FS: One of the activities, but this didn't happen too often, for example, in anticipation of Pesach, we went out into the woods in order to collect small pieces of wood in order to make a fire to kashen the iron pots and pans to make them kosher for Pesach. [PAUSES FOR 6 SECONDS] Other than that, it was family life, and as I mentioned, playing soccer with friends. There were no movies. And only in the later years, we had the first radio that we put-- that my older brother and I put together. 
INT: Were-- did your mother have-- see other friends in addition to her sisters and her family? FS: Well, my mother was a very busy woman because of the store, driving out horse and buggy into the surrounding villages, where she would go from house to house in order to sell our wherewithal, our textiles. And it was primarily the sale of piece goods in those days, very few finished goods. During the last year on one of these-- on several of these occasions, she became the victim of vicious antisemitic attacks by a minister of the peasant village of [GERMAN], who would follow her and would make it a point to accuse her that she would take the money out of the villages so that he couldn't collect money for the construction of his church. [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] Well, fortunately, that didn't last too long. Because towards the end of the-- of 1933, my mother could no longer endure, nor my aunts and-- and uncle would no longer endure life in the village. [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] It was nothing unusual for Nazis to shatter the windows of Jewish homes, and in a number of instances, to actually shoot into the bedrooms of Jewish families and to cut the telephone wire. So it became an unbearable situation. And nevertheless, I could not convince my mother to come on a permanent basis to America, but only on a visitor's visa. And I'm really getting ahead of myself.  INT: Right. The-- when did-- when did she first encounter the-- the minister who was antisemitic? What year was that? FS: That was already in 1933. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] Until the-- [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] until March of 1933, with one exception, we did not experience very active antisemitism. Because in our village, there was still a strong, at one time majority, and then strong minority of Social Democrats who fought the Nazis most determinedly. 
INT: When-- when you went to-- to Nuremberg-- FS: Yes.  INT: --did you encounter antisemitism there? FS: Indeed, I did. I-- it was frequently the practice on the part of the boys in the boarding house-- and there could be between 10 and 13 of them-- to go into the moat. Nuremberg is surrounded by a moat. And in certain areas, it is being used as a soccer field. And so we were playing soccer when a gang of Nazi kids stormed upon us to try and beat us up. And I never forget that one guy wearing the hammer and sickle of the Communist youth beat them off. It somehow, it made a very definite impression upon me.  INT: How old were you when this took place? FS: I was 10 and 1/2.  INT: Were you-- were you happy at the-- at the boarding school in Nuremberg? FS: Yes, because we had really a large group of boys coming from-- not only from Germany, there was one from Hungary, two or three from Vienna, one from Poland. And the rest came from a variety of villages around Nuremberg, also kids who wanted to go to better schools. And that was the best opportunity.  INT: Were the-- were the students, there were non-Jewish students there? FS: No, in-- in the-- in the boarding house, there were only Jewish. But of course, the schools that we went to, they were very mixed. And a small percentage of the kids were Jewish. Most of the kids were non-Jewish. [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] If I may at this time, because going to school brought-- reminded me of the incident that happened a good many years later when, as an American soldier, part of my regiment, we approached Bamberg. And I had four prisoners in front of me. And one of them stepped out and came to me and said, lieutenant, I love my wife so much. Couldn't you let me go home? And much more, I think you and I went to school together. So I lifted his helmet. And sure enough, I recognized him at once. We embraced each other. I said, Lurslein, my god, we did. But I can't let you go, and one of these most unusual coincidences that could happen. 
INT: When did you-- when did you know him, when-- what-- how many years did you know him? FS: During the years from 1927 to 1930-- [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] we-- we graduated together. We wore the same cap and the same shoulder band and had a drinking night together, you know? And he was a very decent guy. I remembered him to have been a decent guy.  INT: What was his name? FS: Lurslein, and--  INT: His-- his-- his first name? FS: His first name, I do not remember. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] Coming back to 1933--  INT: We're going to have to-- we're going to have to stop this tape. We're-- we're at the end of the tape. FS: Uh-huh. OK.  INT: Number two, interview with Fritz Schnaittacher. I wanted to ask you how your mother obtained the goods that she sold when-- when-- when she went in the wagon. FS: For many years we had established contacts with a number of wholesalers in Nuremberg. I believe it goes back to the time that my grandfather, my father's father, ran the business, because the business was called [GERMAN] M for Michael Schnaittacher. And that was my grandfather's name. And so we had many well-established contacts from whom we would purchase the goods that we sold.  INT: How many employees did-- did you have there at the-- FS: We didn't have any employees other than the aunts, my mother, and later on in the years when bookkeeping became a little more sophisticated, a niece helped my mother on weekends. 
INT: I want to go back to the-- to the boarding school. Did you-- did you have a lot of close friends there at the boarding school? FS: I had a number of good friends. I wouldn't call the friendships intimate with one possible exception. It so happens a young man who was one year younger than I am, who actually had come from the town of Schnaittach. He was a Schnaittacher by the name of [NON-ENGLISH]. And I met him after the war. He survived the war with his wife in France. He had turned Catholic.  INT: I would like to-- this would be a good time for me to ask you this. Can you-- I'd like to know the origin of your name. FS: The origin of my name is the town of Schnaittach. And we are people who had come from Schnaittach, so we became Schnaittacher. That's the German pronunciation. What does Schnaittach mean? It meant the separation of a piece of land between a count who had the ruling castle in the neighborhood and then the rest of the area. It cut the area apart.  INT: How far back can you-- can you trace your family? FS: I'm inclined to think to about 1729. Those were the years when Jews in Germany had to take on [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] citizen names. Until then, Jews, like my name used to be [? Meyer ?] [? Ben ?] [? Shlomo, ?] Meyer, son of Salomon. And that was the prevailing custom until then, when Jews finally had to take on the regular names. And so you have the frequency of [HEBREW], which is honest, [HEBREW], which is nice, et cetera. And we were the Schnaittachers. 
INT: When-- what year did you graduate from boarding school? FS: I didn't graduate from boarding school. I ceased living there. And I graduated from the commercial high school in 1930. And then I went to work as a-- an apprentice in a firm that manufactured some toys, and other than that, carried wholesale pots and pans and household items. And I learned the commercial practices. And during the last half year of my being there, I was able to travel around, but only in the immediate vicinity, in order to try and sell our products.  INT: Who restricted you to the immediate vicinity? FS: The owners of the business. And I stopped-- if I may take now the opportunity to switch over-- I stopped working there when-- I had indicated that I had worked there until 1933, which became the dramatic and critical year in the history of Germany, in the history of the Jews from Germany, and ultimately all over the world. Why? Because Hitler was appointed by Hindenburg, the president, to become chancellor of Germany on January 30, 1933. And he decided to have himself confirmed by an election on March 6, 1933. It was no longer a democratic election because the meetings of anti-Nazi parties were being suppressed and closed. And so Hitler-- and even then, only with the support of the German nationalists, won the election on March 6, 1933. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] It took only days for us to realize as to the enormous change that was about to befall us. And indeed, when-- as my custom was that every weekend I would come home in order to spend the weekend from Saturday afternoon on with my mother and the family-- when we had sat down in order to enjoy a cup of coffee, then suddenly-- suddenly there was a hard, cold knock on the door. And as we asked for the person to come in, there was the gendarme, one of two gendarmes of our village, who ordered me to follow him to the police station. It was one of the, probably, most painful moments of my life. Once he had taken me to the police station, he said, in very brief and cold terms, Herr Schnaittacher, you are under arrest. After I had recovered, I said, can I called my mother? And that's the saddest point, because I had to tell my mother your son is under arrest. She screamed and ran out to the police station and said, is that what you can do to a war widow? Well, it didn't do any good. And when I asked the gendarme what I was arrested for, he asked me whether I had any arms on me.
I said I have a little knife. He said, you better give it to me so it couldn't be held against you. But he, indeed, did not know what I was being arrested for. The next train, about an hour later, he-- under his supervision, I was taken by train to the town of [GERMAN], the county seat. And there were one or two people at the station who made this motion, which meant you are under arrest. And I was delivered to the prison, and the warden took possession of me and delivered me to the cell which I was being assigned to as dusk began to settle. And there were two people, each one at least double the age of myself. I was short of 20, 19 and 3/4. And they greeted me in a very friendly fashion. One was a Communist and the other one was a Socialist. And the cell consisted of a wooden plank on which we slept, a-- a pot, which was supposed to be used only in emergencies, and pitchers with water for drinking or washing. And then we received some sort of a mattress and a blanket every night. And during, I think, the first or second morning as the warden opened the cell, I jumped to attention and said I want to respectfully report that I have been bitten by what do you call it? [GERMAN], bedbugs. He said, impossible. These mattresses and everything else were cleaned six months ago. That's the kind of attention that one got. Life in the prison was not-- not painful, so to speak, terribly monotonous, poor food, fearful of what could happen. Dachau, the concentration camp of Dachau, had been founded, and there was always the fear that unless one got out in time, that one could be transferred to the concentration camp. My mother, as soon as I had been arrested, didn't rest for a moment. And she used every possible effort in order to get me out. And coincidentally, a second cousin of mine, also from the village of [GERMAN], was arrested later on the-- the same day. And it wasn't entirely without humor. On the first morning, my cellmates gave me the easiest job. What was the easiest job? To fill the pitchers with water. And there was one faucet in the hallway. And as I turned around, there sat my cousin. And we had never had as friendly a meeting before or after as we had then. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] There was another occasion when we had met in the courtyard where we were given the opportunity to catch fresh air for an hour or so and occasionally saw wood to get some exercise. And there was one young guy who was beating his chaps and his thighs, and he was laughing and happy as never before. And I asked him, what are you laughing about? He said the guy who had arrested me two weekends ago is now in prison, too. He was the mayor of a village where he had been arrested for begging. 
INT: Did they ever tell you why you were arrested? FS: Yes. Good point. I was arrested under the accusation of having been agitating against the National Socialist government, a liaison of illegal anti-Nazi organizations, and knowledge of secret ammunition depots. Well, it never came to a trial. It wasn't true. Prior to the election, yes, I did what I could within a limited scope of speaking my voice against the Nazis, but nothing else. And after Hitler had become chancellor, I stopped everything else because I didn't want to subject my mother to any further suffering. So I was released, to some degree, also because my father had died as a result of World War I and the efforts of my mother. And I and my cousin were released.  INT: What month was that? What was the date of your release? FS: The date of my release was around April the 19th.  INT: And how long had you been there? FS: I had been there for five weeks. And-- but then we were on parole either for six or eight weeks. We had to report to a police station every other day. Regardless of where I might be, I would have to report to the police station. Because of the [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] the hatred in our village, I decided-- and the rumors that had been-- that had been spread-- I decided that it would be in my best and my mother's best interest if I were to leave the job in Nuremberg and the place where I lived in Nuremberg, and move in with an uncle of mine who lived in Munich and who had a very active business in Munich. And so I moved to Munich on May 1, 1933. I emphasize May 1 because I will bring up another May 1 later on. 
INT: When-- when did the antisemitism start, what you described-- that you mentioned? FS: Well, ever more actively after the Nazis had come to power. During the preceding elections, towards the end of 1932, there were several elections during that year. The Nazis started to lose votes, started to lose popularity. And therefore, under the influence of the Nationalists and the Nazis, Hindenburg then, who was an old man, rather feeble, decided to appoint Hitler chancellor in 1900-- in January of 1933.  INT: So the incidents started the year before. FS: The-- true. But the Nazis were losing in strength. And the Socialists and Communists were quite strong. Unfortunately, they failed to create a united front. If that had come about, I don't think Hitler would ever have come into power.  INT: What other-- what incidents occurred in your life, antisemitic incidents, at that period? FS: I once was attacked by a criminal in a neighboring village when I accompanied a group of children who had been vacationing in my village. And he was known to have been a murderer. And he was considered a highly dangerous individual. And so I requested police protection on the way from that village to my village. Ultimately, we didn't pursue the case. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] Other than that, I can't say that I experienced any particular noteworthy incidents. But of course, having been imprisoned-- and it was the most fortunate thing that could have happened to me, because it told me to leave Germany as soon as possible. Unfortunately, I couldn't prevail upon my mother and the rest of my family to follow me then. And indeed, it took until the Kristallnacht of November, 1938 to convince all of them to leave Germany. And unfortunately, two of my uncles, and particularly the uncle with whom I had lived and for whom I had worked in Munich, he was arrested. And I must mention under what circumstances. It was his custom to go to his place of business every morning. And as he did, on the morning after the Kristallnacht, there stood the manager of the business, a man by the name of Hermann who had been my immediate supervisor. And he was my uncle's manager. And he stood there in the uniform of a storm trooper and he said Jews are not allowed here. My uncle turned around, went home, and within an hour he was apprehended by the gestapo and taken to Dachau. He told me the story after he had come to America, which was in 1940. He had to sign over his business before he would be released from captivity in Dachau. And he succeeded first in finding refuge in England. And we got him-- his brother, another uncle of mine, and their families out of England into our apartment in Washington Heights. 
INT: When did you come to America? FS: When did they come to America?  INT: No, you. FS: I came to America in October, November, 1933. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] And [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] my mother came on a visitor's visa from 1934 to '35. And then, because of the fact that her mother, my grandmother, had lived with her, of course, during the time that my mother was in America, my grandmother had moved with one of her sons. But my mother was so conscientious that she could not leave it to them, and she went back and stayed with my grandmother. Then she suffered a horrible nervous breakdown during the Kristallnacht. But she came over in 1939 [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] during the early part of 1939. And her mother followed shortly thereafter.  INT: How did you get out of Germany? FS: How did I get out of Germany? I received a visitor's visa to come to America under the subterfuge to sell German merchandise in America. And so I-- my mother and an uncle of mine accompanied me to Bremen, one of the famous port cities in Germany. And I took one of the two large steamers, namely the Bremen, to come to New York, where I was received by my brother, an aunt, and an uncle of mine.  INT: When did your brother come? FS: He came over in 1929. And the reason for his coming was not political, but rather my uncle, who was a bachelor, as I mentioned earlier, wanted to have one of his kin, next of kin, to join him in his business in order to ultimately take over. 
INT: So what happened then after you after you came here? FS: I [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] worked for a short while in one of my uncle's factories knitting jackets for sanitary napkins. And then another relative of ours came over from Germany in order to found a distillery for cordials. And believe it or not, at the ripe old age of 23, I became their only missionary man selling cordials primarily in Yorkville and in Ridgewood, in areas where Germans who might like these cordials. And of course, also to liquor stores. And there I experienced more latent antisemitism than I had experienced in Germany, where a bartender reached for his ice pick and said, get the hell out of here, you German Jew. And I worked for that company for, I think, two years. And then in 1937, I joined my uncle when the liquor people sold their business to Shanley's, and they surely didn't need me anymore. And then I joined my uncle's business working in the factory in Connecticut, where Acme Cotton Products Company did their business.  INT: We're going to stop because we're at the end of the tape.  INT: This is tape number three, interview with Fritz Schnaittacher. So you went to work for Acme. FS: Right.  INT: And how many years did you work there? FS: Until-- I worked there until I sold the company in 1972. And it is interesting too, and certainly it was of great significance to me in my life from there on and to the happiness of my life, I met a man who had been working for the company since 1925. And ultimately I married his daughter. He ultimately was working for me. He was just the senior salesman. And I met his daughter when she was 14 years old. And I was probably the old man of 26. And after all, I wouldn't look at a 14-year-old girl. But it didn't take so long when I really did look at her. And I came home from a Christmas party, where I had taken another girl. But Dorothy, my future wife, was there as well. And when I came home that night, and my mother opened the door, I said to her, today I think I met the girl I'm going to marry. And about a year and a half later, that's what happened. 
INT: So what year were you married? FS: In 1942. So maybe the years don't jive exactly. But definitely, I married Dottie in 1942. And shortly thereafter, I was drafted. And I went through basic training. And Dorothy followed me from camp to camp until I was flown across. The camps that I had gone to, or that I was being assigned to, were Camp-- Fort-- Fort Dix, New Jersey, which was the reception center. From there I was assigned to basic training in Camp Croft, South Carolina. And after basic training, I was assigned to a camp in Florida, in Stuart-- near Stuart, Florida, which was a radar training center. Yet I wasn't being trained in the signs of radar, but I was being used as a glorified bookkeeper or a statistician. And then in March of 1943, I applied for OCS. And I was assigned to-- [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] to Camp Lee, Virginia for the OCS quartermaster training course. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] After graduating from OCS, and I do have to admit that I was quite nervous when a famous senator from Florida handed out the certificates and I saluted with my left and took the certificate with my right. I was all [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] discombobulated. But I became an officer. And from then on, because of the surplus of second lieutenants that existed, I went to an ordinance training center in-- [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] outside of Los Angeles. It had been used in the past as the internment center for Japanese internees. And then I was being transferred for a depot management course in Oakland, California, and from there to I think it's Fort Washington, near Washington DC, where I took the first course in a related field to military intelligence. [PAUSES FOR 5 SECONDS] And from there I was transferred and had my first assignment as a base censor. We had to censor the mail, and we had to preach to the guys who were being shipped across as to the importance of not really-- not giving away any secrets and the importance of censorship. And one of the rather humorous stories, if I still remember it, was that one of the guys who was being shipped abroad and took censorship very, very seriously, he arranged with his wife who was expecting that when she expected, she should wire him sauerkraut, sauerkraut, sauerkraut. [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] No, sorry-- sauerkraut, sauerkraut, sauerkraut, one with sausage, one without. And that was very effective. And at least one got a laugh and their attention. Well, it didn't take long. I was-- and we sent a letter to the commanding officer that we wanted to get an assignment abroad. And my wife didn't like that very much, but we were reassigned to the military intelligence training center in Camp Ritchie, Maryland. That was, then, really a very important facility, where men were being trained in various aspect-- aspects of combat intelligence. And it fell upon me, also because of the-- the knowledge of German, to be trained as a interrogator of prisoners of war. Our mission was to interrogate prisoners as soon as they came off the line of combat, as soon as our military police or infantry GIs would bring them in. And we would interrogate-- interrogate them while they still suffered under the trauma of combat. [PAUSES FOR 8 SECONDS] Now, I had indicated that they finally did need me abroad. And I was flown over via Africa to Italy, to Naples, where the-- [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] the units were being activated for the invasion into southern France. And that's where I joined a very combat-wise military intelligence unit, primarily that guy, Fred Kaufman, whose name i HAD mentioned before, who had been with the division and now had become a master sergeant, who had been with the division from its mobilization in the States, via Africa, Sicily, Salerno, Venafro, et cetera. 
INT: Which division were you in? FS: And that was the 45th Infantry Division and the 157TH Infantry Regiment. We reported-- we were under the direct command of the S2, S2 being intelligence officer of the regiment.  INT: Do you remember his name? FS: No. [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] I remember the name of our commanding officer, who was Colonel O'Brian, who ultimately became a general during the war in Korea. And while I mention his name, a comical little event comes to my mind. [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] As I indicated, we were flown over in order to participate in the invasion into southern France, which took place on August 15, 1944. And as I saw my first German prisoners, I thought I could tear them to pieces. And ultimately, they became human beings. To be sure enemies, but still they were human beings. And as long as they cooperated, we treated them fairly. That night, the night of the invasion, Colonel O'Brian turned to me, fortunately with my buddy Fritzie on my side, and he said, well, lieutenant, what did you find out? And was-- I was about to elaborate on all of the secrets that I had learned, which would certainly lead to the end of the war in no time, he very coldly turned aside and said, Fritzie, tell me what's new. And so this is how I learned the interrogation of prisoners of war in the field. And it didn't take me long. And I think I became quite effective. We moved fast. We outran in the kitchen. And Fritzie taught me one thing, that along with our specialty, we have to keep body and mind together. And so on the night before we shipped off, he said, lieutenant, you follow me. We'll take our jeep, and you have an interesting story to tell to the guards of the provision dump. And-- because after all, you just came from America, and so you can keep them busy. And while you keep them busy, I slide in and then you follow my whistle, and I'll throw over to you containers of food. Well, so he did. And we carried the food, hopefully chicken, on our jeep. And we couldn't wait until the first rays of sunshine. And what had we gotten? 48 cans of peas. So we learned. And we learned how to keep body and soul together, occasionally under dangerous conditions. We moved fast and moved up to past Grenoble, past-- in the campaign, we liberated Epinal, Montelimar, and ultimately we got stuck in the foothills of the Vosges mountains. And we remained there until, [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] I do believe, until March, when we broke out of this position. And we broke through the Siegfried Line. And there I had one of my most successful interrogations, even though it was on the telephone and I could not even ask questions. But as we are-- our regimental S2 came to me and said, this is over and above the call of duty because there is a lot of fighting going on. But if you're willing to go up, we were-- we received a report from one of our forward companies that they had occupied one of the deep bunkers. And they hear voices, but of course, they can't make them out. And buddy Fritzie and I went up. And it was a noisy night. We arrived at the bunker. And as we-- from the moment on that I picked up the telephone, we received the most important military information that we could have asked to get, such as the outfits that we were faced with, artillery positions, their route of withdrawal, next day's ammunition depot and provision depot and gas depot, and truly information that was of such immediate significance. Now, our battalion commander took very little interest in it. He was interested in mines and artillery positions. But we reported it to the S2 of the regiment, who in turn reported it to the division. And they sent up night fighters. And the following day we broke through. And I do believe that we advanced through the Siegfried Line by over 35 miles, if not kilometers. And Fritzie received the Bronze Star and so did I. And-- 
INT: Who gave you this information that-- that-- that was so important? FS: A master sergeant of one company, who reported this information to a master sergeant of another unit, both units that we were faced with and that we had to overrun.  INT: So these were German master sergeants? FS: Right. Now, at the very end, where they really couldn't give us any more information, I tried to talk to them, but probably fortunately, they didn't hear my voice.  INT: How did you reach them by phone? How did you-- FS: Well, the-- they must've had telephone lines to their various company positions out of the bunker that we had occupied. You see, the men-- our advance unit reached the bunker and went all the way down into the innards of the bunker. There was the telephone. They picked it up. They couldn't make it out. And that's why we were sent up.  INT: Would-- did-- was the conversation going on then, and you listened to it between the two? FS: From the moment, from the moment that I picked up the telephone, and I would repeat it. In order to pinpoint locations, I would repeat it to Fritzie. And so we had precise, accurate information of all the important military data.  INT: Were they aware that you were listening? FS: No.  INT: What was Fritzie's last name? FS: Kaufman. K-A-U-F-M-A-N.  INT: Then-- then what occurred after-- FS: Thereafter? We advanced rapidly. And we saw the-- I forgot which of the German divisions-- burned out vehicles, tanks, et cetera, to the right and left of the route, of their route of withdrawal and our route of advance. 
INT: And what-- when was this? What-- what month and year? FS: That was in March of '45. Now, from then on, [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] it didn't take long for us to cross the Rhine. And we moved [PAUSES FOR 5 SECONDS] to-- we-- we took a town by the name of Aschaffenburg. Aschaffenburg was the first town that was of personal significance to me. Why? Because the uncle with whom I had lived in 1933 had gotten married there in 1923 or '24 to my favorite aunt, [? Ilsa. ?] The town commander, a Major Lambert, who was a stubborn, stubborn [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] guy, who tried to prevent any surrender. And he had several of his officers strung up who had wanted to raise the white flag. I wrote up a leaflet, which is now in the museum in Aschaffenburg. I don't have a copy anymore, but insisting upon their surrender or they will have to pay the bitter lesson of resistance. And the following day, and it was, I think, the only day where we were on the radio. We were mentioned on the radio that Lieutenant Fritz Schnaittacher-- and they gave Kaufman also a rank of lieutenant, which he didn't have yet-- accepted the surrender of the town of Aschaffenburg under the command of Colonel O'Brian. And the surrender was given by Major Lambert. Interestingly enough, once he had surrendered, he was the most cooperative guy you would want to have. And he said there is a unit that may not know yet that we have surrendered. And it doesn't make any sense to sacrifice any more lives. He said, here, put me on the front of your jeep. And the three of us, Fritzie and I, we ride out to that unit. And when we got there, he ordered the unit there to surrender. They had one American prisoner, whom we gave a rifle. And we told him, march them back to the PW cage. 
INT: When was this? What-- what month? FS: And that was in early April, 1945. From then on, we moved very quickly. And I had indicated before, our approach to the town of Bamberg, a beautiful old town with a magnificent cathedral-- and in this location, I must mention another incident. [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] The day after this incident with the classmate of mine, the-- all resistance had collapsed. We took Bamberg. And we had some 500 or 600 prisoners in a churchyard, guarded by our MPs. They were of no mind to offer any resistance. And there was no sense in interrogating them because we had more information than they did. But as I just wanted to walk around and hear their voices, and one man stepped up to me and said, Lieutenant, I come from a village not far from here. Again, couldn't you let me go home? I said, why? Where do you come from? He said, I come from Furth. I said, you come from Furth? My-- I didn't say 'my village.' But after all, I knew everybody and I didn't recognize him. So I said, how come that you lived in Furth? He said, I married a girl from Furth. Whom did you marry? [? Gunta ?] [? Haas. ?] Oh, [? Gunta ?] [? Haas? ?] She lived in house number 35. And his pupils grew wider and wider. And I said, two houses from the firehouse on the left and three houses from the Protestant minster's house. He said, if American intelligence has all this information, how can we win the war? So now you know why. Well, on we moved. And it wasn't long thereafter, that we took the town of Schnaittach. In-between, by the way, this being April, 1945, we had a sad day when Roosevelt died. We moved on to Schnaittach. And we received small arms fire and artillery fire. And we took Schnaittach. And of course, I, as soon as I possibly could, I went for a half an hour to the-- to the cemetery where my father was buried. 
INT: We have to stop. We're at the end of the tape. FS: OK.  INT: Interview with Fritz Schnaittacher. So you were telling me that you-- that you went to the-- to the village of Schnaittach. FS: To the village of Schnaittach where my father is buried. And I spent a few thoughtful moments there. And somehow a native of Schnaittach saw me-- not that he knew me. But he was wondering what an American soldier could be doing at the Jewish cemetery. And he-- I guess so much as asked me-- and he said-- I-- I said, my name is Schnaittacher. That little story traveled to my village. Unfortunately, my outfit did not take village-- the village of Forth. That was taken by a sister unit. We moved on. We didn't remain in Schnaittach for any length of time. And we moved on rather speedily. And we took Nuremberg-- Nuremberg, in the town where I had gone to school for six years; Nuremberg, the town where I had worked for three years. And of course, I knew Nuremberg intimately well and was able of-- to some extent, as far as guiding the advance of my regiment. [PAUSES FOR 5 SECONDS] Nuremberg had suffered enormously. Nuremberg had been a beautiful, old city with a castle dating back to the 11th century, with a moat that surrounded the town-- and with walls. Much has been reconstructed. And indeed, I was there recently, but I don't want to jump ahead. I had the opportunity of interrogating the commander of the resisting forces in Nuremberg. But again, we moved fast, and there was little he could tell us. He became a prisoner. We moved on. We crossed the Danube. And then on April the 29th, we reached Dachau, which, [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] in my opinion, was one of the most glorious days that I was able to participate in with my regiment in the liberation of this camp of atrocities. As we approached the camp, [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] there were the infamous freight cars filled with corpses. In a few instances, some of the prisoners had been able to climb over. But as they came out, they would be shot by the SS. [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] This sight [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] was somewhat more peaceful than the sight of the moving skeletons within the camp. This was the worst sight that I can ever remember. And [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] if nothing else, this would have justified a war against Nazism. For an organization, for a movement to be capable of such a commission of horrible atrocities, is simply unbelievable. And it was no wonder that many of our GIs really were filled with rage. And if they saw any guard, [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] he was shot. If they saw any SS soldier, he was shot. I must tell that one of the reasons why I was called into the camp, into the camp headquarters, was-- and to interrogate a brigadier general. And he wore the uniform of the SS. I thought I had been given the impression that he was a very friendly collaborator, even though he was a general in the SS, who was only too anxious and willing to give us valuable information. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] It was not the case. And even though afterwards he claimed that he had been transferred against his will from the Wehrmacht to the SS, and when I got this part of the story, I told him without any hesitation that I feel that my hands were shriveling up. Then, however, he said, I don't blame you. But I must tell you. If you are enraged and full of non-belief as to what you see here, here you see little mounds, whereas in Auschwitz you would have seen mountains of dead bodies. [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] From my friend Fritzie I learned-- that I believe he was not as innocent as he claimed to be, and ultimately he might have been executed. 
INT: What was his name? FS: I don't know. Neither-- Fritzie doesn't remember anymore either.  INT: When did you-- when did you first receive the orders to go into Dachau? FS: On the afternoon of April the 29th or 30th.  INT: And what did-- what did you expect to find? FS: Well, we had received some radio reports about the horrible events that had taken place in Dachau, so we were not unprepared. Yet still, the difference between what you hear on the radio as to dead bodies or emaciated people, as to the killings, the persecution, the torture that had been going on, and the actual sight of hundreds of dead bodies and then the walking skeletons, there is an enormous difference, and one that, you know, can only affect one very deeply.  INT: Were the railroad cars outside the camp? FS: They were outside the camp. There were railroad trestles leading to the camp. And during the brief time that we were there, we could not get reliable information whether these were trains that were about to leave or trains that come in-- had come in from the east. I'm more inclined that these were trains that come in-- had come in from the east as the juggernaut between the Eastern Front as-- and the Western Front grew ever more tightly.  INT: And tell me again what-- what was on the-- on-- in the-- in the freight cars. What were the contents of the cars? FS: The contents of the cars were dead bodies-- solidly dead bodies. There wasn't a living soul amongst them anymore. 
INT: Did you have any idea where they had come from? FS: No, that's the point I tried to make-- that we don't know whether for sure-- whether or not it had been a train coming from the east from other concentration camps, escaping the juggernaut from the Russians or the Americans.  INT: Were these cars the first thing that you-- that you saw when you got there? FS: That approaching the camp, those were the first sights of the horrible things that had happened.  INT: When you were approaching the camp, did you-- did you see any people? Were there any people-- that you-- that you-- FS: Well, the distance between the freight cars and the camp itself was a very short one. And from there, through the camp, and in-- into the camp headquarters was a-- a distance of hundreds of feet. And of course, we were being surrounded by the living skeletons. And to my shame, I have to admit, that once I tried to save a guard who was being pulled to pieces by the living skeletons. Somehow my ill-conceived humanity came up. [PAUSES FOR 5 SECONDS] I did not stay in the camp for any length of time. It was, as I mentioned, April 29th to 30th. And I returned to the-- the regimental headquarters.  INT: I-- I want to-- I want to get more information about the camp, because this is-- this is so important to us. FS: Right.  INT: Did-- did you-- did you encounter any resistance when you were approaching the camp? FS: No. By then I still heard shooting, but the camp had largely been occupied and conquered. And the-- the SS guards who could had escaped. And the numbers that were left who were annihilated by our troops, I have no idea what the number was. I don't think it-- it went into the hundreds. Now, there was also the 42nd Infantry Division, the Rainbow Division, but I had no official knowledge of it. I learned of it now when I was in Dachau-- when I was in Dachau in May of this year. 
INT: When-- when you went into the camp, did you see the-- the-- the 42nd? Were they there? FS: No. No. The only-- the only-- the soldiers that I saw were the men of the 44th Division.  INT: Did you-- did you talk to any of they-- any of the prisoners? FS: No. I did not have the opportunity. I-- you know, I very much would have liked to. But we moved so fast that it knows-- it was not within my province to interrogate any prisoners. I very much would have liked to. I came across a young kid. Maybe he was 13 or 14-years-old. And I think it was on the day while we were approaching Dachau. And naively I ordered the woman of the house that I found him, that she should take care of him. She should wash him, and she should feed him. I don't know what happened to him afterwards.  INT: Where had he come from? FS: From the camp. Where are your parents? I don't know. [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] He may have survived Auschwitz and was what-- on one of the transports from Auschwitz. Who knows?  INT: How did you-- did you go in-- when you went into the camp, what-- what means of transportation did you have? FS: My jeep.  INT: And as-- as soon as you went in, what-- what did you see? The-- the-- the-- FS: I saw the--  INT: --as soon as you went inside. FS: --the milling, living skeletons-- emaciated, horrible-looking people who were ready to drop. And yet when it came to letting out their rage against guards, they had the energy of doing so. Then of course, relief units began to take over in order to feed and heed-- heal the prisoners in Dachau. But there we didn't participate. 
INT: Were there a lot of incidents of-- of revenge? FS: Yes. I'm sure there were. I have no way of counting. But I'm sure there were.  INT: Did you-- how many did you see? FS: Just one-- one incident-- the one I described. And I certainly was not able to stop it.  INT: What was your reaction when you-- when you saw that? FS: Well, as I mentioned, I-- I felt an unjustified act of humanity within myself to try to stop these people who had endured for so long the most horrible way of existence. You know, during that moment I forgot that, and I saw the way it got-- a human being was torn to pieces.  INT: Literally? FS: Literally.  INT: Tell me about the-- the buildings in Dachau. What-- what were the buildings like? FS: Well, the building-- I only really saw the very entrance and the head-- camp headquarters. I didn't see any of the barracks at that time, because I had to leave. And [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] obviously, the camp headquarters didn't look too bad then-- as well as I can remember.  INT: Who did you interrogate at the-- at the headquarters? FS: I only interrogated that brigadier general, who claimed to have been transferred against his will. [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] Then we went on to Munich.  INT: Could I ask you just another question? FS: Please.  INT: Who were-- who were the people, the-- the skeletons that you saw moving about? Tell me-- tell me more about them. FS: Largely Jews-- largely Jews. But they could have been German anti-Nazis. And [PAUSES FOR 7 SECONDS] that essentially would-- would have been it. 
INT: How many people-- FS: Yeah.  INT: --did you see milling about there? FS: Oh, that's very difficult to say-- probably a-- 150, 200. I spent, again, unfortunately, so little time. I was unable to cruise around in order to see what the rest of the camp looked like.  INT: How much time did you spend there? FS: I would say the interrogation lasted maybe a half an hour. And so I spend at most an hour. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] I took pictures of the freight train. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] I didn't take any pictures of inside the camp.  INT: What was the reaction of-- of the other American soldiers who you were with? FS: Well, rage, the utmost of-- well, this is what we came to fight. And there was [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] the-- the desire to kill-- to kill those who were responsible for it.  INT: Before you went to the camp, were you aware of what-- what you were going to see there? FS: To, again, only to the very limited degree that one had heard over the radio of the atrocities that had been committed in Dachau. But it doesn't compare with the human reality. And it doesn't compare when you see the death train and when you see the living skeletons. It, you know, it cannot be described.  INT: Did you see any-- any of the people being fed? FS: No, not during the brief time that I was there. 
INT: When-- when you went in, did-- were there-- how many other soldiers from the 45th had gone in ahead of you? FS: Well, the companies that had taken the camp-- so there were quite a few hundred-- [PAUSES FOR 5 SECONDS] at least probably 500, 600.  INT: What-- what affect has this is-- has this had on-- on your-- on your life? FS: Well-- [PAUSES FOR 8 SECONDS] what effect did it have on my life? [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] The deepest desire to fight fascism, to fight Nazism, where-- to fight antisemitism wherever it raises its ugly head. [PAUSES FOR 7 SECONDS] Right.  INT: Were the people who you saw there, the-- the prisoners, were they men, women, children? FS: Mostly men. Mostly men. I don't recall whether I saw any women. Undoubtedly, they were there.  INT: What were they wearing? FS: The-- the pajamas-- the prisoners' garb.  INT: Can you describe that, what the-- FS: Well, pajamas with stripes-- [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] that very simple outfit. [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] And it offered very little protection against the cold or inclement weather.  INT: And what about-- what did they wear on their feet? FS: What did they wear under the suit?  INT: No, on their feet. FS: On--  INT: Do you recall? FS: Some-- not distinctly. They didn't walk barefoot. That's my recollection.  INT: Did any of them come up to you? FS: No. Not-- no, they did not. 
INT: So where-- where did you go then after-- after Dachau? FS: After-- after Dachau-- after we, the 157th Regiment, left Dachau, we approached Munich. On the way there was one interesting little experience, where a group of underground fighters against Nazism had approached us. But it was a meeting of only minutes. And we took Munich and opened up our-- the headquarters for the 157th Regiment. And it was-- I mentioned earlier, I came to Munich on May 1, 1933, and we took Munich on May 1, 1945-- 12 years later. It took a few days of consolidating our position in Munich. And after all, [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] the end of the war was approaching rapidly. I remember one particular incident in which I was involved. Our division commander-- two incidences-- our division commander was asked to accept the surrender of the Hungarian army. And he asked me and another-- a guy from divisional headquarters to join him as interpreters with the Hungarian general, who presumably-- and he did-- spoke also German. The Hungarian general was not interested in his troops. He was interested in the horses that belonged to him. And he wanted to be sure that he would get the horses. I guess he did. The other incident-- my division commander, one of the youngest generals in the American army, [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] asked me to be the guide to some of the so-called visiting firemen. Who were the visiting firemen? Publishers of newspapers like and the Ochs Adler of and Pulitzer of the then some publishers of magazines; and some congressmen and senators who had visited Dachau and now were visiting Munich. And so the general asked me to give them a ride. And I started out at the [NON-ENGLISH]-- no. I started out in the vicinity of some museums. And there are-- [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] the-- there was the-- a-- a monument for some German heroes, and the vicinity also of the so-called Fuhrerbau, the leaders' headquarters. And from there I took them into the Odeonsplatz. That's the square where the confrontation took place in 1923 between the Bavarian police and the stormtroopers. 
INT: We have to stop. We're at the end of the tape. FS: OK.  INT: --five, interview with Fritz Schnaittacher. OK, we were in-- in Munich with the visiting firemen. FS: Right. And after that, I-- after the [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] visit at the monument for past heroes and past-- passing the house of the leader, Adolf Hitler, I took them to the Odeonsplatz, where the confrontation had taken place in 1923 between the Bavarian police and the stormtroopers. And I pointed out to the visiting firemen the two statues at the far end. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] And this legend went that as the stormtroopers moved up, led by Hitler, that Hitler quickly jumped behind one of the statues in order to save himself. And I guess it was [? Axa Adler, ?] with profound thinking, who asked, behind which one? Now, I have another little humorous story. I took them on to the beer hall where the putsch had started in 1923. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] And in the basement of the beer hall, there was an air raid shelter. And the air raid shelter was filled with, I would assume, property that had been stolen from Jewish homes. But there was one little monument. It was that of a stormtrooper standing on top of a swastika with outreached arm. And Pulitzer of the said, with a feeling of deep sympathy, did that come from a Jewish home too? [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] OK. Now the visit with the firemen was over. And [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] I-- when I had free time, I pursued my personal war, and primarily it was directed against the-- my uncle's manager, who in 1938, the morning after the Kristallnacht, as I mentioned earlier, was standing in front of the gate to my uncle's business and said, Jews are not allowed here. So-- 
INT: Tell me your uncle's name, and the-- and the manager's name again. FS: My uncle's name was Moritz Meyer. M-E-Y-E-R. The manager's name was Hermann. And I-- I do not recall his first name. Hermann was his last name. And so I drove to my uncle's business, which had been wiped out completely by our bombers. But people were around it. And I asked about Hermann several days in a row, and finally I developed a trace. And I followed the track, and it led me to a community outside of Munich, not far from Munich, about a half an hour's ride. And having the privilege of a jeep, which I made use of, I drove out with the driver, a corporal, and we asked around. And that was-- those were the days when Germans gleefully would point out people who conceivably were guilty of some crimes. And there I drove to the house, and Hermann stood in long johns and some knickerbockers. And I walked up to him, and in gruff military tone told him to get dressed and that he should come with me to Munich. And his wife and daughter were wailing and expressing the disbelief that their husband-- that her husband could possibly have done anything wrong because he's the most wonderful man there is. And I heard all of that. And I took him to Munich, where by friendly arrangement, I had an office with CIC. And I interrogated Hermann there. And fortunately for me, he had been a guard in a concentration camp, which made him subject to automatic arrest. And so at least I could go free. Because if I had gone out of channels in the pursuance of my personal war, it wouldn't have been so good, as I learned later in another case. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] Well, the-- see-- 
INT: Let-- let me just ask you, what happened to your uncle? FS: My uncle had come to America, and he had told me of the story.  INT: So he-- he-- that's the uncle who came here in 1940, and he had been-- FS: Right.  INT: --been in Dachau prior to-- to coming here. FS: Correct.  INT: OK. FS: And of course he was overwhelmed with-- with happiness and satisfaction that Hermann deserved-- who-- who got some of the penalty that he deserved, mildly so.  INT: After you-- after this took place with Hermann, where-- where did you go? FS: Then as occupation forces took over Munich and Dachau, we were being-- we who knew German were being reassigned to a variety of activities. To my best recollection, the first assignment that I got, which would have made it at the end of May, [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] would have been the interrogation of so-called automatic arrestees in a camp in Ludwigsburg. I don't have anything special to say about that experience. We did our best trying to find people who conceivably were guilty of war crimes, and then they would be transferred to the War Crimes Commission. However, during one free weekend-- and-- and that I do want to mention yet with a degree of warmth. I [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] got a jeep, and I drove to my village, to Forth. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] And as I approached the village, I seemed to hear the-- the ring of voices going from house to house, from the upper story windows to the next. Fritz is back. Fritz is back. And as I arrived at my house and knocked on the door, a girl looked down from the window of the room where I was born in, and asked what was the matter. And I could hear her knees shake because she was fearful that something had gone wrong with her family. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] And I asked her to send her father down. And when her father opened the door, I recognized him at once. He had been an old Social Democrat. I embraced him, and I said, Paul, you can stay in my house. But my driver and I want to stay in that room, and that's where we stayed that night. But I drove to the other end of the village in order to see whether my mother's driver had come back from the war, because he was an unusually decent guy, most protective of my mother. And his first name was [GERMAN]. And unfortunately he had not been back yet, but his wife was there. And at least I could help her out with a little money.
[PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] Then we drove back to my house and parked-- were ready to park our jeep when there were two shadowy figures with the armband of American Auxiliary Police there to greet me. One of them was the gendarme who had arrested me 1933. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] The other one was a Nazi, and I certainly would not have anything-- had anything to do with him. I didn't shake the hands of either one. Their hands are still sticking in the stillness of the night. [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] But I ordered the gendarme, in the attempt to mete out some justice, to bring a number of people to me. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] This, again, without authority. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] And [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] I ordered him one guy-- to bring one guy to me who, to my best knowledge, had been one of the most active Nazis there was, contributing to the misery of the few Jews. The other one was the mayor, whom I asked that he should have the town crier announce that any stolen Jewish property should be returned to the mayor's house. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] That was never done. Then I drove to Schnaittach in order to tell the mayor of Schnaittach to resurrect the cemetery. And of course once more to pay a visit to my father's grave. And then I drove back in order to pick up the guy who I considered one of the most active Nazis. And I took him to the CIC in Nuremberg. And that was the end of this visit as far as I'm concerned. Visiting Heidelberg, the headquarters of the 7th Army, some weeks later, a friend of mine who came from the same area I did yelled out to me, hey, Fritz. Come over here. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] I was there in order to officially receive the award for bravery for the action in-- at the beginning of the breakthrough the Siegfried Line. And then he said, look, the town mayor, the American town mayor of Erlangen is looking for you. You have gone out of channel with your private war, and the next time you-- you go to Erlangen he is going to arrest you. So I said, well, it wouldn't be the first time. I had been imprisoned in Erlangen once before. So indeed, the very next time that I had the opportunity to go to Erlangen, I went to the town major. And I said to him, I understand you are looking for me. Here I am. I have been in prison here before. He said, oh, I didn't mean it that way. But you-- you have to follow channels. And I don't know whether it was on that occasion or before that I went to the prison and I saw the warden who was still the same one as 13 years ago. And he said, Herr Schnaittacher, this time the ones who arrested you are in prison. And that was the end of that epoch. And then I was being transferred to the War Crimes Commission, [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] where I was put in charge of a-- a unit to screen the archives of the German Army High Command in pursuance of the case of the economic czar, Hjalmar Schacht. Unfortunately, we couldn't find anything, and there was no other evidence that could be used in the pursuance of his case in the war crimes trials. 
INT: Where-- where were these archives? FS: Near Frankfurt in Fechenheim.  INT: And when was this that you went looking through the archives? FS: That must have been [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] May, June-- [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] July, August of '45.  INT: And how-- how much time did you-- did you spend there looking through the archives? FS: I would think that probably two months.  INT: Who-- who did-- do you remember who you reported to, and your commanding officer there? FS: He later on became the head of a Jewish organization. He was a colonel. [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] Could it have been Gershon? I'm not sure. And it so happens that on his behalf I interpreted [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] the chief of staff of all of the German armies, Keitel. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] That was in the courthouse in Nuremberg. But I do not remember the content of the conversation. And as you undoubtedly know, Keitel was one of those who ultimately was hung. Whether that particular interrogation contributed to it, I do not know.  INT: How much time did you spend in Nuremberg? FS: On that occasion, very little. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] Very little time. Maybe one or two nights.  INT: Did you-- did you spend any other time in Nuremberg working on the-- on the war trials? FS: On the war crimes trial? [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] I really don't think so. [PAUSES FOR 5 SECONDS] I [PAUSES FOR 6 SECONDS] became somewhat disillusioned [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] because there were indications of the Cold War showing its ugly face, and I felt that the earlier I come back to the States, the better. [PAUSES FOR 5 SECONDS] In retrospect, I was wrong. On the other hand, I had considerable responsibilities. My uncle had died, the co-owner of the business. And it was all in the hands of my brother and-- and the other partner. And of course, my wife was here. She would have loved to come to Europe, and that was impossible. 
INT: When-- when you went through the archives in-- in Frankfurt, where-- what-- what type of archives were they? FS: The German type binders, files. And I had two or three colleagues, who were also fluent in German, who would-- who got-- pull out anything that in any way could conceivably be used. In searching through these files, the one most horrible little story was [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] that a young guy who had celebrated his 13th birthday was sending a letter of appreciation to his father. His father had given him a rifle and two Jews for target practice. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] I kept the letter, and-- but I don't know where it is now. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] If I find it, I would be glad to make it available to you.  INT: When-- what-- when you were-- what-- what were your living conditions like there in Frankfurt? FS: Our living conditions were good. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] I had [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] a very comfortable room and bed. We were being fed at the place where we transacted our business. I occasionally would have the use of a jeep. And I was able to visit the birthplace of my mother's, who was born near Frankfurt. And--  INT: How do you feel about the war-- war-- FS: War crimes trial?  INT: --trials that are going on today where they're looking for the-- the Nazi perpetrators? FS: Are you-- well, the leading Nazi perpetrators [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] have been found and found guilty and executed. You're referring like the Priebke in Italy and one in Argentina, and the few? Well, obviously I am in favor of them getting the maximum punishment. Now, I-- [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] it-- this essentially ends my military career in Germany, and my career in Germany. And I came back, without getting seasick, on a [PAUSES FOR 6 SECONDS] small ship in November, 1945. And of course I was welcomed, [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] most of all by my wife and my mother and all the other relatives. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] Now, the-- one little story that I want to now relate to-- unless you have any other questions. 
INT: Well, if I do we can ask them after your story. FS: OK. Is that I've always wanted to sort of close the loop, if I may call it that, in my history as far as my life and the village in which I was born. Went to school there. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] Went to work from there. Was arrested there. Came back. Left for America from there. Came back as a conquering soldier. And now to close the loop I felt that I should like to address the students [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] of the public school aged 14 to 16. And due to the fact that the village was reorganized as part of a much larger community, now a community of several villages with a population of 14,500, and a new-- a mayor who was totally foreign to me. So I-- at the beginning of this year, I made several person-to-person telephone calls until I got through to the mayor with whom I succeeded in developing a very excellent personal relationship. And I told him that I would like to come to Germany in order to address the student body. And he said, what an excellent idea. Now listen to this. We are in the middle of creating-- of building a Jewish Museum in Schnaittach. There are no Jews in Schnaittach. There are no Jews anymore in Forth and in the surrounding villages, only in Nuremberg and in Furth, Furth, the town where Kissinger came from. And they're-- here in Schnaittach they are building a Jewish museum, and they are asking our help in bringing any mementos that would be of significance there. And my son had taken some excellent pictures of the mayor, of the school principal, myself, and of the students as I was fraternizing with them. It wasn't difficult because I was surrounded by lovely girls. We-- I spoke to them for about 45 minutes, and-- to give them an idea of what it had meant to go through the world events as a Jew, what it had meant to be a Jew in Forth in 1933 and later on, and how unbearable life had become for my mother and my relatives. And then we concluded my talk, which was received with warmth and applause. And then we had 3/4 of an hour of questions and answers. Unfortunately, I don't remember most of the questions. But they made a video and I will be getting the video, which of course, I will be only too glad to make it available to you, and I will have to translate it. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] Then-- two of the questions were, one, did you volunteer in the American army? Two, if you had the choice to live in Germany today or in America, where would you want to live? And of course, the answer was an obvious one. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] And I told them that I have so much to be grateful for, to this country, the most wonderful country in the world. [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] Then the mayor took us to Schnaittach. 
INT: We have to stop. FS: OK.  INT: Tape number six, interview with Fritz Schnaittachter. So you were telling me that earlier this year, then you went to-- to the village of Schnaittach. FS: Right. And I was-- the-- the mayor of my village, which is now called Markt Eckental. The mayor of this now considerably expanded village had driven us to Schnaittach. And in Schnaittach we were being received. We-- because two of my sons and a grandson were with me. We were being received by [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] the mayor of Schnaittach, a woman who does a intensive historical study of the town of Schnaittach, and the woman who is responsible for the maintenance and supervision and improvement of the Jewish Museum in Schnaittach. Now, the Jewish Museum in Schnaittach [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] was, I think, officially opened in October, November of last year. And when I-- when I was there, it already had been visited by over 10,000 or 20,000 people, largely students. So it shows the interest that is being generated. I'm in active correspondence with the mayor from my village and the woman who is studying the history of Schnaittach and the surrounding area and the woman who is in charge of the museum. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] And the mayor of our village, after all of these visits, and after we were toasted with kosher wine in Schnaittach-- and I have the kosher cork yet here-- he drove us back to his town. And on the way we had a wonderful lunch, to which he treated us. And interestingly enough, the video that had been made of my visit-- our visit-- and a number of other items were being made part of a celebration of the 15th anniversary of the foundation of this new village conglomerate. And so I'm now waiting with great interest for this video. 
INT: What was the reaction of the-- of the people in your-- in your town to the Nazi atrocities? FS: I only spoke [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] to two people, [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] who are now in their late 40s or early 50s. And I asked them what they knew of the past. And they said nothing. We were too young. What did your parents tell you? Nothing. That disappointed me greatly. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] Again, I didn't have a chance to really make an effort, and that's what I would like to do if my health holds up and that I will go there next year. And I'm being anticipated and expected. [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] One of my closest friends, a Dr. [? Maktoum, ?] who lives in Rockville Centre, who knows my stories, said I want to go with you. [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] But then I really would want to take, and I would want to read in depth, Goldhagen's book, because that will give me much ammunition to raise questions. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] Now, back to the question that you had raised.  INT: Yeah, I wanted to ask you about-- get some more details about Nuremberg, when you were there for the-- as an interpreter. FS: I-- [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] wasn't there. [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] I was there only on-- at the behest of this man who was going to interrogate Keitel.  INT: Who was that man? Do you remember? FS: I-- I think it was Colonel [INAUDIBLE]. I'm not sure. And I do remember distinctly [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] that [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] I came in to the interrogation chamber when Keitel was there already as well as the American colonel. And when I came in, Keitel jumped to his feet and came to attention and saluted me. Now you can imagine what feeling I have-- had as a then First Lieutenant coming from a little village not far from there, and the chief of staff of all of the armed forces of powerful Germany had to salute me. I can't tell you how proud I was. [LAUGHS] 
INT: What-- what did he look like-- Keitel? FS: Well, he looked like a-- a German general. To be sure, he didn't wear the uniform. But he was erect and still in very good condition. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] At one time I remember [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] it was, I guess, in the end of the war, and I was standing with some other American soldiers or officers in the lobby of a hotel when they brought in a bunch of German generals as prisoners. [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] But I couldn't identify any of them, whether it Kesselring or any one of them were amongst them. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] That's about it.  INT: What did-- what role did you play in the-- in the war trials? FS: My role, again, [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] much to my regret, was limited to the investigation of Schacht and the one incident when I helped in the interrogation of Keitel. [PAUSES FOR 5 SECONDS] I regret, but that was the extent of my involvement. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] They are still listing me amongst the personnel that had been involved in the war crimes trials. Well, to that extent, I was. [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] But I have to disappoint you as far as other aspects.  INT: When-- we're not disappointed at all. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] When-- during the time after you-- after you came back from overseas until-- until your-- your trip earlier this year-- FS: Right. 
INT: --what-- what did-- where did you work? FS: I-- [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] our office [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] then was in New York. And I became the treasurer of the company, but still-- [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] which didn't take all of my time. So I was very much in the development of sales-- domestically and ultimately largely export. And so in this capacity, I really traveled from Australia to New Zealand, to Iran, to all of Central and South America and Europe-- from Portugal to Spain to Italy. And [PAUSES FOR 5 SECONDS] I-- [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] ultimately, in 1900 and-- I shouldn't say ultimately-- in the midst of the negotiations for the sale of my company, I lost my brother. He died at a very early age. And my partner's son who was then my active collaborator-- was-- [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] well, I'd rather not say-- not capable of being of much assistance-- and [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] maybe wrongly. And if I had known that also my middle son was interested in pursuing a business career, I would have held on to the business and build it up further. But I sold it in 1972. I continued to work for this company in a variety of positions and in a consulting capacity until about 1987 [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] or '88. I was entitled to be retired, even though I would have preferred to stay on.  INT: Do you-- you told me how your experiences at-- at Dachau affected your life-- FS: Right. 
INT: --that you-- you-- you feel that-- that-- that any evidence of fascism should-- should be stopped immediately. FS: Right.  INT: Do you have any-- any other feelings that you'd like to express now-- how all these experiences affected your life? FS: Well--  INT: The experiences at your village, the experiences of-- of going back this year and all that you've-- that you've experienced. FS: The-- the experience of going back this year-- and by the way, the [? maya-- ?] the mayor is a Christian Social Democrat. He-- he is Catholic, the same as Kohl. And he is not going to vote for Kohl. And he doesn't think that Kohl is going to be re-elected. The reason that it filled me with a degree of hope was that truly, [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] these kids seem to reflect a-- seem to reflect sentiments and ideas that are different from their forefathers. When I raised the question, how many of you have been to Dachau, practically everyone raised their hand. Now, the mayor is deeply aware of the danger of neo-Nazis. And he told me that in the very group whom I addressed, there are two boys who may be neo-Nazis. And he's having them surveyed by the police. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] The superintendent of schools, the teacher whom I spoke to, yes, they seem to be men of character, men of-- of convictions, of democratic convictions, men whom one can have faith in. And I have a feeling that the youth has a good chance of growing up in this new tradition. One of the things that some of them said-- yes, we spoke to our parents and grandparents. And they said that at the beginning [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] that they had hopes as far as the Nazis were concerned. But ultimately, they lost every bit of it. A cab driver whom I drove in from the airport to the hotel said-- when I indicated who I was-- he said, well, look. We have a lot of unemployment which we didn't have under the Nazis. So I said, yes, and do you know why there was no unemployment? He said, fully well-- because of the war and because of the rearmament. So I said, all right. Would you endorse that? Would you suggest that we should pursue that in Germany? He said, no, by no means. 
INT: Do you feel that-- that the-- that the war trials played an important part in their-- in their attitude? FS: Well, but played an important part--  INT: In the-- in the existing attitude now? FS: And the existing attitude is gaining knowledge of the Holocaust, gaining knowledge of what transpired in-- during the Kristallnacht. By the way, the Germans in my village don't call it Kristallnacht. They call it pogrom. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] I think I have not been able to truly study it. And I'm anxious to do so-- to what extent this has really filtered through to the very depths of their heart and mind.  INT: Well, is there any statement you'd like to make before we close the tape, before we stop? FS: Well, my statement would be that I hope what I had presented may contribute to the recognition that there was a Holocaust and-- and that we should never forget and that there is hope. And hope must be justified by conviction and by fighting for it.  INT: Do you think it could ever happen here? FS: Because of the lack of a-- a-- because of the different kind of a society that we have, the many different racial backgrounds, I question it. On the other hand, I'm terribly dismayed about the antisemitism in the Afro-American community, where Jews had been the foremost defendants of the civil rights, where Jews marched, but-- [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] but came through the-- through Alabama, et cetera, and incurred the hatred of the whites. And it would be shameful if that should be forgotten. 
INT: Thank you. FS: Thank you.  INT: Tape number seven, interview with Fritz Schnaittacher. Would you tell us about this picture? FS: This is a picture of my father and mother-- my father, Solomon Schnaittacher, my mother, Frieda Schnaittacher. And I would estimate that this picture was taken [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] in a photo studio in Nuremberg, around 1910. This picture is of my father in uniform-- I would estimate-- in the uniform of the German army-- during World War I. And so I would estimate that it was taken in the vicinity of our home, in 1916.  INT: And tell me his name again-- your father's name. FS: My father, Solomon Schnaittacher. And this is the house which I was born in. It bears the title [GERMAN]. I would estimate that it was taken in the early '30s or the late 20s.  INT: And the-- the town where this was taken? FS: And this was in the village of Forth. Now this very same building is the post office of our community-- of that community. It's taken-- this picture is of my grandmother, Katie Meyer, and a nephew of mine who unfortunately died shortly thereafter, Billy Schnaittacher, the son of a brother of my brother. My grandmother then was 86 to 88. And it was taken [PAUSES FOR 5 SECONDS] well after she had come to America, right at the end of World War II. This is a-- like a recognition by the 45th Division of the Bronze Star that I received on the occasion of the breakthrough, the Siegfried Line, on March 13, 1945. This is a picture of the Jewish cemetery in Schnaittach. Schnaittach had three Jewish cemeteries, the oldest one dating back to 1476. And this is-- are the remnants of the newest cemetery. 
INT: When was this taken? FS: This was taken quite recently, in anticipation of my visit. This picture of my beloved wife, whom I lost on April 15, 1995-- and this picture was taken by my son Paul [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] a year earlier-- so in 1994.  INT: Tell us your wife's name again, please. FS: Dorothy. My wife's name was Dorothy-- Dorothy Luba. Luba is the Russian translation of love. This was on the occasion of Thanksgiving 1996, which we expected to be the last one that we would live-- that I lived in the house that I had lived in. The people are my son Paul, my daughter-in-law Kathy, my grandson Jeremy, and his father, my son, Richard, his wife Esther. My eldest son with the beard is Peter. And his youngest daughter to the right of him is Brianna. Kneeling are [PAUSES FOR 5 SECONDS] Erez, the youngest son of Richard. Then there is the old man. And next to the old man is Nancy, my eldest son Peter's wife. And kneeling below her is Jeremy, her son. Those are the people. That's my family with the exception of Gwynne, who at that time was in New Hampshire.  INT: And who is Winnie? FS: Gwynne is the eldest 'saughter'-- daughter of my son Peter.  INT: And where was this picture taken? FS: That picture was taken in front of the house that I sold in order to move over here.  INT: Where? FS: In Rodney Place, Rockville Center. This picture was of my memorable visit back to Germany in May of this year. And I'm being surrounded by the beautiful girls whom I addressed prior to the moment that this picture was taken. It-- it was in May of this year, and my son Paul took the picture. And it is in the New School in Markt Eckental. Altogether I thought that there were probably between 60 and 80 kids who listened to me. 
INT: And tell me again the name of the town. FS: Markt Eckental. Eckental. It used to be Forth--  INT: Was that in-- FS: --part of-- Forth is part of Markt Eckental.  INT: OK, thank you. FS: You're welcome. This is a picture of my great sons, Richard on the left, the middle son; Paul in the center, the youngest one; and Peter, the oldest one, on the right. And I think I must have taken this picture at the shore of Lake Buel where we have a cottage. And probably it was taken around 1970.  INT: Thank you. FS: Thank you.