INT: My name is Mona Clayman. Today's date is September 2, 1997. I am conducting an interview with Szidonia Kornfeld, in Montreal, Canada. The language of the interview is English. --when I-- I can talk to her. Please state your full name and spell it. SK: My name is Szidonia-- S-Z-I-D-O-N-I-A Kornfeld-- K-O-R-N-F-E-L-D. And my maiden name is Gunczler-- G-U-N-C-Z-L-E-R. I have to name-- mention my name, because it's not-- remained one after the Holocaust, the name Gunczler. So each time I want to mention that name, and so maybe somebody will awaken that here is this also Gunczler.  INT: Could you tell me the date and the place where you were born? SK: Yes. My place was Bodrogkeresztúr-- B-O-D-R-O-G-K-E-R-E-S-Z-T-U-R-- Bodrogkeresztúr, Hungary. And--  INT: The date? SK: --the date was March 13, 1927.  INT: And how old are you now? SK: I'm now 70. [LAUGHS]  INT: Did you grow up in the village in which you were born? SK: After the war?  INT: No. Did you grow up in the village that you were born in? SK: Yeah, I was grow up. I was born, schooled, and deported to Auschwitz from my house.  INT: Near which large city is the-- was the village located? SK: You have to speak louder.  INT: Near which large city was the-- SK: Is?  INT: --was the village located? It was near what-- SK: It's-- it's in the province of Zemplén, where the capital city was Sátoraljaújhely, we have, where my father was born, where I lived after I got married. It's about 30 minutes from Bodrogkeresztúr. And Tokaj, the wine, the famous wine, because we live in the winery, in the south part of Hungary. This was a-- a half an hour walk-- 
INT: What-- SK: --for the famous Tokaj-- Bodrogkeresztúr.  INT: Do you remember what your address was in the village? SK: If I remember--  INT: Your address, your-- SK: Oh, it was only one street, what they called [NON-ENGLISH]. [NON-ENGLISH] mean the main street.  INT: What was the Jewish community like in the village? SK: In the village? It was very, very religious, very strict. Everybody was shomer Shabbos. Everybody was observing Shabbos-- even the one who didn't want to. We had that great rabbi, the miracle rabbi, Reb Shaya'la Steiner. And he-- the one who has a horse and buggy and to go to the Budapest express, what stops in Bodrogkeresztúr, it was 5 o'clock Shabbos hours. He couldn't go 4:00-- 4 o'clock or 4:30 past the rabbi's house. So even he was not really observant, but he would never do that. He couldn't do it. Otherwise, they would tomorrow, they would do this from the call-- these-- help me-- what how you say it in English.  INT: The community? SK: From the community--  INT: Community. SK: --would have been discharged. Well, not discharged. They-- it wouldn't be called as a number of the Jewish community.  INT: Were there non-Jews in the village? SK: Oh, yes. It was about 2,000.  INT: Did they get along with the Jews? What was the relationship between the Jews and the non-Jews? SK: I'll tell you something-- that one street where we lived, we were-- we always felt that they are antisemitic. We always felt-- never mind the school what comes after. But we live together, because we needed them to come to clean by us and to take care of Shabbos-- open the light or close the light-- and they-- if we want-- needed help. But you know, Jewish whatever. We-- because we're there when we were baby, and small babies. But we got along in this respect-- that they benefited from us. 
INT: Mm-hmm. What was the name of the synagogue? SK: Mm, now that's the rabbi's-- Reb Shaya'la Synagogue.  INT: And his name, of course. SK: Reb Shaya'la Synagogue. Reb Shaya'la-- tzadik.  INT: Was-- uh-huh. SK: He was a tzadik.  INT: I see. Tell me. Where did you attend elementary school? SK: In Bodrogkeresztúr.  INT: And what grades did you go to? SK: Grade nine-- six elementary, and three we had to make three. I don't know what. I wanted to ask, and I forgot-- from my friends, how you call this. [NON-ENGLISH]. That means more educated, in Hungarian translation.  INT: Mm-hmm. SK: So three more years. But these three more years that I went in that--  INT: Secondary. SK: --from six year-- the nine year--  INT: Yeah? SK: --was already so antisemitic. Yes, I was born in '27-- '33, '39-- in 1939, '40, it was very antisemitic. And we-- we had to go, and we were even Shabbos to school. And it was mixed. And we have to write Shabbos. It was one or two very antisemitic special. They were out. Let's say, in Germany, one was a kapo, one-- not kapo-- SS. In Ravensbrück, she said [GERMAN]. So these teachers were sadistic only to the Jewish people. And it was no-- the fans from the friends, from the schoolmates. Oh, what a pity. No, they didn't mind.  INT: Do you remember some of the names of your teachers? SK: Oh, yes-- everyone. 
INT: Could you name-- SK: Every.  INT: --could your some of them? SK: There some of them I liked. Two of them I liked you very, very much.  INT: Who were they? SK: I wish I would have go visit him after the war.  INT: What-- SK: Because I was back there.  INT: What were their names? You remember? SK: The first one, [NON-ENGLISH]; the second was [? Leonard. ?] And this [? Leonard-- ?] [? 22-- ?] was such a guy, that I don't if exist today such a teacher. I remember he teach me that-- taught us that when he threw down matches, imagine, just to look at it how they fell on, one on of the other. And-- and-- and they stick together. But if they fall apart, there's no--  INT: What were some of the names of the bad teachers you had? Do you remember them? SK: And he teach me so many things, I remember, this [? Leonard. ?]  INT: Mm-hmm. SK: And he liked me so much that I was the valedictorian in the sixth grade.  INT: Oh. SK: And I have to-- my mother never went nowhere, because oh, she was pregnant, or she was busy with the small children. But she came to this valedictorian, because I thought-- I-- I said a poem from a child who was frozen, and she didn't had the mother. And it was very touching. I made it very eloquently. And I got a-- a book from this [? Leonard ?] teacher. And maybe this is the one. He liked me. I liked him. 
INT: What were some of the anti-- SK: And then another teacher was--  INT: Oh, sorry. SK: --in the fourth grade. And he always called me Szidonia, [? Szidie-- ?] [? Szidie! ?] [? Szidie, ?] come, [? Szidie! ?] He was always-- and at the teacher's house, they're laying out for do re me fu so la si do-- sing-- song. So the-- the notes, every girl has a name with a first [? Szidie, ?] so-- si do-- do re me fu-- fi so la si do. So I was the [? Szidie. ?] [LAUGHS] So, yeah.  INT: Did you have any friends that were not Jewish in the school? Did you make friends with any non-Jewish-- SK: Now or then?  INT: Then. Then. SK: If I-- if I had then?  INT: Had. SK: Or now?  INT: Then. Did you have non-Jewish friends then? SK: Yeah, neighbors, yes, friends, but not friends, because you're sort of restricted in that little village. They were afraid and religious. I shouldn't eat something by them.  INT: Mm-hmm. SK: So they come more to us, or we-- mostly, while I was in the school yard, the play.  INT: Did you belong to any organizations as a youngster? SK: No.  INT: No. What type of youngster were you? What were some of the interests you had-- the games that you played? The-- SK: Before-- always mention before the war.  INT: When you were-- when before the war, when you were little. SK: Well-- 
INT: When you were young. SK: --to-- to play in the backyard with the hula hoop. And well, I used to play with my Jewish friends in our backyard. We used to have such as salt, like shoe paste. We made like a scale and put a-- a brick, and other was sand. And it looks like I have a grocery store, and we are business people-- and something like that. We always chatted. I don't know what, because our horizon was so small. There was no library, and no theater, no nothing. But we were so happy. It was such a happy family, that my brothers used to come home from the school singing. And the food was-- we rationed-- ration-- rationed? And we were happy, singing. And with my friends, we were walking on the street like it would be ours, especially when we were already 16. And the boys came home from the school. They were not allowed to go back. Or the German didn't let in payots or whatever. So we were walking on the street with my friend who lives now in Israel. And we were looking where we see the boys. [LAUGHS] But that's all. [LAUGHTER] That was the greatest pleasure and the only thing what we really have there.  INT: What was your father's name? SK: Joseph-- [? Yosef ?] [? Mordechai. ?]  INT: And his-- where was he born? SK: Sátoraljaújhely where I was married and I lived after the war for 3 years, 3 and 1/2 years. 
INT: When was he born? SK: 1898-- 1895. I told you. I here the paper. Shall I check it? In November, I think-- 7.  INT: And what languages did he speak? SK: My father? Hebrew, Hungarian-- very little-- he used, you know, but he didn't-- and German, because everybody speak German, because you speak Yiddish, you speak German. And I think that's all.  INT: What type of education did your father have? SK: Talmud-- forever.  INT: He-- SK: Forever. 'Cause he was a child. He went to the yeshiva, to Mukachevo, that's Czechoslovakia. And he come home when he was almost engaged-- 20 or 19.  INT: How did your father earn his living? SK: How he earned his living? He was a watchmaker. We had a big watch on the front of the house. It said Günczler [? Yosef ?] [NON-ENGLISH]. [NON-ENGLISH], this mean he was putting in in a little village. A girl got engaged, so we had the stones or the ring, and our father set a ring whatever color they want, or the engagement ring. And also, optical glasses was belonging to that family, in Europe, especially small villages. So we made very good, and we have a table. And in Auschwitz, I always dreamed if I come home from war, if I ever survive, I want to get all these colored stones, and I'll have a ring and a necklace. 'Cause I like jewelry.  INT: Did he employ anybody in-- SK: No. 
INT: --no. SK: Once. Once was-- when it was already they took away the permit-- we were not allowed to work-- he was not allowed to--  INT: When was this? SK: In '38, I think. And they took away the permit. He was not allowed to work. And somebody come from a different village, a Mr. Brown. And he helped my father. I don't know if they cut him. I think he was-- he had this still the permit. I don't know how was that exactly. But I guess that's the way it was, that that guy fixed the watches for my father. And if I remember, that there was a [? graph ?] in our village, and he needs glasses. I remember my father said, [NON-ENGLISH]. I remember this. And he brought the glass, and we made the whole-- we get the-- the food for that glasses, what he sold for that guy.  INT: Why did they take away your father's permit? SK: Because it was when the Germans gave all the law, Jewish law. I don't know how you say it-- to the-- and--  INT: Right. SK: You have to help me with certain words. I know them, but it doesn't come to my mind-- that they took away--  INT: The Nuremberg laws. SK: --from everybody, not just one. A Jew-- a Jew-- a Jew was not allowed to work. A Jew was not allowed to have a maid. A Jew was not allowed to go in the morning, just 8:00 and the restricted hours. 
INT: Those were the Nuremberg laws. SK: And they took every form everybody. So since then, we had very poor living, very hard-- hard, living because he was not allowed, and it was very strict. And you don't know how antisemitic laws. They were happy they could find somebody to caught and put in a jail or even shot or even what did-- it didn't happen too many times, but it happened. And you we afraid to do it, you know, very much afraid. So my father was a great Talmudic scholar. And he started to learn with boys who couldn't go to the yeshivot, because if they were with the train-- because their payots, they hit them. They-- you-- you cannot imagine. Your mind cannot even grab this, like about the whole situation of the Holocaust-- how bitter, and how it happened that my father didn't go to my sister's only first child wedding, because they would cut the beard. They would throw him in the window, or whatever they would do-- very strict antisemitic action they-- they did already in 1942, special. In 1942 was the first time, I think, from the wartime. I remember we didn't have what to eat. They give us [NON-ENGLISH]. This mean if they find, he kill you. It was not allowed only five pound flour or something. So we're-- even if you have the money, you were not allowed to storage it. I remember my brother sent us from the yeshiva, and my father caught the bread and said, first for the children. And when it got to him, was no more bread. But in 1943, it changed, the situation. It was better before-- in 1942 to 1944, we had to eat. And I remember I went to-- to the village. I sold few stocking, and this and that. And I brought home some flour and that. It was easier. But then-- 
INT: What was your mother's maiden name? SK: Grunfeld. [? Gizela-Katalin ?] Grunfeld.  INT: She had her-- SK: Gizela is [? G-I-Z-E-L-L-A. ?] Katalin was [? K-A-T-A-L-I-N. ?] It's Hungarian. And Grunfeld-- G-R-U-N-F-E-L-D. That was a very big family.  INT: When was she born? SK: I don't know how may sisters, brothers.  INT: When was she born? SK: In 1898.  INT: And where? SK: And in Trebisov.  INT: And what type of education did your mother have? SK: I don't know.  INT: What languages did she speak? SK: She speaks Slovakian, Czechoslovakian. And you know, every Czechoslovakian, it's a very family language-- all Slavic language. So I don't know. They speak Czechoslovakian or Czecho, or Ukrainian or Poland or-- or Russian. But my-- my father spoke also I just remind myself. When my parents want to speak something secret, they speak Czechoslovakian.  INT: [LAUGHS] SK: I forgot to-- because you asked me how many languages.  INT: Did she come from a religious home? SK: Yes, but not as religious as we were. He was very religious, because my grandfather was [NON-ENGLISH]-- is German-- an accountant. You know this [NON-ENGLISH] is a German, but it was not written with this word. And he was very intelligent. But still, they called him the [NON-ENGLISH], because he wear a shtreimel, the only shtreimel in the whole Trebisov. Trebisov was a very big city, but the children were more modern. And this guy, who I mentioned, that young guy with all the beard-- you see, he was very modern-- and the other brother and a sister was shot by the [NON-ENGLISH], also mother and girl. And my mother was religious, but she was very intelligent born and mother. My-- you could see that she come from a wealthy home, and-- and a little bit-- a better home. 
INT: Did she wear a sheitel at home? SK: Yes.  INT: Yes. SK: You see the picture what I have?  INT: Mm-hmm. SK: With the bow? How modern she was with the sheitel?  INT: Mm-hmm. How many brothers and sisters did you have? SK: I had eight. Four died at home. Eight.  INT: Could-- SK: We went to Auschwitz.  INT: What were their names? SK: The oldest was [? Goldie ?] [NON-ENGLISH], and she had a son-- [? Albert; ?] then my brother [? Jacques, ?] and then a brother Armin, with whom I was together in Auschwitz. And he worked where I work, near the crematorium, where it come in the clothes. And he had to check if the-- quilt-- quilt--  INT: Quilt. SK: --blankets were clean-- no, not even a touch. And this he had to take from one barrack to the other. And each time when he went to the barrack, we met. And he said he looked at the flames over the oven. And he said, [NON-ENGLISH] will help. You gonna see he will help. I says, but look. He said, he will help. And he was working there. But I have this here.  INT: Mm-hmm. SK: So I don't know if--  INT: And-- and what-- what are the names of some of-- your-- the other ones in the family? SK: The other one was Jeno. Then was Wilmos. Then was Leo, Edit.  INT: Were they all born in the same village? SK: Yes. 
INT: Mm-hmm. How did you get along together as children? SK: Like we children. We were-- the boys were always studying in-- in yeshivot, the older ones. And this was very young-- just see it-- two years old and six years old. They're very small children. And I was the boss, the bigger one.  INT: [LAUGHS] SK: 'Cause my sister [? Mary, ?] she was 16-year-old, my sister, when she was engaged with that guy. And he was all the time in the army, in the Hungarian forced labor. And she was six years engaged. And these love letters, I have some of them. But she wrote him, 'cause I find in the garbage-- and the English lesson that she went to school to learn English--  INT: Mm-hmm. SK: --my sister. But she-- she-- my father begged her. Don't get married. The war will soon ended. What if they take away your husband again? This was in 1942. But they were so in love. And six years they couldn't wait. They married. They had a child. She was pregnant with a second. Soon as she arrived to Auschwitz-- I have the date, witnesses-- that they took her. And not just that-- I told you I don't know if it will be here-- that I've worked in the-- near the crematorium, what the clothes they brought out from the crematorium.  INT: Yes, you'll tell me. SK: It was my work to search for jewelry, and I find my sister's pocket, her [? legitimation, ?] because everybody had to have identification. Because we catch you-- you are not a Jew? Where is your papers? So everybody had to have something that what-- or you belong to a school, or you belong what. So Günczler [NON-ENGLISH], and my friends with whom I worked together also, the shochet, the slaughterer has two daughters-- [NON-ENGLISH]-- they were with us in Auschwitz. [? Gitu ?] is in Israel. She-- we were together, these four girls. And they all-- don't worry. Somebody has hers the same dress-- not her. But wait. I had in the pocket. Then everybody looked. And we were-- we got this [? brom, ?] this medicine, what everybody lost their period, and didn't think. Otherwise, we will get crazy. We had only one thing-- one-track-minded-- food-- surviving. Everyday I lived here. This was the crematorium, and this was the work. So every day when we went the work, through the crematorium, to the hospital, we will go in the crematorium, when it will stop the work, when it won't be any more work. But it ended before, because I will tell you why. 
INT: Let's get back to your family. So you, as the elder-- were you the eldest daughter? SK: No. My older--  INT: Yes we-- SK: --was the who married and had a baby.  INT: Yes. But you were the eldest one left at home after that? SK: No, and then I had two brothers who was in the yeshivot.  INT: I see. SK: One of them worked in Auschwitz with me together, and then he went to Germany. And before liberation, he was digging a grave to hide the German. And it was raining, and he was weak. And there went a-- a-- a kapo-- kicked him. And he ram in there. Because where he worked, we had very good clothes. We changed it every day. In fact, I took every day in the camp in good shoes, and I walked in-- in this Dutch wooden shoes. So he also had very good clothes. And he was still alive. He told me that guy, they rode, and they schlepped already from him the shoes, and the-- this and that.  INT: Tell me about-- SK: And this killed my father, this brother--  INT: Mm-hmm. SK: --of mine, because he hoped. He always-- I told you. You're not happy, I come home. So he said, but you don't know us when a Kaddish. He had seven son, and not remained one. And he hoped every day with his heart attack. He went to the train station. Maybe my brother will be appearing, 'cause I told him he's alive. 
INT: Mm-hmm. SK: Well, when this guy told him that he witnessed-- finish. He got a heart attack.  INT: Tell me about your grandparents. Your mother-- SK: My grandparents?  INT: Yes. SK: They were--  INT: Your-- SK: --very distinguished people, not because--  INT: Your mother's parents? SK: My father's.  INT: Your father's. SK: My mother's parents. Yes, my mother's parents were business people-- all of them. My grandmother was a very nice, tall lady. And my grandfather was a accountant in the [NON-ENGLISH], the German. I told you. He was educated. And all my-- all my-- my mother's sister and brothers were in business. One was in button and thread. One was-- one brother was the health-- help from what they make medicine. I saw that with my own eyes. I was younger. Then my mother took me to a wedding. You needed a passport to Czechoslovakia. And she took me. I don't know why. She want to show off for the-- black Gypsy. Because they all called me that I look like a Gypsy, and wanted to pinch me. And they took me to the wedding for my mother's one of the sisters married, to Presov, but also went to Majdanek, Lublin in 1942. I'm sure she was one child, two child. But I don't know what happened, because from 1942, we didn't had any--  INT: Mm-hmm. SK: --correspondence with them.  INT: What about your-- your father's parents? SK: My father's family was very, very religious. I could say Hasidic. One was a great rabbi in Humenné, but has now two grandchildren. One of them is the [NON-ENGLISH]. One is the Bobobver [? Rav. ?] You don't know this, but this is great dynasty from [NON-ENGLISH]. So all my family who come back from my father's side-- not brother or sisters-- we was the second cousin and third cousin-- they're all very Hasidic-- rabbis and all-- only the children, they don't want to be already. So-- and-- 
INT: Did you visit them often? SK: Yes. Yes, I visit them to the-- when they had the first children's marriage, I went to every marriage-- every wedding. And my cousin told me once-- I called him up. I arrived. I'm here. I know even if you crawl, you will come. They didn't need me so much as I need them. I didn't had anybody else. I have two-- from my father's side, one first cousin in the whole world existing, and my mother's side is two in Israel. And we live so far. And they have their children's children, what is an-- a bunch. Everybody has lots of children, like me.  INT: When you were-- when you were young, before the war, did you celebrate holidays together? SK: With the family?  INT: With-- SK: No.  INT: No. SK: No, because one lived in Belgium. And with Czechoslovakia, you couldn't-- don't forget. When I leave, then I was big already to remember. It was wartime.  INT: Right. SK: Since 1938 was the Kristallnacht, or '36?  INT: '38. SK: '38, yeah? So I was 11 years old, 10 years old. And-- and don't forget-- when you lived in a little village, and very Hasidic, everything is very restricted. And anyhow, in Europe, it was a dignity between parents and children. She wants some-- he wants something-- twice. What?  INT: Nothing. SK: Well, we--  INT: Go ahead. SK: We shouldn't talk about this?  INT: No, no, go ahead. It's just for the time. SK: What? The-- 
INT: For the time. SK: That we should hurry up?  INT: Go ahead. Tell me. Tell me more. SK: I don't know what you asked me, because we were disturbed.  INT: Tell me what your home was like. SK: Tell me your--  INT: Your home. Tell me. Describe your home to me. SK: My home? It was very restricted. We didn't had, as I told you, library to books to read. I got up in the morning. I had younger brother, sister. And I have to change their diaper. I have to wash the diapers. We-- my mother was very, very clean. And we had a-- you what a symbol of the drugstore, the-- I have it there, the brass [INAUDIBLE].  INT: Yes. SK: I have to clean it. Or I had silverware where to clean. And-- and we had a stove what was-- have to brush it to be shiny. And I was very good in it. And I like to do it. And-- and lots of housework-- wash and that. That was-- my mother didn't let to have by the cooking, because she was afraid I didn't washed enough my hand to make the [NON-ENGLISH] or anything. Because she wanted to do it. And really, the horizon was small, because even if it wasn't so small, they didn't let us, you know. They-- they wanted to keep us under their control. But I don't know why it was a village where you-- even if you want, you couldn't do anything bad-- nothing, really. 
INT: What-- what languages did you speak in the house? SK: In the house? I spoke Hungarian to my father and to my mother, of course. And my father answered me Yiddish.  INT: I see. SK: And they talked between them Czechoslovakian.  INT: We're going to change the tape now. SK: Pardon?  INT: We're going to change the tape now.  INT: --two with Szidonia Kornfeld. If I were-- SK: Born Günczler.  INT: Born Günczler. SK: Please.  INT: If I were a guest at your Seder table, what would I expect to see? SK: What would you expect?  INT: Yes. If I were visiting your home-- SK: Yeah.  INT: --for Pesach, Seder-- SK: What would you witness?  INT: Yes. What would I-- yes. SK: That's what you mean. You would witness something you would never forget. Because we are all together in the table. And it's very traditional. We do everything as 20 years or 100 years ago. The difference is that I have four children--  INT: No, I mean when you were a little girl. SK: Oh, when I was a girl.  INT: Yes. SK: Oh. That was almost the same. We sit at the table, and my mother made everything, and she, every year, collapsed because of Seder, because of the preparation, once they bought and readied the chicken. But it was something, especially the last Seder. As long as my eyes will be open, I will see it. I visualize. I see it with-- it stays in my vivid memory, how my two brothers came home from the yeshiva, and they said Torah, you know? By each section, when they said, I went out from Egypt, and then [INAUDIBLE] this and that was the Torah. For the 10 minutes, he can. Then the other brother started to the next section. Then my father. Then my father [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] said the Torah. And all the young brothers, it was such a high holy day, because everybody ask the Ma Nishtana, this 11-year-old, the six-year-old. It-- it was a-- nine-year-old, little children. And they all asked the question, and it was-- I don't know. You asked-- sorry-- you asked me a different question, how would you like to see the Seder. 
INT: No, no. If I were a guest at your Seder table-- SK: Yeah.  INT: --in your village-- SK: Yeah.  INT: --what-- what-- what would I witness there. Did you sing songs at-- SK: Songs, sure. There is a part what-- in the end, what goes the song, sing. And then in the middle also, that is sung. They sing beautiful, beautiful song.  INT: And what did your mother serve? SK: Mother served-- we didn't eat till the first days, the knaidel. Because they don't mix their flour with their thing. We had noodles, fish, and a-- the soup, the meat, and compote, homemade compote. We didn't bought anything, anything ready-made.  INT: Did you ever invite any non-Jews to the Seder table in your village? SK: We invited any people? Always. Always was people. Because it was a village, lots of poor people and also were beggars, beggars who come to-- to-- special to a little village like these. They come to the [NON-ENGLISH], to [NON-ENGLISH], what is it, he has a [NON-ENGLISH], or however you call it, [INAUDIBLE], and he comes before Pesach. And some couldn't go home, so they stayed. They were invited especially by the rabbi. House was two yard, one [NON-ENGLISH], one [NON-ENGLISH], and one only for the poor people to sleep. And they come. They were by us, they went to other people, but we were by the rabbi's tish.  INT: You never had-- did you ever have any non-Jews at your Seder table? Did-- no. SK: No. We were not such reformed people. And before the war, in such a small village, never happen. We never were so close to them. 
INT: What was your village like? Tell me what you village looked like. SK: Village, it was a pretty rich village, because we had mines from stone. I see the mine from up on the-- my eyes. They made, like, [? Ajax, ?] you know, from the stones, and other factory. They had a cannery factory. This says Bodrogkeresztúr. I should give you a little souvenir from Bodrogkeresztúr, from the village, mine we have there. And-- and then mostly it was like in a village, what grew the wheat. The field, [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] [NON-ENGLISH]. I don't know what you say it. People owned these-- these big fields. I don't know how many acres or whatever. And it was potatoes and wheat and other. And the most income was the winery, where the south part. Tokaj and [NON-ENGLISH] were the best wine in Hungary. Even today, all New York, Tokaj wine.  INT: When you were at home in your village, did you know about the rise of Nazism? SK: When I was--  INT: When you were still at home in your village-- SK: Yeah, when--  INT: --did you hear about Nazism? SK: Sure. In-- since 1936, there was no other subject that everybody-- I remember my brother, who couldn't afford to buy the newspaper. And they have-- they-- even there other little notion store, where they had newspapers, cigarettes, traffic, they call it. And he is standing by the window to watch what is the headline. What [INAUDIBLE] line, what-- but I heard when they talked about. And also they said when they came home from shul, it was always before we start to eat, we talked over the politics. But I didn't understand to it, and I didn't care for it. 
INT: Were there-- were there any antisemitic acts in your village? Were people behaving in a way that was not nice to the Jews? SK: Of course.  INT: What-- SK: All of them. [NON-ENGLISH], you didn't [? even ?] [? daily-- ?] even in the school. There was a time, I think it was 1942. I never mentioned to you, just one of the nights that comes to my mind. You know, we lived downstairs. And I was very much afraid from this [NON-ENGLISH], from this drunken-- it was wine to-- like water. You know? And they had the money on the weekend, and they drank it up. They didn't have what to eat, the kids, nothing, not to clothes, not to eat. So once this-- it called [NON-ENGLISH], the guy. And I remember like today, I was in my bed, and my mother was very frightened. And everybody went and put the tables and the chairs to the door, that maybe he comes in. He has a knife. He will slaughter us. You know, like in pogroms in [NON-ENGLISH] and that. And he screamed on the street. And I looked in the window, like I was always interested on everything, when I was afraid every. And I remember. And he was screaming. I see him in front of my eyes like it was yesterday or today or now. And he screams when he passed our house. I was so happy. He came to the door, so not finish. He will kill us. He will kill us. But then he was-- he was-- we went furthermore. So this was one episode that is very clear. And I remember, there was the 11th. It was like the-- by the German Army. There is the young-- 
INT: Youth? SK: Youth. There is a special--  INT: Hitler Youth? SK: Huh?  INT: The Hitler Youth? SK: Huh?  INT: The Hitler Youth? SK: Jugend. Youth. This group. And they were singing and walking on the-- it was every Tuesday or Wednesday or whatever. And this group, then everybody was shivering, what will come out from it. You know what they did once? The Jewish boys has to go too. So when my boys-- my brother came home from the yeshiva or before the yeshiva, he once went to-- he had-- called, like when they call you for the army, he was called. And my brother, this Armin, who was in Auschwitz also together, he went in. And he went in very much hills, you know, mountains, hills, you know, where the grapes vine-- you know, it has to be a little hilly. And they went up the hill, and they had to dig there, I don't know, tomatoes, potatoes, whatever. They had to do some agriculture work for the army or whatever they call it. And one [NON-ENGLISH], one Christian boy, wanted to throw him down from the hill. And he would throw him down, he would be finished, because it's very--  INT: Steep. SK: --it was finished. And I don't know how he survived, but he came home, my brother. And I never mentioned this story yet. He got unconscious. 24 hours, he didn't talk. He did nothing. They went to the rabbi's grave, and-- and lots of people, and they prayed Tehillim. Tehillim. You know what is Tehillim? They went to have, and they prayed. And they said we should take the [NON-ENGLISH] and I don't know what else from his thing, and we should bury it there, I don't know, near the rabbi, or near my father's father. I don't remember, because I always wanted to go there, they didn't let me. And my-- the whole house, a small house, so many people were crying and-- and saying the prayers. And all of a sudden, he opened his eyes, and he said, I heard everything. I just couldn't talk. And this I remember like today, all of it. And this guy, not later, much later, was taken to Auschwitz, survived. 
INT: Did you ever meet any refugees from Poland or from Germany or from Austria that-- that had come to your village? Were there any that had come? SK: Yes.  INT: When did they come? Do you remember? SK: One was coming [INAUDIBLE] where she slept--  INT: No, to your village. SK: To my village?  INT: When-- yes. Did-- when you were-- when you were still in your village, did-- SK: After the war--  INT: During the war and before the war, were there any-- SK: We lived together. What's the question?  INT: Were there refugees, though, that had-- had left Poland and left Austria and left Germany that-- that came to live in your village? SK: There was one, the sister, my mother's sister, who was shot by the [NON-ENGLISH]. She escaped from Czechoslovakia in 1942, come to my mother, who has a sister in Bodrogkeresztúr. But you don't know what we [NON-ENGLISH]. That is you will be hanged or shot if you hide a Czechoslovakian refugee, or Polish, or any refugee. If you hide, you're going to be shot. It was [INAUDIBLE]. So one night, my mother decided it's very dangerous. We live in the border. We have, or the border. [NON-ENGLISH] was 30 kilometers. And-- and they-- they catch her by us, we'll be all killed. So my sister dressed up in a-- a nun dress, and my mother-- my grandfather had a sister in [NON-ENGLISH]. That's-- that's like I said Vancouver, like very far. But it wasn't so dangerous. Was the border city. And it was no-- not to worry for the time being. So she went there, my sister, and she hide this. I have postcards, what she wrote. I have here the postcards. I'll show them to you afterwards. But she wrote to my mother from that place. Also my sister wrote to her that she had a baby, and how I would like you to invite to come for this bris. And also what do you say to grandparents, to your parents, if they cannot come to the bris, or if they would live through that, to-- to witness, to be [NON-ENGLISH] or whatever. This, I have a postcard, written in black and white, with the date, 1942, whatever the-- I showed you, but you don't have room for all this evidence. 
INT: Were there any other people-- yeah-- were there other people that you saw in the village that had come too? SK: No.  INT: No. SK: Oh, maybe was, but they were hidden.  INT: They were in hiding. SK: So secretive. It was life and death.  INT: Now, in March 1944, that's when the Germans entered Hungary. Tell me-- SK: March 19.  INT: Tell me about the day that your life changed. Where were you? SK: Just a minute. Somebody was before here by the door. We went to look.  INT: Yeah, he did. SK: No? So--  INT: Where were you when-- when-- when you heard the news? SK: Bodrogkeresztúr. Bodrogkeresztúr. And I remember like today, it was a Sunday. And it was-- I was brooming the street. It was a-- a law, you have to clean the street in front of you. So in the front of our house, I was cleaning. And everybody was talking, you know, the Germans coming. And then my mother sent me for something in the grocery store, and there was a German soldier. And I looked. It was a-- I admired, rather good-looking, rather kind. He said, [NON-ENGLISH]. So I didn't know [NON-ENGLISH], because we called it different in Jewish, so [NON-ENGLISH]. And he showed a cigarette, so I know he wants matches. And I said this grocery man, happened to be he was not Jewish, that he-- the guy wants a [NON-ENGLISH]. They were very polite, German politeness. And this was March 19. And I don't know. It's-- maybe it's irrelevant, this matter, to tell you that [NON-ENGLISH] had come home from the yeshiva. And when the Germans stepped it into Hungary-- to Bodrogkeresztúr, first, they opened all the winery basement, or however you call it. The wine-- winery-- 
INT: Wine cellars. SK: Cellar. And they took all the wine. It was 100 years old. It was thick like jam. They knew where to go, because if-- if you would ever go to the village, every door has a basement was a winery. And they come in. They were [NON-ENGLISH], drunken. They were-- to have such a wine, they never see and heard. And this was Friday. And the boy came home from-- I have the book here in English. That boy came home from the yeshiva, and we have a Bodrog. That's why I called Bodrogkeresztúr, where we were. And that is another village, where he come from. And it was filled. And when we come, and one German, there was not even a bridge, just such a-- a-- they call it [NON-ENGLISH]. It's no-- [NON-ENGLISH]. That they strap in, and the-- a guy pushed it, and they come over from this side of the water to the other. You know? They put the-- the wood they used to bring from the forest in that. So there was that. And the guy come from the village, that he would come to Bodrogkeresztúr, because he's from Tokaj, where the wine. Was six kilometer walking distance. And also he said he had a dream that the [NON-ENGLISH] [? miracle ?] rabbi, that rabbi, told him that you will survive. Yeah. And all the children should go home, because it is very dangerous. But I promise you, you will survive. But your grandfather had been told by that [? miracle ?] Rabbi something that he would go through something very bad. So he arrived to that village, and the Germans shot him. Like-- like this distance, they shot him. And he was there Friday. And there was a very few rich people in Montreal-- in Keresztúr. And everybody went to see what they can do in the city hall about the gendarmes, about the police, what they can do. And they were stopped on the [INAUDIBLE] to bring the boy. He was there, half-unconscious. And at night, everybody saw-- we saw with the bare eyes that a dog was licking him, and he was dreaming what's going to be with him. I have the book. It's so interesting, because my village and my place. And Sunday-- till Sunday, they left him there to lie. They took him to the hospital. It was, I'm sure, he paid a fortune to let him out. And imagine, he survived. He went limping, with a shot leg, to Auschwitz. And he survived. And he come home, and he lives in London. And he wrote a book from that story. 
INT: Now, when were you ordered to leave your home? When did they order you to leave? SK: For-- in-- they come April 9th-- March 19th.  INT: March 19th. SK: I'm sorry. I have here the paper, I thought, when we made the-- here. [PAUSES FOR 9 SECONDS] So March-- April 3rd. [NON-ENGLISH].  INT: No, March 19 was [INAUDIBLE]. SK: May 17, [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] 1944, late in the afternoon. 3 o'clock-- oh, before it was-- they gathered us in the village.  INT: Well, that's what I wanted to know. How much time did they give you to go to the village? SK: Just a minute.  INT: Did they give you an hour? Did they give you a day? SK: Not really, but I have it written there.  INT: Well, it doesn't matter. SK: Anyhow, they-- they said to us right away, we should take-- I have it here right now, in the beginning. And I will not have to repeat it. But here I have it that March-- April 19, they take us to the ghetto, to Sátoraljaújhely.  INT: Oh, but yes. But when you-- SK: --from Bodrogkeresztúr. But I have before.  INT: When they left-- when-- when they told you to get out of your home, where did they-- SK: We were-- my mother was baking cookies.  INT: Yes? SK: We should have for the trip. And they come in, the Gendarmes, but from our same village. We know them. They said, listen, Günczler [NON-ENGLISH], you have to pack your package. You can bring only-- I know the exact details, all. And you have to come up here, in front of the house, five in a row. And I'll come back in 20 minutes, or whatever, and you have to be ready. So my mother put us the clothes on and the food for the kids, whatever we could. And we-- we were waiting there. And they took us for the night to this big [NON-ENGLISH], has a big shul. And there we sit in there. But this is there. I shouldn't repeat it. 
INT: No, no, it's OK. SK: I will talk about it. Or if you want to start, and then I'll tell you.  INT: No, no, no. Just tell me. SK: Now? OK. So when-- so that night, we sit in the shul, everybody and their luggage, and the men saying Tehillim, Tehillim, praying to God. And small babies, little babies, and pregnant ladies, and old ladies, and pious people, rabbi from the village. Everybody had to sit there, around. And only the doctor, who was a Jewish doctor, but he was a doctor of the [NON-ENGLISH], the [NON-ENGLISH], the big farm and everything. They had their own--  INT: Estate. SK: Mhm. And they liked this doctor. It was their doctor. So they take care only that he shouldn't have to be deported. But it took-- it didn't take long. For four weeks, they kept him. After four weeks, they said, into the ghetto. And he don't survive.  INT: How long did they keep you in the square? SK: On the square, in the synagogue?  INT: Where-- where-- where-- the synagogue square, yes. SK: Till that-- the other day, till the afternoon.  INT: Did you take any-- did you hide anything before you left, any of the things that you did-- did you have any time? SK: Only food and clothes we had in our mind. I'm sure my mother had her ring on or earrings or something, some of them we hide.  INT: What was the name of the ghetto that you went to? SK: Sátoraljaújhely ghetto. Very famous ghetto. 
INT: How did you get there? SK: 3 o'clock in the afternoon, we left Keresztúr.  INT: No, how did you get there? SK: In a horse and buggy. As many you could throw in, babies, old people. Everybody was thrown in that wagon, as many you could. It was 500 people on the platform on the train station. Because the boys was all in slave labor, in the army. And some of their girls escaped to Budapest and hide themself-- not in the village. Nobody hide themself. But it was so many possibilities. You were just thinking. My mind today, how come the people were-- I was a kid, but there were so many educated, intellectual people have friends. And-- and-- and the business people, they could have hide themself. It was so big, that village, with so many forests and-- and wineries, they could hide here and there. And I don't know why nobody even tried.  INT: Did you know where you were going? SK: No. They said they'd take us to [NON-ENGLISH]. But we didn't know that we go into another hell, because we went to a big family together. It was a courtyard. By us, in Keresztúr, when they come in, they screamed, and they fast, fast, fast, schnell. It was a courtyard. It was the rav-- you know what mean rav, rabbi, and then another family, a lady. She [NON-ENGLISH]-- I speak Hungarian-- and the next neighbor like this. The son lives in Los Angeles, a multimillionaire. They-- they were also a big family. I don't know, 13 children. And then the-- the rabbi, the other rabbi also, with lots of children, grandmother, auntie. And here, this side, two long, big yard. And we were here in the front. So we all have to-- 
INT: Do you remember the date that you went into the ghetto? SK: Yes. I have it written. I gave it to you when you asked me there. Tuesday, May 17. No, no, this is the ghetto we left. April 19, 1944, we went to ghetto Sátoraljaújhely from Bodrogkeresztúr.  INT: How big was the ghetto? SK: Very big. Many--  INT: Many blocks? Many city blocks? SK: Many blocks, many streets. Many blocks, streets. Because the people who lived, let's say, in Hampstead, they brought them in to-- to Bedford. And they have to leave that for the Christians who live there. They moved in. They took every, whatever they find, if not all of them, but most of them. And we had to go together. That's a-- where was the ghetto side, [NON-ENGLISH], [NON-ENGLISH], and then the streets. That was swamped with people--  INT: With people. SK: --with children screaming and yelling. You know, it was, in one room, six or eight people.  INT: Was there a wall or a wooden fence or-- SK: No, it was rooms.  INT: No, no. Outside, around the ghetto. Did they have a wall? SK: Yes, yeah.  INT: They had a-- SK: But this, I never see the wall. I never went there.  INT: Were there-- SK: Well, maybe I have seen it, but I don't remember.  INT: Were there guards at the gate? SK: Oh, guard, it was everywhere.  INT: Was anyone allowed to go out of the ghetto? SK: No. 
INT: No. Which members of the family were with you in the ghetto? SK: My parents, my father and my mother, Isaac. Armin. No, Armin was in the yeshiva. Jeno, Wilmos, Leo--  INT: All your sisters and brothers. SK: They were all small kids.  INT: And where did you live? SK: In Bodrogkeresztúr.  INT: What kind of-- yeah. What-- what kind of-- what kind of place were you living in in the ghetto? SK: Oh, it was in the ghetto place, in a street, [NON-ENGLISH] 12. And there was a big courtyard. And it was about-- here, I don't have it, but here I have it, how many people lived together in one room and the whole backyard. So it's-- I will repeat again this? OK.  INT: Yeah. SK: What else?  INT: How many were-- you and your family were living in one room? SK: No, there was a whole bunch of people.  INT: All in one room? How did you manage? How did your mother manage with cooking and keeping clean? You were so many. SK: Clean? My mother was extremely clean. And we have a little pail, and washed and cooked the diapers. And-- and she cooked something very little. We didn't have from what. Whatever we have with us, we used it.  INT: You didn't get-- SK: There was no market to go to buy. But I remember, the last week from the ghetto, it was so hunger, that I even told to beg to the people for food. 
INT: Did anybody smuggle food in that you know of? SK: There was no smuggling--  INT: They couldn't smuggle. SK: --possibilities. Maybe some other people, I don't know. Some other people, or people from [NON-ENGLISH] who knows the ghetto neighbors or what, but not to my knowledge. We-- nothing.  INT: Did they have any-- any observance of Jewish laws-- SK: Oh, yeah.  INT: Ritual slaughter? SK: This was never missed in this group of people like us--  INT: Yes. SK: --the-- the tefillin, davening.  INT: Yes. SK: They made minyan in the-- the [NON-ENGLISH].  INT: The square, yes. SK: And in the backyard, or here or there, this was no problem. And beside that, in the ghetto, was a shuls. What was before the ghetto, there was Jewish streets and Jewish shuls. But I'm not familiar. I don't know exactly. My husband would be able to better, because he was born in that city, and he lived there.  INT: And your father went-- your father-- SK: And my father was also born in that city.  INT: And he went to the shul there, in the ghetto. SK: Yes, yes, yes. And they cut his beard in the ghetto. That was the biggest tragedy. There it started the tragedy.  INT: How did they observe Shabbat in the ghetto? SK: Oh, that, there was no problem. Because the Shabbat--  INT: Yes? SK: I should say it? Shabbat was so [NON-ENGLISH], you know, the mind and in the body and all-- all [NON-ENGLISH] behavior. Or I don't know how to-- what kind of expression. That was like I have to go to drink a glass of water. Oh, tomorrow is Shabbos. Whatever possibilities, we will keep it. What-- we'll cook an egg, we will-- whatever. 
INT: Were there any marriages in the ghetto that you remember? SK: Not to my knowledge, but engagements, yes. Fell in love, meet each other, and it was terrible feeling when they had to divide each other. Oh, it was very bad.  INT: How did-- how did they manage with death in the ghetto, when people died? SK: The ghetto, this-- you see, you asked me a question, what anybody could tell you, but not me. They're from the older generation. Because I don't remember, how was it. We have such a big city, had a cemetery too. And I'm sure they let them to take out. Or I don't know. Because in [NON-ENGLISH] was very much [NON-ENGLISH].  INT: Mhm. SK: In the beginning, they were-- the Jewish [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] who managed the-- how do you call it? I read so much about it.  INT: In the ghetto? SK: In the ghetto--  INT: The Judenrate? SK: The Judenrate, exactly. They-- they-- I'm sure that they care on it, if somebody died, they should be buried in the--  INT: Did you work in the ghetto? Did you do any work in the ghetto? SK: No, no, no.  INT: How did you spend your day? SK: I helped my mother, whatever was-- we had to wash, mainly the children clothes. There was a-- a-- well, and the-- get the water, we had. And then we cooked, and we washed whatever we had. Whatever my mother had in the house, [INAUDIBLE], we-- we-- we took it along. The food was the most important. 
INT: We're going to change the tape now.  INT: Tape three with Szidonia Günczler Kornfeld. Were there any particular quotations from the Tanakh that gave your family strength while you were in the ghetto? SK: What mean Tanakh?  INT: From-- from the Bible or from any of your teachings-- SK: It was--  INT: --that-- that helped to get through all this in your-- all this-- SK: Of course. This was the only thing, the faith, what made us to survive, that we were religious, and we believed that we will survive. And we have to pray to God he should help us to go through this hell on earth.  INT: Did-- while you were in the ghetto, did you know anything about what was going on outside? SK: Unfortunately, not even an inkling. not a word, nothing.  INT: There were no radios or underground newspapers? SK: No, no.  INT: Did anyone escape from the ghetto? SK: I'm sure, but I don't-- not from my family.  INT: Did you know the truth about the gas chambers when you were in the ghetto? Did you know anything about them? Were there any aktions in the ghetto? Did they-- SK: It was--  INT: Aktions in the ghetto? Did the Germans do anything against certain groups of people? SK: Of course. They took to work people and to-- they take them out the young girls or young men for work, forced labor. But I was too young. I wasn't so young like-- as I told you, the horizon was so small. And they didn't let us to-- to be grownup, you know, to do things. Actually, the horizon was small, and I knew just that. I have to stay near my mother. And then they didn't let me to work, and-- because they were afraid we should be religious, stay in the level as we. And we did. 
INT: Approximately how long did you stay in the ghetto? Do you remember when you left? SK: Four weeks exactly.  INT: What time of day did you leave the ghetto? Do you remember? SK: Yes.  INT: In the morning, in the afternoon? SK: In the afternoon.  INT: In the afternoon. SK: In the afternoon, April 19, 1944, we leave the ghetto, 3 o'clock, from Sátoraljaújhely.  INT: What instructions did they give you? What did they tell you? SK: The same thing like in our village, just we were the first--  INT: Transport? SK: Transportation to go to Auschwitz. So it was panicky, you know, very panicky. They said, come-- everybody, out from your house, from your room. And bring you only a small package, what you can carry with you. And come out and stay five in a row. So can you imagine? You cannot imagine that my mother, with a two-year-old, when she was pregnant, and with a five-year-old, and with a nine-year-old, and with a 11-year-old. And the kids were maybe crying. I don't even remember. I just hold one or the other. And-- and my mother was so tall and skinny and today is pregnant. And I don't know why she had to be so punished. That hurt me more than what I lived through, that she, with her 42 years of age, she has to live. So we went to take these children. I mean, they were crying. And to see the child was crying is-- is-- is heart rendering. I-- 
INT: Did you know where you were going? SK: No. [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] The day when I arrived, I know where I am. I am in hell, living hell.  INT: Tell me-- describe the journey to Auschwitz. How many were you in each car, and who else was with you on the transport? SK: Except my sister, who was pregnant, and she lived in [NON-ENGLISH] ghetto, where she came a little bit later, and my brother, who-- Armin, who was in a yeshiva. Imagine a boy who was born 20 years old not yet, and he was taken from the yeshiva, who was learning only Talmud. And he just living to-- for God, to be his [NON-ENGLISH]. How you say it? Not--  INT: Keep the covenant. SK: And-- and he's such a boy. And he was smart. Because in the school, I remember when he was in the sixth grade or in the higher, third grade, he was very smart and very good in writing poems and writing Torahs and that. And he was-- the Red Cross got established that year in-- in our village. And they choose him as a president, a boy who had a little payots behind. And it was so many Goyims, [NON-ENGLISH], but he was chosen. And I remember, he wrote a poem with his name, Günczler, Armin. And each letter had 12 rows. And I remember the-- a few of-- I remembered more, but now I slowly forgot. But I remember that A, Armin, in Hungarian, if I would be able to fulfill my dreams, [NON-ENGLISH]. [NON-ENGLISH] is dream. If I could fulfill my dreams, the-- the knowledge what come from such a [NON-ENGLISH]. You know [NON-ENGLISH]? How you say a [NON-ENGLISH]? 
INT: I don't know what a [NON-ENGLISH] is. SK: The-- where the water comes.  INT: A well. A well. SK: Not the-- the well.  INT: Well. SK: Comes. But my thirst got quenched?  INT: Quenched. SK: From the knowledge from my teacher about it comes from such a [NON-ENGLISH], what-- it what-- took for my teacher. He grabbed the-- the deepness of that knowledge. That was the A. And in the G, the Günczler, I remember [NON-ENGLISH]. And I remember the beautiful poem. And he went to-- from--  INT: But he wasn't-- he wasn't with you on his transport. SK: He was with me in Auschwitz, because--  INT: Yes, but on this transport. SK: No, no.  INT: Who was with you? SK: Except him and the [INAUDIBLE], my sister was pregnant. The rest, everybody was with me.  INT: How did you get to Auschwitz? On-- SK: In the afternoon, to--  INT: No, on. On. How did you get there? How did they take you to Auschwitz? SK: I just tell you that we have ghetto. 3 o'clock, they gathered us.  INT: Yes. SK: In-- in-- for more the backyard, for courtyard, five in a row. And they took us from there in the [? Ujhely. ?] In Sátoraljaújhely was also a synagogue, a big synagogue. And they gather us there to sit there, waiting till 3 o'clock, when the train arrived. And they put us in the train. Well, put us, schnell, schnell-- 
INT: How many were you in a-- in each car? SK: About 75, 80, 85. Oh, it come-- it depends on the SS. When he was standing there with the German-- with the Hungarian police guard. But not the police guard, was worst, who had the feather, the--  INT: Iron Cross? SK: The Gendarmes, Gendarmes. Gendarmes. And they hit us. Schnell, schnell, schnell! Then go up. So we pushed ourselves fast. The more the better. And we were there, I don't know how many. We could like herrings. We were-- we were just like this. We couldn't lie. We couldn't sit. We couldn't stand.  INT: How long was the journey to Auschwitz? SK: From Tuesday afternoon, 3 o'clock, to Sunday morning. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] We arrived Auschwitz Shabbos morning, May 20, 1944. [NON-ENGLISH] in Hebrew, this is the Auschwitz yahrzeit, for [? Gizela ?] [? Grunfeld ?] my mother, of [NON-ENGLISH] Günczler Kornfeld, and all my sisters and brothers, what I have mentioned here.  INT: The trip-- SK: It's got Isaac, Jeno, Wilmos, Leo, Edit. All-- all these perished and my mother. Just my father was very lucky.  INT: Did-- no. Just tell me-- I want to know about the trip that-- the trip. SK: The trip was terrible, terrible. First of all, when we haven't even started to go, they put us in a tunnel--  INT: Yes. SK: --in a dark tunnel for hours. And we were expecting that they will kill us-- didn't-- didn't know how and what, with gas or what. I'm sure this is the place where they will kill us. But we were waiting about three hours, and then it started. Train moved. It moved. It moved. It moved. Then it stopped in Kosice or somewhere in Czechoslovakia, and they give us some water. Because we were screaming crazily. And they were afraid that they were going to break out a-- a-- 
INT: A riot. SK: --killing in the train or something very bad. So they stopped the train, and they give us in a pail of water. And in a minute, it went away. But the train started to go again and no more water. It was so bad. The children were screaming. I remember this-- this Leo was so crying for water, water, that this Edit had to make pee-pee, and he drink-- my mother give it to him to drink. And that's true. I promise you. It's all true, like you see me here now. And we stopped in [NON-ENGLISH]. Was a very great [INAUDIBLE]. Well, for you, I'm telling what is strange to you, but for me too. But that time, I was now there. I was-- my only desire, if I ever get free, I want to go back to the [NON-ENGLISH], to know where is the place that when the train stopped, people were utterly crying, loud and loud. [NON-ENGLISH]. I don't know in Yiddish how to, you know, used to tell that he should pray for them or-- or have in mind that they should survive, or they shouldn't be killed. And all kinds of words you heard, this, the rabbi from [NON-ENGLISH], and the [INAUDIBLE]. And I went-- it was my desire to see who are them, the people who are crying and screaming. And then I went back to see that after the-- in 1966. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] '68.  INT: At what time of the day did you get to Auschwitz? Was it in the morning, or-- SK: Yeah, in the morning. In [? October. ?] 
INT: In the morning? What-- what-- SK: From Tuesday, Wednesday, Thursday, always three days it took. And this was so long that 3 o'clock, we left Tuesday, May 17, and we arrived in the ghetto. I have the calendar from that year, what is showed this calendar. What I showed you. I find it in the garbage in 1944. This is exactly a date in Hebrew and in English and in Hungarian when they took us, and when we arrived to Auschwitz.  INT: What happened? What did you see when-- when they opened the doors of the cars? SK: What I saw? [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] This is written in every book, if you read Holocaust books.  INT: But what did you see? SK: No, that's what I want to tell you. That it's written in every Holocaust book how when we arrived, and these striped-- striped Jewish guys who had to work there by the train station, where later, I work myself there. And this-- this-- the-- they whispered, [NON-ENGLISH], for the little boys, you should say that you are 16 years old, you should survive-- many. And they were always whispering something. But, you know, like chaos. You cannot imagine. I think this is the hell of Faust opera, you know, when-- there, you got-- you got up from the train station, and they made it purposely, with such a hitting you, fast, fast, schnell, [NON-ENGLISH]. They didn't care after three days, thirsty and hungry and tired and bitter and-- and-- and-- and-- and no future. So everybody was running. We were happy. Who knows where we take us. Anywhere will be better than in the train. So we're running. And I saw many people stayed there in the train. And I look back. Why they stayed? Maybe I should stay too. So then I find out that this is dead people. [LAUGHS] You know? We stepped them. Then when we don't-- we-- we-- we didn't know. And you know how they schlepped down the sick, the very sick people. There was a Red Cross car. And we thought this is the Red Cross. And many people back then, they had no-- no [? friends ?] to go, they'd be put in there. So they put them. 
INT: Where did they take those? SK: Old people. To the crematorium. Right away, there was the crematorium, the gas chamber, and finished, many.  INT: And when you got-- was there-- SK: Many, many.  INT: --was there a selection right away? SK: No. When we arrived-- you could see. I have here a few pictures.  INT: Yeah, we'll see them later. SK: And you will-- the Holocaust when you see when they selected the women, separate five in a row, and the men. So soon as we arrived, they said we should stay five in a row, man and woman. Then Mengele was so busy that he-- we stayed and stayed and stayed. It was almost dark.  INT: Did you see Mengele? SK: From the morning--  INT: You saw Mengele? SK: Sure. Of course.  INT: How did you know it was Mengele? Did-- had someone told you that it was Mengele, or were you-- SK: That I'm not that many. I didn't know. And I didn't know where we were. I just want to tell you the minute they ask us that we should put our hand up or just-- he went like this. He had a stick, like this. And he made [NON-ENGLISH]. And nobody just [NON-ENGLISH]. This is you should see with your eyes. There was such a panic, such a-- everybody was running just to run. And everybody looked and screamed, Mommy, [NON-ENGLISH] names, you know? Even now, when I wake up sometimes at night, it-- it seemed to me-- I live there on the [NON-ENGLISH], in a train station. The train at night stops, what? I'm in Auschwitz? But I didn't hear the voices, you know, the screaming, what I heard all the time when they stepped off from the train, and they looking for each other. You know? 
INT: We-- when you were separated, did you-- do you remember anything that maybe your mother or your father said to you before-- SK: Yes. Yes. When we got separated, my mother went and-- Mommy go. You leave me here. Leave me here. And my mother goes and looks back with very sad eyes. And she hold the children like this, and one like this. And she walked. I didn't know where she walked. But it was the next day, I worked there. I know exactly where she went. And my father was so lucky that the train was like this. This arrived. And this went back, all with merchandise from the-- what we selected from the clothes, the clean clothes to Germany, shoes and glasses and everything. And he-- he-- they ask [NON-ENGLISH], watchmaker. So my father said-- because in the train, he said to us, if they ask you to work, always go to work, because work is life. And so they ask him if he's a watchmaker. He went to that and the other train. He arrived in Germany, in a barrack, and you wouldn't believe it. He liberated in the-- got liberated in that barrack. He didn't know from Auschwitz at all. He brought home a bag of-- sack of bread. Who knows how hungry the children are? And he brought the bread home. And he got a heart attack. The day when they told him there is no family, no Auschwitz, he had a heart attack. And-- and they said they put the light for him in Europe, was in the floor, the dead person, and put the-- to light. And they said already Kaddish because he's finished. Because he was so sick. Imagine when you hear that your seven sons, nobody is alive. 
INT: Right. Let's get back to the day that you got to Auschwitz. Did they ask you how old you were? Did anybody-- SK: In Auschwitz?  INT: Yes, as soon as-- SK: No.  INT: No. SK: No. He right away made like this to me.  INT: Was-- and then what happened, after that? SK: Terrible happening. Then when my mother-- everybody was looking, where is mother, father. The way we walked, because we still are sober. After it, not. Because they give us, right away, in the soup, something grayish, something-- [BACKGROUND NOISE] maybe that's for downstairs. [BACKGROUND NOISE] Mm. OK. See, there they are. So I was with my-- where I was up to? Where I was up to? Help yourself with something. [LAUGHS] [INAUDIBLE].  INT: What was done after that? Was there another selection after that? SK: Yeah. When they made the right, we, the girls, we walked so far, to the sauna. It's called a sauna. It's still there. Everything is there. I took my son to show him. See, here, I walked in. Here they took the clothes. So I went into the sauna. And they shaved us. Too much, I didn't have. I was so young. But they shaved us, the heads. I had dark-- dark hair, long hair. They shaved us. And they let us 24 hours to stay there. No, I'm sorry. The first time, not. They shaved us, and they give us clothes. That was a gray sack with a neck, just to go in. And nobody recognized a sister or what-- or a sister or mother because we looked terrible. So right away, they send us to a barrack, Barrack 23. It was Czechoslovakian Jewish girl there, kapo. She was the boss. Said, you see the flame there? You stupid. You were still in Hungary, and we, two years, you were walking in carpets, and we were already here. And you didn't find all to-- to help us, or you help yourself. You see the flame and big sky-high-- [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] how do you call what comes from the flame, the-- 
INT: Ashes. SK: Not ashes.  INT: Smoke? SK: Smoke. There is your parents. And then she talks the [INAUDIBLE]. She's a-- not nice to say that. But we saw the night. And we got such a-- here is a picture, if you want to see. Like for chicken, you know, wooden planks, three, four, and seven girls in one, seven girls, seven girls, and huge, 2,000 girls in that one barrack. And only they give us a little blanket. And we were there for the night. In the morning, they took us to zahlappell. Come Mengele and again look for us, if everything is OK. Row by row, person by person, maybe he was too busy, he didn't notice somebody was blind or that or that. So they came selected. Then, next day, they took us for the tattoo.  INT: Can you show us your number? SK: The tattoo number is-- my number is A-6344. The 6 and 3 is 9, and 4 is 13, and 4 is 17. So Mr. [? Grunfeld, ?] a friend of ours, told me that you know, 17 means in Hebrew, tough. But if you add the A, it's 18. It's Chai, to life. So I got this. The next day, it was swollen like this. I was very pale. They took me back. And 185 needles-- needles. It was ink in it. You see the ink? But they give you 185 needles, like this. Mm. But this was it. And they put me in the best workplace I could be in Auschwitz, to the transport, what arrived from the ghetto to the train track, they took all the clothes, these SS, the guys with the stripe. This was their job, to empty the trucks, to the train track, to go back. The train-- 
INT: Transport. SK: Hm?  INT: The transport? SK: No, the train. To empty from the food, where was-- people were happy. They went to the crematorium. So at least I-- I saved that little gem--  INT: Oh, I see. SK: --or that fat or what. So this was taken to the-- a [NON-ENGLISH] near the crematorium, from the train track. Also from the people who went into the gas chamber, they had to undress in the nude. And they were so smart, they said, put the shoes to the shoes. Because they shouldn't have to work to add. So everybody put their shoes to their shoes. The dress hanged up. Take the soap and the towel. And they put them in a big, huge, empty place what I saw now, after the war. And the SS closed the iron door. And as many people fit in, thousands were in there. And they had a little window where they pour in the Zyklon-B gas. And a few were screaming. And one was jumping on top of the other because gas, the pressure were up. And-- and they-- they were vomiting and you know what, excrement and that. And this was a 20 minutes-- [BACKGROUND NOISE] They were watching it, how they jump, and the SS from the window. And--  INT: Where were you at this time? SK: I was in the barrack, in the barrack, in the-- where we slept after the zahlappell. They-- they keep us there. The-- and then, when this happened, comes a kommando what was working there. And every three months, they killed them, they shouldn't get free to tell the people what happened. So these people who was in that-- Sonderkommando was the name-- they had to take, like, you-- when I see people, like, doing the watering the grass, that's the way they water the people, because they were together in the gas chamber, so how the-- the pressure. So to depart them from each other. And then there were stables, a special kommando, who had to pull the teeth out from the people. Or they had any jewelry to take off. You know how hard is from dead people to take off the jewelry, but this was their kommando. Or to [INAUDIBLE] or what-- special room there for that. And then when they put them to the gas, they put them to the crematorium. And the ashes, they spread on the Vistula. There is a river was from blood and ashes from the Jewish people. And when you step there in Auschwitz, it's everywhere, blood. 
INT: What was your job at the crematorium? SK: After this, they choose me. After the-- that, about 1,000 girls, the youngest, the most beautiful, the strongest, maybe if you're 25 years old-- between 20 and 25 years old, the oldest. And they choosed us to [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] that kommando, white scarf that the clothes, what come out from the crematorium, we have to select that, the fat-- the gem to the gem, the clothes to the clothes. And everything was very new, we have to put nicely away. But something has just a dot, a-- a tablecloth, we have to tear it. Every day, we have to tie a new scarf, that it should be blinding clean white, the scarf, and to make like this. So this was the famous kommando. Because we have what to eat. Because there arrive the transport, we had to take all the food to see if no jewelry in it. After this, when I was in the big kommando to do the glasses and everything what arrived, we have to sort them. It was a place for the glasses, for the artificial food, for clothes, for cord, for [NON-ENGLISH].  INT: Was this the time you found your sister's dress? SK: That was the time?  INT: Was that-- was that when you saw your-- you found your sister's dress? SK: Yeah. That is-- well, not yet, because now I'll tell you what was it. When something I wanted to tell you, that [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] when the [INAUDIBLE] kommando, I was in the [NON-ENGLISH] kommando, and then I was in the fields kommando. They took us, four girls, that we have to do only the jewelry, from the shoulder, from the belt, from wherever. And whatever we find, there was two big SS and like a big trunk. All the children going to camp, we have to throw everything. Once, a little ring from the Theresienstadt camp, a little girl had a comb and a little bite of bread and a little ring. And even that, we have-- if they find it. So they shaved us again there for punishment. So this was the work there in Auschwitz. Then was every four weeks, we have to go to selection in the crematorium-- not the crematorium, in the sauna. For 24 hours, they took all dress. We were in the nude, until the dress got cleaned, Mengele came, because he was very busy in the train station. And whenever he arrived, we was thinking there were 24 hours. And the girls had to go one by one in front of Mengele, like this, to see we didn't fat, even we didn't get pregnant since he saw us or maybe didn't see well. Maybe you have an artificial foot, or maybe something wrong with us or one breast or all kinds of sickness, yeah? But I didn't even know it exists at that time. And he made a new selection. So there was two sisters. Now, they took us on the last trip in my life to [INAUDIBLE] know where he's going. Or a mother was taken from my village. OK? 
INT: Go ahead. SK: I should stop?  INT: No. SK: Ah. So he-- she said, Mrs. [? Rosen, ?] I remember like today, when they took the mother, such a nice mother. And-- and-- and this was the end. Then I was punished. Because this number I have here, in the sleeve, and in the back, with a red paint across, like a-- I am a-- I am a-- how you call it, for a jail-- criminal.  INT: Prisoner. Prisoner. SK: And the-- from punishment, that they bring-- then brought out my dress, with the number. I could never go back to that place. And every day, I saw my brother a few times. In fact, once an SS saw us to talk. We don't-- we weren't allowed to talk, men and women. And he run after him. I said, no, my brother really came. But I saw him escape very far. He didn't run all the way through. But then, then they were punishing me. They never let me back to that work, and I never see my-- alive my brother.  INT: We have to change the tape.  INT: Tape four with Szidonia Kornfeld. SK: Born Günczler.  INT: Born Günczler. Right. SK: Don't forget.  INT: OK. How did you start-- SK: There's no other name like Günczler in the world.  INT: How did you start your day at camp-- in the camp? SK: In the camp?  INT: What was at the beginning of the day? SK: First, first we left the day. I lost my number, and I never see my-- 
INT: No, at the beginning of the day. SK: No, but first, we didn't finish--  INT: Yeah. SK: --that I lost my number.  INT: Yes. SK: And for punishment, they didn't let me go back there, and they built the SS lazaret, and I have to go to work there and to hit the stones, and carry them with a wheelbarrow-- four girls with the stones-- in Auschwitz-- the SS lazaret. The lazaret is a hospital, army hospital, or one, and I worked there. After this was finish, then they took us in a very light job in the SS disinfection. Their clothes we had to clean, the four girls, four-- again with that four girls we were in, in-- together when I find my dress from my sister.  INT: Who were the four girls? SK: From my village-- two sister from the shochet and another Auschwitz girl were the four together. And we were together with the SS, and the SS give us a-- once a little bread or something. But it lasted very little while. Then I had one more work in Auschwitz, but if we'll get to it, it was when it was the uprising of the, the-- not the ghetto-- the--  INT: Commandos. The sonderkommandos. SK: --crematorium.  INT: Mm-hmm. SK: In October. And then they took me there to work, and they killed the SS and, and a child. And they wanted to anatom or--  INT: Autopsy. SK: --autopsy. And they wanted to see how-- what kind of munition they had, these Jewish guys. Because the one who would have been killed anyhow, the one, the sonderkommando, they got somehow from I don't know where, some munition, and they bombed the-- they run away, but they cut them off. But the-- when they washed the-- cut this body for-- I saw the child there. They send me out, and then they called me back to wash the blood for the-- from the cement, like a slab, you know, a-- 
INT: Mm-hmm. SK: --where they washed the child. And I worked there. And after-- ask me what else. Mm-hmm.  INT: How did the-- your day start in camp? SK: We went to-- every morning, for hours, rain or shine, hungry, for get a little coffee, what was so-called coffee. It was brown water.  INT: Mm-hmm. SK: And that's what I got-- we got in the morning.  INT: Mm-hmm. SK: And we stayed there for zahlappell for three hours minimum every day. And then we went to work.  INT: Mm-hmm. SK: It's depend where. In--  INT: Yes. SK: --Auschwitz I went to the crematorium. There I went to another place, wherever, when I was in the other ghetto, other camp.  INT: Mm-hmm. SK: I will tell you. And then they send us to the work. And at night, we walk back. At three hours, again, zahlappell. And then they give us a slice of bread and a little soup, what was almost no soup. And then they let us go. If one person was missing or we had a mistake, it was 96, 95, or 95, 96, we had to stay another three hours for punishment, till he did go through the whole camp to count again and again, again. And this was the worst thing, 'cause rain or shine or summer or cold. You have to stay hours there. And we were going into one each other to warm a little bit. But we were afraid they come. It was a terrible thing. 
INT: How many girls were in your bunk? SK: About 2,000 or 1,000 some.  INT: What did you talk about at night? Did you have any time to talk to each other? SK: We were not allowed to talk to each other. But still, at late night, at late night or, or whenever we ran out to the zahlappell, we said, oh, will we survive? We will survive. Oh, tell me. You have still from your bread from yesterday? Or that was the thing-- just we didn't even think so much of the surviving than the food. Because we got this gray thing in the soup, what every girl the first days was running the period here and there, and then finished.  INT: Uh-huh. SK: Nobody had it.  INT: Mm-hmm. SK: Because it took away your mind, and not at mind, the-- not the whole mind, that you shouldn't be able to work, but enough dizzy that he shouldn't think that look, the crematorium-- they take my mother. It was indifferent to us.  INT: Were there any non-Jews in your bunk? SK: No.  INT: No. SK: Because this was the first Hungarian transport from all the big cities, all the big ghettos came in there.  INT: Only Hungarians? SK: But there was good Christians. There are plenty.  INT: Were there are only Hungarians in your bunk or Jews from other places too? SK: No, Hungarian, mostly.  INT: Mostly. Do remember the date you left Auschwitz? SK: Yes. 
INT: And the-- and the time of day? What time of day did they-- what-- did you leave Auschwitz? SK: For-- forever? November 1.  INT: And what-- in the morning? In the afternoon? SK: That I don't remember--  INT: Remember. SK: --exactly. But--  INT: Where were you sent to? SK: To Ravensbrück.  INT: How did you get to Ravensbrück. SK: Well, they put us in a train, and we traveled for a while. And I know that we pass Berlin or a big train station, and we saw young people. And we saw a dog. I says, well, I wish I would be the dog there. And the girls talked German. [GERMAN]. Ah, but life-- we were-- we thought there's no life anymore. This is it only.  INT: Did you know where you were going? SK: No.  INT: No. What did you think about when you were going there? You'd-- you didn't know where you were going? SK: We didn't think nothing, just we-- when they will give us to drink or eat?  INT: How long was the journey? SK: I don't remember.  INT: Well, a-- SK: A day or two.  INT: Did they give you anything to eat, anything to drink? SK: No. No.  INT: How, how long did the journey take? SK: I'm telling you, one or two, two days.  INT: Two days. When you arrived, where were you put? Did you have a barracks? SK: When we arrived-- of course, first zahlappell, counting the numbers, for hours. We were standing. It was raining like crazy. And then they put us in a zelt barrack. I don't know if you know what's mean a zelt. 
INT: A tent? SK: Tent, yeah. And we're about 1,000 girls or how many in that tent. And it was raining. And we were so thirsty that some girl put out their mouth from the tent to drink from the floor, from the earth--  INT: Rain. SK: --the water. And they were going around. We didn't know that the SS girls went around with the [NON-ENGLISH]. And they hit them. A girl's mouth swell like this.  INT: Did, did they give you anything to eat? SK: No.  INT: You weren't fed at all? SK: Well, we're not what?  INT: You weren't fed at all. They gave you nothing to eat. SK: No, not now, not then. The other day, yeah.  INT: How long did you stay there? SK: Four weeks-- three weeks, four weeks.  INT: And then where did you go? SK: Malchow.  INT: How did you get to Malchow? SK: Also with a train.  INT: Uh-huh. SK: A long journey.  INT: A long journey. How long was that journey? SK: Not because it was so far, but they stopped. They go. They stopped. They go. Oh, she put back the telephone. [BACKGROUND NOISE] You see? And?  INT: Did you do any work at Malchow? SK: Yes.  INT: What kind of work did you? SK: From the first beginning, in a munition factory. But I even get-- got money-- $1,200 for the-- from Alfred Nobel and the Siemens factory. And I told you that we were four girls in a room. Not everybody had this job there. But we-- these four girls that always stick together. I'm sorry. And the four girls were in a small room, and like you scaled the, the gold, it was powder to measure. It shouldn't be more than that, whatever they told us. And like you see the ice cream cone, cone, that, that hole there? 
INT: An ice cube tray? You mean a little-- yeah. SK: Yeah, a tray where you put the ice--  INT: Yes. SK: --and the water and comes little ice--  INT: Yes. SK: --on. That's the way we had to fill up this, this, this-- oh-- this thing, thing. And then we had to-- in a small little window, we have to give it in. We didn't see the person whom. We give it. He didn't see us. And we have to give this over by the window. And they put it in a like-- we saw like a-- where you bake the bread. How you call it?  INT: Oven? SK: Oven. And then once it exploded, and we all got punished. They cut our hair, again-- shaved our hair. Because sabotage. But this was one SS [NON-ENGLISH], a girl. Did you ever see picture from of them?  INT: Mm-hmm. SK: She was walking around every minute, around us, the four girls. And once she stopped in front of me. And she start to hug me-- not hug me-- pat me, and said, [NON-ENGLISH]-- little doll. And the girl from the window who took the munition, she said, [NON-ENGLISH]. So we know it's Christmas. And we didn't know. So I don't know. Maybe it touched her that it's Christmas, and her daughter is home. Or maybe she was sorry that I don't have the Christmas, and I work here. Or maybe I have very black eyes and very white teeth. And I have a-- maybe a pretty face, young. As she pities me. 'Cause the rest wasn't so ugly. So next day, she come when they give us the food, that they should give me a plate of soup more. This plate of soup was another two months to live or a month to live. It was life. Every piece of bread and every bite was life, lengthening, of course. 
INT: How long did you work in that factory? SK: Till the liberation. Just shortly before the liberation they stopped to work. And then we started the death march.  INT: Well, while you were at, at Malchow, how did you get to work? SK: By foot.  INT: A-- SK: Miles and miles.  INT: And what time of year? SK: In the dark, in the dark, early morning.  INT: What time of the year was this? Was it cold? SK: Very cold. It was November 21 till April. And a girl once steal from the kitchen garbage a carrots, so she were punished to put the carrots in the mouth. And between like a snowman, she had to stay there till she collapsed and froze to death.  INT: Did you have any shoes? SK: I saw that with my eyes. Yeah, very bad shoes.  INT: Mm-hmm. SK: Because it's already ruined, and I could never-- and they didn't give us any other.  INT: Do you remember any names of kapos or blockaltestes from any of the camps? SK: Blockalteste, I remember [? Elsa ?] and [? Edit. ?]  INT: From which camp? SK: Czechoslovakia.  INT: From which camp? SK: All the girls remember them exactly. This [? Elsa ?] was accused in Israel to hang, but she was pregnant. In the Jewish law, they didn't let her to hang. But she was really very cruel.  INT: That was in Auschwitz? Was she in Auschwitz? SK: No, no. This was-- I heard after everybody. 
INT: Oh. SK: I was such a kid. I didn't know nothing, sort of.  INT: No, but which camp was this? SK: In Auschwitz.  INT: Mm-hmm. SK: In Auschwitz, this was the one who said, look the flame, the gas and the smoke. There is your mother.  INT: Mm-hmm. Mm-hmm. SK: And, and she was very cruel, and she hit us very badly. And I don't know. They said that the, the German came and said I want 20 girls. And who she was not sympathetic to her, she send the 20 girls. But I don't remember clearly. The older girls remember exactly. And I don't know. I was like a child.  INT: Mm-hmm. SK: I was busy with, maybe I get another piece of bread. Or shall I eat the bread? Or shall I not eat the bread? I, I, I don't know how did I manage.  INT: Were you ever sick in any of the camps? SK: No. No. That was my luck. That was my luck. I had been sick here. You see that? Here from my shoes.  INT: Mm-hmm. SK: It, it-- and men shoes, what goes like this--  INT: Yes. SK: --and--  INT: But you weren't-- you, you didn't come down with-- SK: No, they-- then I had to go to the quarantine to make that. And I didn't go, because I was afraid they never let me out from there.  INT: Were there-- SK: So I better suffer with the raw flesh. 
INT: Were there any children in the camp? Were-- SK: Not--  INT: --no-- SK: --with us. Not with--  INT: Did you see any? SK: The children camp was different.  INT: You didn't see any babies born? SK: No, I didn't see any.  INT: Mm-hmm. SK: But they said, the older friends of mine, that she had a baby born, and the-- this helped her, and that help her. But I didn't witness.  INT: Were you concerned with any religious observances in camp? SK: No.  INT: In any of the camps? SK: I-- this girl with-- the slaughterer's, the shochet's daughter, she was very religious. And she figured out when is [NON-ENGLISH].  INT: Mm-hmm. SK: And she knew it by heart. And we have to say it with her. But that's all it was. And she was such a tzadeikis there. And she said all the brokhes. And she was the one who actually made me to survive. Because when we walked the death march three days, and I said this is it. I cannot make it. Said, [NON-ENGLISH] and come just a little bit more. You're gonna see. We'll make it. You will make it. Suda, come. Come. Come. You will make it.  INT: Was there any particular yontif in the camp that you remember that-- any yontif in the camp that you-- SK: Yes. I remember when we walked in Auschwitz, it was Rosh Hashanah. And the men were so depressed, because who knows? It was not big rabbis there or big tzadeikes. I have no idea. Because they looked like everybody looked. Everybody looked alike. But I remember everybody was murmuring in the mouth. [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]. We should survive. Everybody murmured, but very careful, because the SS was-- even the SS was there, in the front and in the back-- always. 
INT: When was Malchow evacuated? SK: Before liberation. Three days.  INT: And what time of day did they-- what were you-- what did they tell you? SK: Nothing.  INT: What orders were you given? SK: What orders? That you should stay in a, a--  INT: You were-- SK: --five in the row. And there was SS by every fifth girl, from left to right. And we walked on the highway, walked toward the place Berlin, that maybe they will be liberated-- not liberated-- that they shouldn't be liberated. We should work still. We should go. And, and I don't know what they wanted to end to do with us.  INT: Well, who supervised you? Who was on either side? SK: SS. SS. Always SS.  INT: Did you get any food? SK: No, not in these three days.  INT: Did you sleep? SK: No. Once we stopped for a minute a little while. I don't know, a minute, or maybe it was 15 minutes. We stop, and we thought we will kill us. Better let's go.  INT: Did-- SK: You know? Because we're always afraid. We wanted to survive. That is-- I'm sure. Because they were smart, the girls. They heard that they-- that they are so close, the Russian. We gonna be liberated. But I didn't know what does it mean.  INT: Did you know where you were going? SK: No. No. We had to go to walk aimlessly. But they knew where they want. They wanted the, the front, the front, you know what mean, the front, the-- 
INT: Mm-hmm. SK: --the soldiers who was killing in Berlin, we should go ahead, you know? Always ahead where the-- where still the Germans.  INT: Mm-hmm. SK: It was not the Russian.  INT: Did any people see you? The local people? People-- SK: Yes. In Malchow, a lot.  INT: And what did they do? SK: And I couldn't imagine. Nothing. In the-- in the-- in-- indifferent. Like, we wouldn't be there. They walked their way. I said, look. People are living. It was the gate there, and I saw people going, coming. And they didn't do nothing. In Malchow, it was really, they didn't see us.  INT: When did you know you were liberated? SK: I told you last time. When we walked the death march, there was a few smart people, girls, older girls, who, who-- when it was the German come-- there no German-- the American or Russian--  INT: Russian. SK: --came ahead, that the German disappeared for a few minutes. And some people run into houses, and somehow in the forest. And they got liberated like this, that they hide themselves. But some little girls like me, I will not go nowhere. This is it. I walked ahead with the thousands of girl But every minute I heard a shot, you know? Who couldn't walk, they shot right away. Or this SS or that SS, or from left side or from right side. If you couldn't walk, you remained seated, boom. We knew that you're-- so we stepped like this on the dead people-- sisters like this. I didn't have never nobody. I was always the sole survivor. I have a sister or auntie, a relative-- nobody. I always hanged in the-- alone in the world. 
INT: But someone helped you in the death march. Your friend helped you. SK: No, this friend of mine, the last minute when I was at-- I don't go more. Finish. I don't want to live anymore. I, I don't have for what. And I, I can't do it. And then she made me and walked, walked, walked. Well, not too much, because we will get liberated that way. That, again, the SS disappeared. And we thought we are free. But still they come back again. That was the first thing. They come back again, and we walked again. The last strength-- the last strength, and the people who died managed the last minute from we, we get liberated. So well, all of a sudden, we see white flecks. And we are in a farm. And there is men and women, and older and younger. And he says, you know who got liberated? And there was sitting a man-- ehh, ehh, in dying position. Daughter want-- stays in a blanket. I'm so cold. And the other one is so hungry, so thirsty. And we said, but don't. We are liberated. You're gonna see they're gonna be. But three days, nobody cared for us. It was every war on the world after three days, the army could be killing and robbing and do whatever they want. So we walked, the girls, alone on the highway. We stopped to another farm. One of the night, two Russian trucks stop. And they come in in their farm, and there was a woman in there-- old lady. And they come to my bed, and I was like this I should look ugly and skinny. And they cover me. Eh, for this it doesn't pay. They go to the next one. And she speak Russian, because they from the part of Hungary, Czechoslovakia, what was-- and they speak Russian. So they said, oh, you know, we are survivors. We don't have mother, and this and that. So I don't know what they did. I was not coming out from [LAUGHS] under the cover. I was afraid. And then we-- another night, we go in the-- in the field, running in the field. 'Cause a truck stopped. So now it's finished. Now we will not survive. They ran after us. They're crazy. They have so many girls, and they have to run through these cripples. And then they come closer. And I remembered a lady, she lives in New York-- in Queens or where-- she said, oh, that's my sister. This is my muter! And in German he tell. But they didn't care. He said, no. And we started to run so much, like in dream you run. And you, you fell. You run and you fell. And that was it. And then we became to a Prenslau, where it was a lager, and then they started to take care on us. 
INT: Who helped you at the lager. SK: Who?  INT: Who helped you in Prenslau? SK: Who helped--  INT: Helped you? SK: To-- for what?  INT: To-- who, who gave you some help in Prenslau? Did anybody help you there? SK: No. That was a like a, a [? folks ?] kitchen.  INT: Yes. SK: Like a Salvation [LAUGHS] Army. And there was a big, like, a cook. And they give us like with the army. They give us this very good soup with [NON-ENGLISH], peas, and-- but not over eating, not like there, who was liberated, what the American, they died, half of them from the chocolate, from the good food. We had Russian poor food. And then started to be registration, names, what-- there. But I was so stupid. I don't know why I never got a piece of paper that I was there, you know? They didn't give us a paper that-- to witness that I was liberated. I was there-- [INAUDIBLE] by Mecklenburg, and then in Prenslau, and then another few places. I don't know where.  INT: How did you manage to get out of there? How did you manage to get on a transport to get, get away from there? SK: From Prenslau?  INT: Yes. SK: Very simple. They didn't want the Hungarian to stay, because the Hungarian have very much to the SS, you know? In the front, they killed the Jewish boys in the-- that [NON-ENGLISH]. They killed them. They were very bad. But here, the Hungarian, they didn't want to take. I'm a Hungarian. But my mother was a Czechoslovakian. So I asked my friends, maybe you teach me how to say, what's your name? And where are you coming from? How old are you? So I went to the Czechoslovak consul, and I-- they have a consul, where it was a office. And I, I told them I'm Czechoslovakian, [NON-ENGLISH], Trebisov. [FRENCH]? French. [LAUGHS] I mix it. [LAUGHS] The, the Slovak, they asked me the name, where I come from, where I live, and my mother's name. OK. And they brought me in the transport. It was a bus, what took us to, to Prague. And there was heaven. They undressed ourself, from top to bottom-- nurses. They washed us. They give us to eat. And who had a taped on number could travel in Prague, all over. But where would I travel to? To who and what? Alone. So this was in Prague. Then in Prague, I met the man who said that when were-- everybody ask everybody, from where are you? And everybody-- where was names put out, who is survived, whose is-- work-- to be found. And the-- a man said, from where are you? I'm from Bodrogkeresztúr. Oh, I just was with a man-- Günczler, a watchmaker. That's impossible. My father didn't survive. Impossible. He said, yes, I was with him. He has black glasses. I said, black glasses? How do I know? I saw in Auschwitz everybody was taken away the glasses. We weren't together in Auschwitz. He said, no, he had the glasses. He was a watchmaker. And he survived. He even told-- cried his wife and his children, and a daughter who was married, and they worked together with my brother-in-law. He was also a watchmaker. In one barrack, when in Auschwitz, he arrived. In the next barrack, in the next train, they took him back to Germany. And he was there till the liberation. And that's the way he survived. And he right away went to Prague, and from Prague to Pressburg, where I went after him everywhere, like a movie. When he said Prague, OK, where is? Then he said, no, he went to Pressburg. So I went to Pozsony, Pressburg, and he said, he just left-- Günczler, back yet to Hungary. So they answered, do you not go with the Russian? They will kill you. And I went to, to-- from Pressburg to Budapest, because I wanted to see my father alive. 
INT: How did you-- how did you get there? How did you get to-- SK: On a train-- the train, you know, where the train hits each other?  INT: Yes. SK: No, not hit-- elastic up and come. Because I was afraid to go into the, you know, in the train, inside.  INT: Why? SK: Because the Russian will kill me. They said they'll raped me in pieces. And then I looked already better, so I was afraid. So I went to the-- Budapest, to the train. And I arrived. [NON-ENGLISH]. This sister who survived, who was in Hungary, shot by the [NON-ENGLISH], this sister was hidden in Budapest. She came from [NON-ENGLISH]. When they took these people also to Auschwitz, she went to Budapest to hide. And she was there with, I don't know, Christian paper or what. And she-- I have a postcard, what she wrote from Budapest from the address. And even in that little the room when I made with the SS that little munition, I had in my mind [NON-ENGLISH]. I have we'll go back in this place. And also, we go home and I find my mother's picture, because I know my mother. I will not find this picture. She had the bow, the big picture what I have in the bedroom. And this always was in my mind. And I arrived to Budapest, and it was a taxi-- no money, nothing. I had-- I thought my brother survived, so I took an SS shoes, what was heavy army shoes, an army something, and a coat, and a [INAUDIBLE], when I don't know exactly what. And I took this for my brother. He should have right away shoes. From where we will buy? And I schlepped that in my bag. And I arrive to my cousin. Well, with the address, it was leveled, in Budapest. So there, I didn't even have money. I said what is the [INAUDIBLE]? Tell me. When I said I have no money. So a lady comes there. By how is the-- 
INT: Go ahead. [BACKGROUND NOISE] SK: --how is the shiksa, the-- you know, how you cannot know the future, that this lady was exactly passing by as I go to [NON-ENGLISH] 12. There is these people who lives here. And I go. She was-- she was shot in the [NON-ENGLISH], my mother's sister, but there was cousins from Kosice, who was hidden there in Budapest. And they were there. And they said, yes, I go with you. I said, no, I don't want to sit here. They went down, brought my package up. They paid the taxi. And I said, I want to go right away to [NON-ENGLISH]. I heard that all the refugees get there together. From there, they go home. So I want to go to see if my father is alive. No, stay a little. No. So my cousin, one of them, came with me. It's half a cousin. And he came with me to [NON-ENGLISH]. And this is a movie. In every room it was written, the name who is there. In every room, I said, no. There's not Günczler. I go to the next room. I read in this the names, what is in that room. No Günczler. Then I go in another room. I see outside big, like, in a, a kaserne, where the army. And I see Günczler-- [NON-ENGLISH] Bodrogkerestúr, [NON-ENGLISH]. [NON-ENGLISH] is what you-- I said, it's true. I can't believe it. I will see my father alive. I open the door. I see only mattresses and men-- ehh, ehh-- in their death bed. Some is dying. Some will die-- and hardly alive. And I said, [? Tatiko, ?] [? Tatiko. ?] And I go to every mattress. And maybe I don't recognize him. I bend down. Maybe I see his face. I will recognize him. But it was not him. So I touched the mattress. My father maybe slept in this mattress. And then a man said, no. He went home. 
INT: We're going to change the tape.  INT: --five, Szidonia Günczler Kornfeld. You were telling me about the-- when you were looking for your father and all you saw were the mattresses. Can you go on with that? SK: So then I went from one mattress to the other, and then I see the door that's inside [? this. ?] So I go. He said, he left for Bodrogkeresztúr. He didn't want to stay a day. So he left to Bodrogkeresztúr, the hometown. And they said my cousin stayed for Shabbos. He go on Sunday. Said I'm not wait a second. They-- maybe I go home, I won't find him alive. No, I want to go right away. He said, it's dangerous. You cannot make it, impossible. Said, I will try. I don't care. I took my rucksack, and I, I go to the train station. And I go not inside, outside, where the two trains get together. And I stayed there like this, you know, six, seven, eight hours. If it stopped, then I was there. And I heard, it was drunken, screaming, yelling-- the Russian soldiers. Private, private people, they didn't let in, they didn't. So I arrived to Bodrogkeresztúr, middle of the night, 12 o'clock. And every night came out people to welcome the survivors. And that night, nobody came. I was alone in train station. And it's very far from us, the village from the train station. And I saw a horse and buggy, and a-- not a coach, a-- like the-- 
INT: A wagon. SK: --a wagon, like the farmer, like in western. So I said-- Hungarian to the lady-- please, maybe you let me to go in with you to the-- you know, so many things I didn't tell you, because I was sure that I will read that here. But OK. So, she said, I take you gladly, but they will rape you. The Russians go for such young girls. I said, I don't care. Here is a blanket. Cover me. In the-- you know, this is like this, the wagon. And he put me there. And so we went-- ta, ta, ta, ta-- in a wagon, you know, in a village, long village. And he stops in front of my house. We didn't see any Russian around. And I stop in front of the house, and he goes away. And it's dark. No window on my house, no door in the house-- empty. The grass was so big that I had to make like this to go in my back, in my courtyard in the house where we lived. And I said, we are here, [NON-ENGLISH] again. Where shall I go? What shall I do? Nothing. My father is not here. Because it's impossible. [NON-ENGLISH] So two, three houses away was the [? Ritter ?] family, and I went there. And I saw the light there. I knock on the window-- very high, the window-- and knocked on the window. I said, it's Suda Günczler. Ah, screaming. Girls from the floor-- another survivor. Happy. How comes nobody was [NON-ENGLISH]? Happened to be nobody was in the thing. I said, I want to know where my father is. So they started to tell me, that, last night, he felt very bad. They wanted-- in Europe, they put, there, on the floor, the dead and two candles-- that last night, we wanted to put the two candles for him, already, on the floor, because he was finish. But now, he's is a little bit better, but you cannot go to him now, because we have to prepare him that you are on the way, you are coming, and slowly to tell him that you're coming, so he will bear it. Otherwise, he will get a heart attack, a fatal one, and finish. So I couldn't wait the whole night through. I couldn't wait. But I was afraid to go it in the dark. I was waiting till it was a little bit dawn. How you call it in the early morning? 
INT: Till the sun came up. SK: Huh?  INT: Until the sun came up? SK: No, before, in dawn. Not the sundown, the dawn.  INT: Sun up. Sunrise. SK: No. OK. I-- before the sun arised, I went. It was still half dark, half light. And I went to the window. They said where he is in the rabbi's backyard. And there is a few boys. And he is there. He is very sick. But slowly, they will tell him. And I stayed by the window, and I look into the window. That's not my father. They fooled me up. No after all, he's, he's not my father. They mixed him up. It's impossible my father didn't survive. He was 49-years-old. But we never see 49-year-old people, only 20, 25. But maybe he was strong and nice-looking. I look in the window, and he looked like, you know, the beard started to grow. And he was very black. And he has very nice teeth. And he looked this. I don't know if you see the Dreyfus [? affair, ?] when he came from the-- from the island, from the Devil's Island after five years, and he had such a beard, and he walked like this. That's the way my father looked. It came right away. It hit my mind. He's like the Devil Island, my father looked. Said, maybe it's my father. I will go in. I will see. So my-- it came out a man. They said they will tell him. OK, come. I go in. My father see me. And he's like a wild eyes. He looks at me, and he hugged me, and he fell on me. And he didn't want to let me go. Flesh and blood. Survive. He cannot believe that I am live. And where is the rest? I said, the rest? I don't know. They will come. And, and, and, and we were like this, like-- look how goose pimple. We are glued. And then he come, the man, and he separated us. And then I told my father that I was together with my brother, and I'm sure he comes home, [NON-ENGLISH]. He was so happy with the unhappiness, that at least-- so he cannot believe Mommy doesn't come home and Golda doesn't come home. And he made all the names. And then we slowly tell him that how it was and what I lived through, and he should be happy I'm here. And he said always, with a sick heart, he went to the train station every morning to wait. Maybe this brother of mine, and of the village, will arrive. And one day, somebody come, a witness, when he was digging a grave for [NON-ENGLISH]-- to-- when it's comes bombardiering to hide. And it was very much raining. And a kapo went and then kick him. And, and, and he was dead. And he was a witness, how they took his shoes and everything. Because he has good shoes, because he worked in that place-- 
INT: Who, who told you this? SK: --where it was the clothing.  INT: Who told you this? SK: A, a man who lived in Israel. And he was still living, not far, in the [? Sátoraljaújhely ?] ghetto.  INT: Mm-hmm. SK: We knew him very well, this guy.  INT: And where was this where he saw your brother being kicked? SK: In Sachsenhausen, somewhere in Germany--  INT: Mm-hmm. SK: --before the liberation. So since then, my father got another heart attack. He was very, very sick. I thought he will not survive this time. And then every day I cried for him. [NON-ENGLISH], why aren't you happy I am here? You're only longing to see [? Avrum ?] here. Why not? So he said to me, my [NON-ENGLISH], my dear child, you don't know what's mean a Kaddish. And he had seven sons. And not one came home at Kaddish. So he cannot bear it. He cannot bear it. And he cried day and night. Never I see a smile after the war on him, never a smile. So this was a-- I don't know what else you want to ask.  INT: What did you do in your village after that? SK: When?  INT: What did you do in the village then, when you stayed-- SK: After?  INT: --there, yes. SK: My father was always sick, always sick. And I went to the village. And I start to gather, from the people, food for my father, almonds, or something special, healthy. He should be-- come back to his health. And I got this flour. And this I sold. I took it to Budapest. There was no food in Budapest only in the little villages. And I took a oil in a [NON-ENGLISH], in a, a jug. And I sold that. I put one in-- I went through the, the customs. Well, it was not custom, but we checked, yeah? 
INT: Mm-hmm. SK: So I went through the custom, and here I showed them the, the package. And the jug I put on the, the thing. And I--  INT: Pushed it. SK: --[NON-ENGLISH] [LAUGHS] the food, and I survived with the thing. And I sold it. And I brought-- I went to buy like earrings, like my father used to sell, red and green and blue. And I put it on the table by the jeweler. And how many I can get for this money? So I took about 15. He took 5, and then 7. So that's what you can get for that money. But I went home in the village, and I meant the village to the non-Jewish people, you know, the little farmers.  INT: Mm-hmm. SK: They're so happy to get a earring. They didn't even pierce their ears. And I went, and I pierced their ear. They were happy and bleeding a little.  INT: Where did you get the earrings? SK: Got?  INT: Where did you get these earrings? SK: I'm just telling you. You don't listen. I took to Budapest the food.  INT: Yes. SK: I sell the food, and I went to the jeweler. And I bought these earrings for the money. And he said for that money, you cannot get all these earring, you Jew, only that many.  INT: Sorry. SK: So I went again back to the village, and I sold it to the real farmer's girl, who didn't had even pierced. This I push the earring. It was bleeding, but they were happy. And they give me rice. They give me flour. And again, I went. And again I sold them. My father said, I don't know from where she get this business idea. And I always work that for my father to better his life, because we eat in a [NON-ENGLISH], in a Joint kitchen, where the American woman go from place to place to beg a penny. And God bless them, these ladies, who that time, like today, we do that. But what a skill they did that, that they send us clothes. These are the clothes what I take off my lager clothes, what I got from the Joint. And these women, when they were together, God bless them. From them, we had the food. And we'd eat in a Joint kitchen whatever the-- my wedding was in a Joint kitchen. They give the soup and the [NON-ENGLISH]-- the, the [NON-ENGLISH]? And that's what it was, my wedding. 
INT: How did you meet your husband? SK: I went to a wedding to [NON-ENGLISH]. And this auntie of mine, who was shot by the [? Donau, ?] this-- or Budapest, they give me her shoes, her dress, and that's the one I went to the wedding-- and junky shoes, a [? raunchy ?] dress. And I met my husband and his brother. He has a brother, a lawyer in Saskatoon. And he was a modern guy and a very flirty one. He said, this beautiful girl, I didn't see it in the wedding. So my husband come, I'm also Kornfeld-- my husband. And I liked him better, because he was more idle. I don't know how to say it. Decent. He was very modern for me, the other. I was afraid of him. Anyhow, we-- he came to my father. And my father listened to him how much he can learn in Hebrew, if he's not a-- just a guy who doesn't know to learn. Because he said, that is the first thing, a guy who knows how to learn. So he didn't have nothing. I didn't have nothing. He didn't had a suit to wear to the wedding. I didn't had the-- have clothes to the wedding, not even a nightgown, [LAUGHS] and not pictures from my wedding. My children cannot-- I can't prove it to them that I got married. But they believe me. I have pictures when we got engaged.  INT: What's your husband's name? SK: [? Avrumi, ?] Adolf. 
INT: And what was the date that you married? When did you marry? SK: August 18, 1946.  INT: Tell me about your wedding-- a little bit about it. SK: That's what I tell you.  INT: Yes. SK: That my wedding was in the [NON-ENGLISH] in the Joint kitchen.  INT: Yes. SK: All the girls from the village and all the boys from the neighboring village, they come. And there was a Gypsy who played the violin. And they danced. And my father made a beautiful speech, because he was a rabbi-- not a rabbi. He had lots of knowledge. After he became a rabbi.  INT: Mm-hmm. SK: Because that was his-- he made the living from that. But he made a speech. And the whole village was crying like the funeral, the day from the village funeral. He cried so much. And when he made the-- he hugged me. And that is a [NON-ENGLISH]. I don't know if you know what it mean.  INT: Mm-hmm. SK: Here I have a picture from-- he hugged me. And he said, [NON-ENGLISH]. He was singing and hugging me. And nobody can divide us. He was just lying on me and crying and crying and crying. And then he went away, because he was so smart. It was mother and girls there also. After the war, everybody was freedom of living. And he didn't want them to dance girls, girls with boys. So he said goodbye. He bentsched, and he blessed me. And he went away. And we danced a little bit there, around. And that's all was the wedding. 
INT: And where did you live? In this-- SK: I lived with my father. One room, he lived. In the other room, I lived. Didn't I open this by any mistake? No. So we lived. But then, my father started to cry me, one day, that he would like to get married. Because maybe he will have a woman who will still have a, a child, a boy, a Kaddish, if I will give him permission. So I cried very much. I didn't want him to get married. I said, listen. You are young. Go. Live in [NON-ENGLISH], where my husband live. And I marry. And somebody offer me a woman from somewhere. And I will marry when you get married. And he married. But he-- the only thing he benefited from it-- he never had a child. She was a old maid. But he was adoring, my father. He was taking off his shoes. He wash. She was not-- he wouldn't live nine years after this heart attacks. But every few months, they took him in a different city with a heart attack. She saved him. Because she was crazy for him. Because he was very knowledgeable, and she was from a village. And anyhow, my father lived a few years happy living with that woman. But whenever I went home, he not pretend. But he cried for me that it's not the same like your mother was. But it didn't soothe my pain. You know, because it was very fresh, the pain. And I couldn't take it that my mother bed, she should sleep there. But anyhow, this I shouldn't even mention in that. 
INT: Did you live in the same village, or you moved to another village where your husband was? SK: I lived in the-- I made the, the wedding was there.  INT: Yes. SK: And then when my father mentioned he wants to marry--  INT: Yes. SK: --so I went in a room, because I always wanted to leave Hungary. I said to my husband, I want to leave Hungary. I want to-- don't want to stay here. So we went to live in a room in [NON-ENGLISH]. A big city, 2,000 Jews or how many or more live there. That was a big city. And I lived there. He start to do something, but he didn't do much. There wasn't what to do-- no money and no connection. And we didn't furnish yourself nothing. It wasn't from what. But we didn't want to stay. So what I got pregnant. I had my first son, this son of mine. And my father was the [NON-ENGLISH]. He, he lived that I married and had a son, and he was the [NON-ENGLISH]. And he's named after my husband's father. And after this boy, another two years, we still couldn't leave, because I didn't want to leave my father. Because I, I, I said, as long as I can enjoy, I mean, I don't want to leave. So then I get pregnant with my second child, with my daughter, you know? I don't even see her. You know with [? Gittie, ?] who has this lovely grandchildren. 
INT: Well, we'll probably see her later. SK: What?  INT: We'll see here probably on some of the pictures-- SK: What?  INT: --later. SK: OK.  INT: Yeah. SK: I just want to tell you that she was born. And before she was born, I told my husband I want to leave. I don't care if I will have her in the border on the-- on the-- on the street, or in the hills, or whatever. So she was six weeks old, not even six weeks. We give him a sleeping pill. My husband took my son with a few diapers. I took my daughter, with a few diapers and whatever clothes I have, and went, middle of the night, under a train. And we escape the Russian. We didn't want to stay in the communism. And we escaped. And we went to Czechoslovakia. That was half-official, that the Jewish people can gather there. And then they will take us to Vienna, where it's officially refugee, DP-- a DP camp, you know? So that's the way it was, that we escaped. And we were lucky. Some was catched. And we went to-- 42 people in one room. And then we went to-- two people, they give us a room-- two people in one room, in Vienna. Half a year I lived in Vienna. After Vienna, we went to Steyr-- very cold, where they make this stainless steel. We were there also with a couple, who was-- in one room, we put up a blanket divide. And I have to go out at night. She's stayed, and, when she stayed, I went away, wherever I had to go. And she had to go, then I went away. Two years we were there together in one room. You know? Then we went from that to Hallein, where also was that we will take us right to-- they, they wanted to take us to Israel, and we didn't want to go, because I don't have nobody. I heard there is so poor. You have to broke the stones. So I want to go to America. I always dreamed, as a child, I go in a boat to America. So from Hallein, we had to go to Salzburg for the perm-- visa. And I prepare myself if we-- where we go to Canada. Somebody send us a paper, who is a friend of mine, who come two months earlier. So it was easy. He just send a paper that I'm a cousin. And he wants us to come to Canada. So when we arrived to Canada, nobody-- the JIAS didn't want to help me. I came private. Somebody send me private the thing. And we were two children. We didn't have where to be. We're on the street. Nobody wanted to let us in. So my husband went to pray to the [? Tosher ?] Rebbe's synagogue. And he said, if you want in the kitchen where we wash the hands, you can come here. So we were there four weeks, with two children, in that room. And then we find a old man, a rich son, the baker, rich son's brother, who was blind for 25 years. The hall, how it looked in a mess. When the son came in, he said, it's not the same house. I cleaned it up. And I lived there for a year. And then the friend of mine give me some money, that I should rent the house. $300 I have to pay, key money, just to give me the room. And we went upstairs to live. And I cooked for three boys, food and shelter. And that's the way I kept up. And my husband start to work. Every day, they send him away. He worked by the boat. Exactly by him, turn-- it stopped the work, no more work. Then he went to work to a furrier, $17. They said, you cannot make a living with two children. You should better look for another job. So he'll go in the other job, in a glove factory-- also two week. So I'm buy in a grocery a can for $0.15, a can of peas, And for this, I made a soup for a [LAUGHS] few days. The baby was so young, my daughter, I-- rub her a carrots, and I-- there was no baby food. And I, I nursed her. So that was the-- 
INT: Your beginnings. SK: --life till then.  INT: What was the date that you arrived here in Canada? SK: In Canada? So when--  INT: What was the-- when did you come? SK: Yeah, I want to tell you.  INT: Yeah. SK: June 4, 1951, I arrived to Newfoundland, to-- how you call the city, on the capital city?  INT: You, you arrived in Halifax or in-- SK: The boat. Halifax, yeah.  INT: Halifax. SK: We arrived in Halifax, and they brought us with the train for two days. I don't know how long.  INT: You came by boat? SK: Boat, yeah,  INT: How was that trip? SK: Terrible. I never sit in a boat, and I was so seasick. I said, never in my life I go. So last year, everybody went to a boat, when it's now the [NON-ENGLISH], how you say that? Caribbean. One day, for a boat. I said, no I never-- this is not-- that was a war boat. These are luxury boat. Because I was so sick, that half a day I was happy for only a short day, never again I go for a cruise. So--  INT: Well, from Halifax you came straight to Montreal? SK: Montreal. And the--  INT: What happened when you got here, right away? Did somebody-- SK: Yeah.  INT: --receive you here? SK: Some-- no, the JIAS. But the JIAS said I should go wherever private, because the guy sent us the thing. 
INT: Mm-hmm. SK: And he was a young boy-- just for a favor. And they didn't believe me. He was very cruel, that person. So I went a family. This boy has a family. Just take them in. I will look for a, a house. And after two days, or not even two day-- three days, two days, she said somebody comes, I have to go. So my husband went to the synagogue to pray. It was Erev Shavout. And he said come in four weeks, that I told you already.  INT: Yes. SK: That we moved in in the house. And then I start to-- for three years, I have a son, my younger son, whose daughter, both daughters, was here.  INT: Yeah, that was your third child. SK: My third child. And I opened a grocery store, with a few baby cans, a few peas and carrots, and I dreamed I want to be a business woman. And this you don't need knowledge. A little bit I spoke English. I don't know from where. I went to school summertime for a few weeks only. And not even that, because I always had to run the bitsy baby, to nurse and do that. So I, I, I just learned from the street, practically. I know how to write and wrote--  INT: Mm-hmm. SK: --business people I wrote in '60 already, kitchen language, that you should serve me with this and that. And they didn't want to serve me-- [? Ainslie. ?] So I said, you prejudice, because you don't want to serve me. And I'm such a big client. I have a big client here. So then they start to serve me. And when I went to-- from the grocery eight years after, I went to open the gift shop, a gift shop at [NON-ENGLISH], in the basement, for 10 years. Then I was succeeded. And I went here for the [NON-ENGLISH], since 1964, here. I am. 
INT: How many-- how many grandchildren do you have now? SK: I have-- actually, my son has six. They're all there. And my daughter two, and my other son five, and my other daughter three, and other daughter two. This means 16. But from them, three is married by my son, two is married by my daughter, and one for the one who was here. So six has added to the 16. I have 22 grandchildren, because I have to keep their birthday just the same.  INT: Right. SK: So 22 grandchildren. And we produced 12 great-grandchildren. She has the 12th grandchild who was here before. And they had-- so I have 12-- 26 grandchildren, 12 great-grandchildren, and we are four children and their wives or husbands, and the two oldest then, 44--  INT: People. SK: --44 people made from this one survivor.  INT: Right, wonderful. SK: So Hitler didn't succeeded.  INT: Right. SK: Right?  INT: How were you affected as a parent when you were bringing up your children, because of what you had gone through in the Shoah? Did it affect any way in which you were bringing up your children? SK: Not really. Because my children-- I tried my-- everything what I didn't have, I wanted to give them. I worked so hard. I worked in the grocery. Then I cooked for three boys. And I made their sandwiches in the morning. And beside that, it was jewelry stones to make $0.70 a one, if I put the stone. So I made 40 in a hour. That's mean that's-- nobody could make more than two, two and 1/2. And I worked so fast, that I should make extra money, that I should be able, my daughter, my oldest daughter-- who was on the phone-- she went skating, skiing, swimming, ballet, French, everything I gave her to be busy. Because I worked, and she shouldn't get in a bad company. She should be always occupied. And my son, the older son, went very young to the school, to the States. He was 13 years old. After bar mitzvah, I send him away. He was six and 1/2 years in the States in a very excluded school. It was in the top of a mountain. It took a half an hour to go down to the village and never mind to New York. So he had the best education what's possible. Then the second one, I sent to the States also for two and 1/2 year, who roomed with my son-in-law. And when he became my son-in-law, he said, Mommy, you dig the whole world, you can go through, you cannot find such a boy for your daughter like him. He's a chartered accountant. And then my son married off his daughter. He's an-- [? actuary. ?] This makes a lot of money. He's a very knowledgeable guy. 
INT: Did you speak to your children about the Holocaust? SK: Oh, they know it by heart. I told my son that he should make me something as smart. I should leave it for the--  INT: When did you start to speak to them? How-- when they were very-- SK: Always. I always speaked about the-- because every Passover, I find two little-- you know, I was three years at home with my father at Pesach. And every Pesach, when it was the Seder, he took the-- like in olden time, the matzah. We're going to [NON-ENGLISH]. And then, when it came where they killed the firstborn boys and the children, he started to cry so hysterical, that I started to cry. And everybody cried. And were from that. So three years he put-- we have two little glass. Oh, I shouldn't stand up. I wanted to show you the glass. But I find in the garbage. And he said, here's the two glass-- [NON-ENGLISH]. If the children are not here, at least they should be on the table.  INT: We're going to change the tape.  INT: Tape six, Szidonia Günczler Kornfeld. Why have you now come forward to tell us about your Holocaust experiences? Why have you come to tell about your wartime, your, your Holocaust experiences? SK: Yeah. I'm a masochist. You know what mean that? I like to punish myself. I talk so much from Holocaust, and I don't know of any survivor who writes books, all that, and talk so much about the Holocaust. Wherever I am-- weddings, wherever-- party, I always bring up the Holocaust, how I survived and how I am a sole survivor. I cry day and night for the fact that I survived only myself. And no matter I have [NON-ENGLISH] in the heart of so many good children and husband and everyone, but nobody can replace a sister. I don't have a whom to pour out my heart, freely. I don't have nobody. I had a cousin. He's also-- they're all gone. And I was very young. The rest is more older. So I, I like to talk about the Holocaust. Not I like to talk, I don't mind to talk. So one of my grandchildren said, Bubbe, you talk so much of the Holocaust. It grows out already here. So him, I don't tell. But my daughter likes to hear about it. My son likes to. My grandchildrens, the one who was here, who brought that, he said he will say something. But they couldn't wait. I thought they will interrupt. 
INT: Is there something that you'd like to add, something that we didn't mention while you were talking before? SK: I would like very much to--  INT: To-- SK: --read that tape-- not all of them, but some of it. But I didn't tell you-- what my daughter worked so hard. I--  INT: Would you just tell us about it. You-- SK: No, but I have to see. I cannot-- that I don't know by heart. It was here.  INT: No. You can just tell us what it is. You're-- that you made-- you made a tape? SK: Yeah. Here it is. I have to show that to you. This is my father's will. But this tape. I'm sorry. [PAUSES FOR 6 SECONDS] This is actually a girl from school asking me I should make her an essay.  INT: Can you just hold it up and show it to us? SK: This, she ask me I should make her an essay. So it was before Christmas, in 1983, December 7th. So I said-- the mother said I will be the best in the school, and it felt good to her, she would do it. So I took the tape, after, from business, come home very tired, in my bed. And I told her this story. And I send it to my daughter. She was very touched. She typed it, and she add a, a note to it, that I would like you to read it. 
INT: You want to read the note she added? SK: The note, but I, I go through. What it has told, I will not. I said that, 'I guess we all became heroes to have lived through and survived the Holocaust. But at the same time, I think that survivor just the fate of God, with luck-- with luck, and willpower to live, and to live through, and to be able to tell those unbelievable thing, which we lived through in a period of time, which will be unforgettable to this generation or generations to come. My maiden name is Szure Rivke Günczler, and now Mrs. Kornfeld. I was 16 years old when, on March 19, 1944, the German troops invaded the very-- invaded Hungary. And with the help of the Hungarian police and the government, they successfully invaded, in a very short time, every existing little village. On that day, my colorful life darkened forever. It was before Pesach, and my mother eyes never dried up from tears since two years earlier, in 1942, where my grandparents, my mother's parents, [? Grunfeld, ?] from Trebisov, and her five brothers and four sisters, were taken from Kosice, and all the Czechoslovakian city-- Kosice not, because it was already Hungarian, but Presov, Bardejov, Trebisov, and never returned. Just one postcard we received from my grandfather where he wrote, we are OK. But we are waiting, and we are expecting Uncle [NON-ENGLISH]--' the--  INT: OK. SK: --thing? '--to come. And by the time we received this postcard, he is already scattered in ashes. But we are ignorant of the fact that we went on for other two years, until it came our time. And my mother mentioned. Now I feel what my parents felt two years ago.' 
INT: OK, Szidonia, I think we're going to have to stop, because I'd like you to give us a message-- SK: Yeah?  INT: --a message for your children and a message for your grandchildren, and a message for your great grandchildren. SK: Yeah, but it's very funny that if you didn't let me to see that is the whole story. But you ask me this also. But here are many, many--  INT: Well, maybe you can just-- SK: --details what you--  INT: --fine. SK: --didn't heard about it. My daughter wrote me that. 'My dear beloved, Mommy, no words in the world can describe the emotion that I feel at this particular moment now, that I have completed this paper. But I do want you to know that never have I felt prouder, prouder of you than when I heard this tape for the first time. It takes a very large amount of energy and courage to be able to release such a horror so vividly without completely breaking down. Many people don't want to think about the Holocaust, much less write or talk about it. I strongly feel that you have left us, your children and grandchildren, particularly my children, who have heard your story directly from your mouth, with a very rich heritage. Very, very sad, but I am sure it will enlighten them and us, during our lives, to remember all that you have gone through and suffered for us, so that we may live better life than you have lived. We all deeply feel the loss of your entire family, which I'm sure they had lived, would have a chance in-- or life. I promise you, Mommy, that I will cherish your tape forever, as I cherishing your father's books. I am very, very sorry for all the terrible things you have witnessed and encountered in your life, but please accept, on behalf of my family, my sincere gratitude and thanks for our-- both you and [? Tati, ?] my husband, have given us spiritually, mentally, physically, and monetarily. May, may you [NON-ENGLISH] for HaShem, that you should live until 120 in good health. Yiddish naches from all of us, happiness, and prosperity. Please note, it took 17 pages to complete this-- 17 [NON-ENGLISH], and [NON-ENGLISH].' This is 17-- 
INT: Thank you. SK: --pages, but could be--  INT: Thank you. SK: --34, because it's a--  INT: Now tell us what your message would be. SK: Pardon?  INT: Tell us what your message would be to your children. SK: My message is the same what she wrote, that I thanks to God that he made me to survive and to be with the 44 people. I-- and I succeeded to make this in my day. I didn't want them to be [? rabbanim, ?] and I didn't want them to be [NON-ENGLISH] folk people. I want them to be educated. If not highly educated, but average people. And I succeeded. Nobody is better than me, and nobody is worse than me. And this is enough for me. And I'm very grateful to God. I'm just not that type who prays every minute, but I have my own way how I am appreciate grateful to God for all this what has given to me.  INT: You have words for your-- your grandchildren? SK: Words?  INT: Any special words for your grandchildren that-- SK: That I love them, and they should they think of that, that-- they should never get to it, that there should be a Holocaust. And I don't know they should forgive the one who, who deprive them to having great grandparents or uncles. But certainly, they should do whatever they can do to support that cause, that the Holocaust should never happen again. 
INT: Thank you, Szidonia for giving your testimony today. Who is the lady on the left? SK: The left is my great grandmother from Czechoslovakia, my mother's grandmother.  INT: What was her name? SK: I don't know.  INT: OK. When was this taken? Do-- SK: Also don't know.  INT: --you don't know. SK: Maybe it's written the other side of the picture?  INT: How did you get this photograph? SK: I got it from Belgium.  INT: From a-- SK: They had it. But the grandparents--  INT: Those are the ones on the right? SK: --who is my mother's parents there, [? Grunfeld ?] from Trebisov.  INT: Which ones are they? The one-- SK: The man with the beard is my grandfather, and the lady is my grandmother, who is named [? Perl. ?] This granddaughter of mine is named after her. And the other one is [? Geza. ?] He was an a chartered accountant in Trebisov, in Czechoslovakia. And he was taken away in 1942, in Majdanek, Lublin. And he sended us a card, that he waiting for [NON-ENGLISH]. That's mean for the help, uncle. And when we received that postcard, he was long in ashes.  INT: How did you get that picture? SK: This picture was also in Belgium. Because my auntie, from Belgium, was taken to Switzerland, was marshalled to France. And then were in family lagers, and they survived. And we have the pictures.  INT: Thank you. Can you tell me what this book is? SK: This book, my father-- well, he survived. He wrote this after the war, partly as a memory book for his lost children and wife, and also from the big rabbi, who was in our village, his miracles, that, originally, he wrote that book. I know he wrote that over together with that memory book and start to-- 
INT: And who are the-- who-- SK: --he wrote--  INT: --who are these people that-- that we see? SK: That's my late father, Joseph [? Mardche ?] Günczler. And that's my mother, [? Gittel ?] [? Grunfeld ?] Günczler, from Trebisov. And she went to-- both went to Auschwitz. And she was right away went to the crematorium and perished in the gas chamber. But my father survived in a very interesting way that they ask him if he can make watches. And they took him to Germany, with the same train, and he never knew that it's Auschwitz. And he was in Auschwitz. He survived. He-- they liberated in that camp. And he came home with bread, and he said, who knows how, how hungry my children are? And that's the way he arrived to the village, Bodrogkeresztúr, where he's there. Then he wrote this manuscript, and he left me a will. In the book it says that I should not sell his books, that I brought from Israel for $1,000, just if I need it for education for my children. And this Sefer, this book, he cannot leave me valuable things as a will for father leave the children. But this manuscript, I'll leave you. And do me a favor for your father. The only favor you can do me, at-- if you give it away for people to read that, then I will be elevated from the deepness to the high level of a thing. Then, and what he wrote there, on the picture, he wrote this, because he, he thought this is a souvenir from my father. I will see that picture, because that's all I will have left. Because he send me away from Hungary. I didn't want to go. And he said you are young. Life is in front of you. I want to be here in the front of that [NON-ENGLISH]. And he buried that. And where he learned with the children, from this wood, they should make him the [NON-ENGLISH]. And this he left in the will. And that's the way it was. Now, he wrote there-- because my son was born, and he was the [NON-ENGLISH], the [NON-ENGLISH]. And he wrote in that place, as an everlasting testament for my beloved son, [? Avraham ?] Kornfeld, and to my beloved daughter, Sara Rivke, they greeted each other in peace, here in Bodrogkeresztúr, and to everlasting testament to my grandson, who is a pleasant rose and beloved man, [? Nata ?] [? Yehuda. ?] Let his star shine and blossom. 
INT: Where did you get your mother's picture? SK: I find it in the garbage. You know, in every village, you have in the end of the backyard, where there they throw the garbage. And then comes a few weeks or months, and the Gypsies came, and they took away end of the-- I don't know-- the fields or what. And the garbage were in there. As soon as I went in the-- I find one picture, another picture. I had a flat here in, in-- I had a, a cedar chest, and the albums were there. My father always play [NON-ENGLISH], chess, and he was learning. And I'll get that. This you asked. So--  INT: Who are the people in this picture? SK: This is my sister with her groom. They were engaged. But it was war time, and he has to be in the army and in the [NON-ENGLISH], forced labor. And they couldn't get married. They were 16 years old, my sister. And she got married. Then she couldn't wait any longer. They were such in love, that they married in 1942, yeah? Can you see that?  INT: Mm-hmm. SK: In 1942.  INT: Mm-hmm. SK: And my father begged them-- wait a little bit. The war will end. No. They didn't want to wait. And my father was a poet. And he wrote in Hebrew. You count it in numbers. You see the line here is the groom's name, [? Naftala ?] and [INAUDIBLE]. And I, and have the family name, then Golda, my sister, and Leo, and Günczler. In this side is the groom. And this side is covered by the picture. It's my sister's name, Leo. And then, when he came home from the war, and I find this picture on the garbage, he wrote in the other side when they killed her. Sst, sst. Because the groom, then we went the same camp, the same transport to Auschwitz. So he know exactly. And he told my father, because they worked together-- the yarzheit. And the-- 
INT: Who are the people in-- in these pictures? The one on the left. SK: On the left is my mother's brother, the man with the beard, the [? Grunfeld-- ?] [NON-ENGLISH] Grunfeld, who went to Auschwitz. Because she was-- they lived in Kosice with his wife and the children. And the-- in 1938, Hitler give back Czechoslovakia part to Hungary. They should be better helping him. And so they were Czechoslovakian, but in 1938, they give him back. So he was in Hungary. In 1944, they leave to Auschwitz.  INT: What was the lady's name? SK: What?  INT: The lady's name. SK: Is his wife.  INT: Yes. SK: Is my auntie. And the next one is-- was a very wealthy guy, my mother's brother. He was in medicine, herbs. And he was taken in 1942 to Majdanek.  INT: What was his name? SK: [NON-ENGLISH] Leo [? Grunfeld. ?] Never returned. The sister of-- this my brother-- that's also a brother of my mother. And I have a lot of more, but they-- I don't have picture from them, from Presov, from Dobrá from-- every Czechoslovakian city, my mother has a sister or a brother. Now this one escaped from Hungary-- to Hungary from Czechoslovakia. This is [? Golda, ?] from Trebisov, Czechoslovakia. They both live in Trebisov. Was not married, none of them, not she, not him. And she went to, first in other end of Hungary. But then when they deported them, she went to Budapest. And one night she went. She was engaged. She went to, to meet to her boyfriend, and they shot her in the [? Donau, ?] the famous [? Donau. ?] 
INT: Who's in this picture? SK: What?  INT: Who is in this picture? SK: This picture is my-- one of my younger brothers, [? Chaim ?] [NON-ENGLISH] Jeno Günczler, who went to Auschwitz, like the other few sisters and brothers, straight to the crematorium, in 1944, May 19.  INT: Where was it taken? SK: The school-- the picture? In school, when he was nine years old or less than that.  INT: Thank you. Who is in this picture? SK: My-- this picture is my younger brother, Armin, whom I was together in Auschwitz. And before they liberated, they killed him. His name-- he was in the yeshiva. From there, they took him to Auschwitz, in 1944.  INT: Thank you. Who is this? SK: This is myself, me.  INT: When was this taken? SK: In 1949.  INT: Any special occasion? SK: No. I think we need it for the passport. And I made that. That says Suda, Suda Rivke, Szidonia Günczler Kornfeld.  INT: Thank you. Who is in this picture? SK: The picture, the first one is my father, in the left side. He always wanted to be-- have a souvenir, that if you die shortly, you can have it that each day I should have a picture from him as a souvenir. And next is me, with my husband, with my oldest son, [NON-ENGLISH] Erwin, [NON-ENGLISH].  INT: Where was-- SK: In 1946.  INT: Where was it taken? SK: In Sátoraljaújhely. We have where he was born in my own bed. [LAUGHS] 
INT: Well, just a second. Now, I-- who-- who are the people in these pictures? SK: The big picture is my son, with his wife, and then my son, with his older-- with his oldest son. The next is his oldest daughter, with her husband, [NON-ENGLISH]. And then upstairs, the girl is [NON-ENGLISH], who needs a very good guy. And the [LAUGHS] lower one is the second daughter with her husband. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] What's [? Hans? ?] Avi, Avi [? Hans ?] and their baby. And upstairs, that's my son's two youngest children.  INT: Thank you. SK: So he has six children, and this is one of a grandchild.  INT: Thank you. Who are in these pictures? SK: And that big picture is my daughter, my oldest daughter, with her daughter and her husband-- the daughter's husband. And then left side is [NON-ENGLISH] Hoffman, her husband. And that's [NON-ENGLISH] and [NON-ENGLISH] Hoffman, and [NON-ENGLISH] Hoffman. The second one is [NON-ENGLISH] Hoffman, my daughter. She has only two children, the daughter and the son. It's [NON-ENGLISH] and their four children, [NON-ENGLISH], [NON-ENGLISH], [? Debbie, ?] [? Dina. ?] And then this is my daughter, who is there with her-- the family picture-- her daughter and her husband. That's their three children. Also [NON-ENGLISH], [? Debbie, ?] [NON-ENGLISH] and [NON-ENGLISH], and they, they, they just cut his hair.  INT: Thank you. SK: [NON-ENGLISH], that's [NON-ENGLISH] there.  INT: Who are in these pictures? SK: That's my younger son, [NON-ENGLISH] Kornfeld, with his wife Amy Kornfeld [NON-ENGLISH], and his-- her daughter, oldest and first daughter, married with [NON-ENGLISH] to [NON-ENGLISH] from Belgium. And the next is her son, [NON-ENGLISH] [? Mordechai ?] Kornfeld. And the next is [NON-ENGLISH] Kornfeld, [NON-ENGLISH] Kornfeld, and [? Dovi ?] Kornfeld. And this is the [NON-ENGLISH] child, the grandchild, my great grandchild. 
INT: Thank you. Who's in this picture? SK: This picture is my youngest daughter, [NON-ENGLISH] Kornfeld Silber, her husband [NON-ENGLISH] Silber, her-- to the left side is [NON-ENGLISH] [? Mordechai ?] Silber. And the other brother, the younger brother, is [NON-ENGLISH] Silber. And the daughter, [? Leah ?] Silber. That's my youngest daughter's family.  INT: Who is in the picture on the left? SK: The left is me and my husband.  INT: When was that taken? SK: Mm, about 20 years ago.  INT: Any special occasion? SK: We were in a bar mitzvah in a home. And the second one is we were at wedding. I don't even remember. Maybe it says in the back which year. And this was just recently, our 50th wedding anniversary surprise party. I went with a robe. I didn't know that all my children whom you see here, and all my 24 grandchildren, everybody gathered to my daughter's house. It was a luxurious party.  INT: Thank you. SK: It was the nicest what I-- it was worth it to survive and to live through this.  INT: Thank you. Who are these two young ladies? SK: They are both my youngest son's two daughters. One is the oldest daughter, and one is the youngest daughter.  INT: What are their names? SK: And very lovely, and very good children and grandchildren.  INT: What are their names? SK: Their name? Her, the older one is [? Feige ?] [? Goldie ?] Kornfeld, now Mrs. [NON-ENGLISH]. And this lovely baby is hers. This lovely baby is hers. 
INT: And who is the young-- SK: So this is my great grandchild.  INT: And who is the other lady? SK: And the young one, the younger is her sister, my youngest son youngest daughter.  INT: And have you anything that you would like to say? GRANDDAUGHTER: Yeah.  INT: OK. GRANDDAUGHTER: OK. We didn't have time to memorize, so we just wrote it down quickly. SK: Louder. I should hear it too. GRANDDAUGHTER: My grandmother is a survivor. Although the Nazis cruelly destroyed her family and her friends, stripped her of her private dignity, she somehow found the inner strength to live. Not only did she survive, but through sheer willpower, she was able to pick up the pieces and begin to rebuild her life. The Nazis were almost triumphant in their plan to rid the world of all Jews, but the Kornfeld family is a living testimony of their failure. It was people like my grandmother who were determined not to let the Nazis win. On the same land they tried to murder and destroy, my grandmother began and nurtured and rebuilt a new family. My grandmother is an inspiration to all, and she continues to be a pillar of strength for her children, grandchildren, and great grandchildren. And we all love her very dearly. SK: Thank you. GRANDDAUGHTER: OK. My grandmother has taught the lessons of her past as a-- as a Holocaust survivor to her 4 children, 22 grandchildren, and 12 great grandchildren, for them pass it on-- SK: Louder. GRANDDAUGHTER: --from generations to come. She has passed on to her family all the true values of the Torah and continues to do so. We are so proud of my grandmother, and words cannot describe the love and gratitude we have for her. 
INT: Thank you. Is there anything-- SK: Thank you very much.  INT: --you want to add? SK: Yes. I forgot to mention to you, because I made in honor of--  INT: Brief. Make it fast. SK: I want to mention that this charity box, with charity, I made in-- in honor of my father and his father, Günczler family. But he's not a survivor in the whole world. Anywhere I go-- in Amsterdam, or in Europe, in any city, I look the telephone booth. There is no other Günczler. So I made the honor of this for poor, for-- how do you say [NON-ENGLISH]? GRANDDAUGHTER: Brides and grooms. SK: Bride and groom to getting married. So I send every year a big amount, and whatever my grandchildren and my family, and good friends wants to add to it. I have another very important-- not message-- but when you ask me if I want to say something before, so it's a very heartbreaking sentence what I want to tell you-- that I don't have whom to tell this. If I ever arrive to that stage that this is going to become into, into fact, I will be, like Simon Wiesenthal, said that he finds Mengele, he don't mind to die the next day. So I want to say that this is my only wish. And I would like to tell to the right person. Now they're making in New York a Holocaust Memorial, and I would like to tell them, when they make the museum, it's a great desire for me they should make a little gas chamber and a crematorium, but the flame and smoke should be artificial, but sky high. And they don't need anything gas. This-- the whole world would come to see this, that flame and sky what I have seen for a half a year in Auschwitz myself. And my mother and my whole family burned in that half sky. That's it I want to say. And thank you very much for your devoted volunteer work, Monica. 
INT: And thank you. SK: It was nice meeting you.  INT: And than you for your testimony. SK: And so with Dan. And I wish you the best. I appreciate your patient and you-- what you did for me.