INT: Today is August 22, 1997. I will be interviewing Philip Bialowitz, also Bialowicz in Poland. Interviewer, Tina Tito. We are in Little Neck, New York in the USA. The language will be English. Today is August 22, 1997. I am the interviewer, Tina Tito. I will be interviewing Philip Bialowitz here in New York. Mr. Bialowitz, could you tell me your full name and spell it for me? PB: My name is Philip Bialowitz, P-H-I-L-I-P B-I-A-L-O-W-I-T-Z.  INT: Where were you born? PB: I was born in Poland, Izbica, near Lublin.  INT: When were you born? PB: 11/25/1929.  INT: 19-- PB: 29.  INT: And how old are you today? PB: 68.  INT: Could you tell me your father's full name? PB: My father's full name Scyia Bialowicz, spelled at the end with a C-Z.  INT: And your mother's full name? PB: Biala Bialowicz, also spelled with C-Z by the end.  INT: And her maiden name? PB: Maiden name was Kliv, K-L-I-V.  INT: And you had several sisters and brothers. Could you tell me their names? The oldest brother? PB: Oldest brother, Simha Bialowicz, Yakov Bialowicz, and my three sisters, the oldest was Rifka Bialowicz, Branche, and Toba Bialowicz.  INT: Thank you. Let's go to your hometown, and can you describe Izbica for us? What did it look like to somebody coming to visit? PB: Izbica before the war, it was a very, very young Jewish-- Jewish community with 5,000 Jews, 99% of them was Jewish. And most of the Jews of Izbica were Hasidic, different sects, all kinds of-- very, very religious. And world-renowned rabbi of Izbica was named as Mortre Yosef. And he was a advisor to-- to world-- world-- world leaders. And he was called to world conferences. And the Elie Wiesel had a lecture on Lincoln Center, and he mentioned Mortre Yosef in Izbica. And in Izbica was also originated the Hasidim [NON-ENGLISH] Hasidim, where they use a blue [NON-ENGLISH] And it was originated there in Izbica. 
INT: Were you part of the Hasidic community? PB: We were not [NON-ENGLISH] but we were-- we were very religious. My father was a leader of the community. And the visiting rabbis from out of town stayed in our house when they came to visit Izbica for a few days.  INT: Do you remember the duties your father had in the town? What was he asked to do for the town? PB: Well, my father was active in the community and by-- like-- like to give loans for people, for people who-- they-- they were very poor and to help out with the-- with people that were-- a lot of people who were very poor and-- and went to help them out for-- for Shabbos, you know, and to help them out with food. And he was very instrumental in helping out.  INT: Describe your house in Izbica. What did it look like where you lived? PB: We lived-- we-- I wouldn't say we lived the-- like in America. We-- we-- we lived in a wooden house. And we had two bedrooms, a living room, and a kitchen. It's-- it's-- well, it was considered not a high-class place. But all Izbica was not-- was not-- people were very poor. And the standard-- my family, we were not so poor. But still, we not-- we not considered rich. And my father was in the-- in the leather business. And well, we managed a little better than-- than other community, other people. 
INT: Where did-- who did you sleep with in your house? PB: Well I-- I slept with my father in one-- one bed. We didn't have-- we didn't have-- we were six children. But as-- as the-- Izbica didn't have a industrial base. And we didn't have the education in Izbica. So we-- we-- we-- well, we only went to a-- to-- to public schools till the seventh grade. And after this, my-- my parents send out my-- their oldest son to Warsaw in order to continue to study. And he was studying in Warsaw, and he was a pharmacist there. And as soon as-- as we got older, my second brother went also to Warsaw. If the war wouldn't break out, I would go probably also to a different-- to a big city and to-- to continue studying. But the war interrupted all the plans.  INT: What kind of school did you go to in Izbica? PB: I went to Izbica to a cheder, and I went to public school till the outbreak of the war. But when the war broke out, I couldn't continue studying. So mine parents arranged private tutors, and I studied at home. And-- and that's why I-- and I continued after the war when I-- after the war, I continued my studies.  INT: Did you have a bar mitzvah? PB: I didn't-- I don't recall that I have a bar mitzvah.  INT: Did your brother, do you remember if your brother had? PB: My brothers had the bar-- but I was too young to-- to remember things. But I'm sure they had bar mitzvah. 
INT: Other things about the synagogue-- was it close to your house? PB: The synagogue was about 10 minutes' walk to the synagogue. It was a big synagogue. And my father and myself, we always-- we-- my family was sitting right near the rabbi.  INT: Who was the rabbi? PB: The rabbi was Israel Landau was his name. And he was, well, a very well-known rabbi, was he comes from the [NON-ENGLISH] family, from the [? Alzena. ?] And it was a synagogue, well, orthodox. There was another room. My mother was in other room. I remember in the high holidays, I used to-- I used to run into-- to the other room when my mother was playing. And I saw my mother surrounded maybe by 50 women around and they repeated, davening. Because they-- they didn't know Hebrew, and my mother was well-educated in Hebrew.  INT: Did your mother come from Izbica? PB: She was-- she was-- she was born in Izbica, yes.  INT: So her family-- PB: My-- my father was born in [NON-ENGLISH]. This is near Wlodawa also in the area, not far from Sobibór.  INT: And they always lived in this area, as far as you know? Your grandparents grew up in this area too? PB: My mother's grandparents grew up in the-- in Izbica. But my parents-- mine-- my father's grandparents, they-- they are from [NON-ENGLISH]. My mother--  INT: But as far back as you can remember, you were always living-- your family lived in this area of Lublin? PB: Yeah, yes, in the area of Lublin. We were a very knit family. And we were-- had a very standard and we were normal, normal children. And we were looking for the future. And-- but the, the war interrupted everythings. 
INT: Tell me about your relationship with your sisters and brothers. Who were you close to? PB: Well, but I was close with all my sisters and with my brothers. And my brothers used to send me from Warsaw-- they used to send me clothing. I remember for-- always for passover, he send me a nice coat, a nice suit from-- from Warsaw. And I was the nice-- the nicest dressed in Izbica. So we were a very close-knit family.  INT: Do remember things that you did as a young boy? Any games you used to play, climb trees? PB: I used to play soccer, I used to-- you used to go to the-- to the forest. And we had picnics. It was a normal life.  INT: Did you ever go out of Izbica on a holiday or a trip to another area? PB: Well, I-- a couple times, I went to [NON-ENGLISH] to mine uncles, my brother's family. And I stayed there for-- for a week, me and my sister Branche. As I remember, I also went to Zamosc to see my mother's side family. I stayed there for a few days, because it was 21 kilometers from Izbica.  INT: How did you get to these places? How did you travel at that time? PB: By-- there was a bus. And sometimes we traveled by-- with the horses, you know. It took a little longer.  INT: Did you know the road to the area very well? PB: I know well-- very well the whole area, all the villages and-- a rather small town, very small town. Well, but very vibrant and very, very educated people in-- in-- in-- in Jewish life in Izbica. 
INT: Where did the non-Jewish population live? PB: They lived-- they lived in surrounding, around Izbica.  INT: Tell me about the geography of Izbica. Was it near a mountain, near forest? PB: It was near forest-- and forest and was located-- centrally located the station was between Lwów, Warszawa, Warsaw. And also during the war, Izbica became a way station because it-- because of the location, because it was-- they could transport the Jews to Belzec and to Sobibor.  INT: Now in terms of your house and the center of the village of Izbica, when you looked around, what did you see in the-- in the surrounding area. Did you see trees? Did you see mountains? PB: There was one little mountain where we lived. But the mountain now, when I visited now Izbica, the mountain is almost disappeared. It's-- it's very little mountain now, you now. Because already 50, 60 years. So-- but it was-- was a lot of trees. It was near-- near the-- a lot of nature all around.  INT: Where was the cemetery for the Jewish community? PB: Cemetery was in center of the city, was the cemetery. And [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] I'll come up later to tell you about the cemetery, what I find the cemetery now, how it looks like.  INT: The stores in Izbica, who owned the stores? PB: Well the-- 99% were Jewish-- Jewish stores, Jewish merchants. And people from around the villages came once a week and they-- and they sold their products and-- and they-- and they exchanged for-- for goods from the stores. 
INT: Non-Jews as well as Jews? PB: Non-Jews, non-Jews, mostly-non Jews, yes.  INT: Did you have friends that were non-Jewish? PB: I had very few friends non-Jewish because the relations between Jews and-- and the Polish people were not the best-- the best way. Because the-- the antisemitism was-- I used to be-- I used to be beaten up by-- by Polish students after they had their religious hour. They came up so indoctrinated that they beat me up. So it was not so easy to go to the public school. The antisemitism was rampant.  INT: How did the teachers treat you? PB: The teachers, normal. I mean, was not such a very close relationship, but normal. But the students, especially when they had a-- the religious hour, they-- they were-- we came out right away with beatings.  INT: What was the reaction when you were beaten? What was the reaction of your parents when you came home beaten up? What did they say to you? PB: Well they told me, well, this is-- this is the way we live here. It's-- this is going on already for centuries, antisemitism. And once my mother went to the-- to the principal to complain. And the principal, she said she will look into it. But nothing, yeah, they didn't do-- they didn't take any action.  INT: Any other aspects of your life as a child that you remember that are very special? A holiday that's very special to you? PB: Well, the holidays-- especially I remember the Passover. The Passover holiday, we are in our house, from generation to generation, we baked matzahs for the town. And we had those wooden-- those wooden-- wood where-- where-- where you made the-- the matzahs. And every year, they came and-- and they and-- they made them thinner, a little bit. And my mother, a month before-- before the Passover, before we started to bake matzahs, she went around the town to pick 20 girls, young girls to bake the-- bake the matzahs. They were like models, she went around to look for models. And we had our-- our [NON-ENGLISH], you know what makes that. And I was a little boy. And I was a [? [NON-ENGLISH]. ?] Like I-- I have to figure out how much flour to put in. And after the-- a year later, I advanced to be a [NON-ENGLISH], like to put the water into the-- If I put in a little bit too much water, they couldn't use that-- that whole dough for their-- for-- for-- for the matzahs. And if the war wouldn't broke out, I would became-- I would become a-- a [NON-ENGLISH], and then I would be a [NON-ENGLISH] to put the matzahs into the oven. So this was going on from generation to generation in our-- in our family. And we bake-- baked the matzahs, first the first oven was for the very prestigious people, more richer people, who they could afford more to pay more. The first-- the first oven like [NON-ENGLISH] matzahs. And so this is-- this is I remember from Passover. But all the holidays was a big events in our house. Everything they cleaned, they prepared. And especially Yom Kippur was the whole-- the whole town was-- was like very excited about the holiday-- about the holidays. 
INT: Did you ever dress up for a Purim spiel? PB: Yeah, we dressed up for Purim spiel. We-- we had a regular, normal life, yes.  INT: Do you remember any costumes that you wore? PB: Well, I remember I-- I wore a special costume, like they-- they put me on with a-- like a rabbi with a beard-- beard. And [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] it's-- it was very interesting, you know. It's very lovely.  INT: Tell me now, as we move forward, you're getting a little bit older. It's around 1937, 1938. What was-- what was the news in your town about what was going on? PB: Well, we listened to the radios, and we-- we heard the speeches of Hitler. And we-- and we knew that something is-- he's a very mean person, that he has plans, bad plans to-- to conquer Europe. And we were very scary what's going to happen.  INT: Did your brothers stay in Warsaw at this time, or did they come back home? PB: My brothers stayed in-- in-- in Warsaw till the-- till the war broke out. And the war broke out, my brother Simha came to-- to us. And my other brother Yakov, he-- he went to Russia.  INT: Why did he decide to go to Russia? PB: Because he had a group of friends. They decided to escape from-- they were afraid for the Germans. And they decided to go to Russia. And thank heavens, he survived. 
INT: So when did Simha come back to Izbica? PB: Simha came back to Izbica when, right in 1939, yes.  INT: What were you doing just before the war? What do you remember, the-- the last thing that was sort of normal in your life before the war? PB: Well, I went to-- to cheder. I went to school, and I helped out my father. We had a little leather-- a leather factory. I helped him out with all the-- he showed me around the chemicals what he used, you know. I wasn't so excited about this-- this line of work. But I tried to help out. You know, everybody in my family-- we were six children-- everybody had an assignment-- to clean the house, to help out my mother, and in every field.  INT: The war is breaking out. Where is your family right then when you first realize it's breaking out, the war? PB: We were in the-- in the house.  INT: In your house. PB: In our house. The war broke out. And we were very scared. And it didn't take long, and the Germans came. We had-- there was a-- there was a resistance from the Polish military in Izbica, around Izbica. And there were big fighting we had, and I was very scared. And we had all the bombardment and the artilleries and we were-- it took only a few hours till they were overwhelmed, all these people, and the-- and the Germans came in. 
INT: What happened when the Germans came in? PB: The Germans came in, and right away, they-- they started-- they started with the Jews. First they cut the-- cut the beards from the men. And they-- and they tried to humiliate.  INT: How did they do that? What did they do? PB: They were beating him. And they-- they told him to do all kinds of thing, which-- to humiliate him-- cut the beard, the payots, you know. If you saw that-- that-- that's-- you're going to have a very rough time, you know, from the Germans. But we were helpless. We couldn't do anything to change it. So we were looking for a [INAUDIBLE], maybe something will happen.  INT: Did you do any preparation in the house? Did you hide any jewelry, hide any money? PB: Well, we-- they-- they came-- they came to-- to Judenrate. They came to-- to our house, and the Germans. And we had to give away all the jewelry and the furs what we had. All the jewelry we-- and some of the jewelry were-- were like antique pieces, which was going from generation to generations. So we gave it away, and we thought this will help us survive.  INT: Do you know who was in the Judenrate in your town? Do you happen to remember anybody's name? PB: One was Blatt and Messerschmitt.  INT: How were they chosen, the Judenrate? Do you know? How they-- how did they become Judenrate? PB: Well, they-- they-- they-- this-- the-- there was a Volksdeutsche, Volksdeutsche in Izbica. His name were Schultz. And he gave the names of people to-- to the German Gestapo for the Judenrate. 
INT: So two of the people were Blatt and Messerschmitt on the Judenrate. PB: Yeah, Messerschmitt.  INT: Are they the two people that came to your house? PB: No, somebody else came. I don't recall their names. And-- in Izbica was assigned a Gestapo. His name is Engels. And he was a very vicious person. And he killed hundred of Jews in Izbica.  INT: How did he do that, how did he kill them? PB: He just came out for breakfast, he shoot people and for-- for lunch, you know, with a motorcycle. He'd stop 10, 15, 20 people. This was his-- his satisfaction every day. And-- and I'll-- I'll tell you-- I'll elaborate what happened to him after the war.  INT: We'll-- yes, we'll talk about that later. So we're now-- you're-- do go out of the house? Does your mother let you leave the house? PB: We went out of the house. And at the beginning, they-- they rounded up people for work. And I-- I was already a big boy, and I happened to be in a different area of Izbica, different street. I couldn't go home. And so I was hiding in somebody's house in a closet. And-- and I-- the people came to my house, and they told me-- they told my parents that I'm hiding there. So my sister came with the woman's clothing. And they-- they put me-- they put me up as a-- they made me up as a girl with the makeup and everything. And I walked home as a girl. So this was one of the episode in the beginnings. 
INT: Do you remember the name of the family that you were hiding with? PB: The name of the family was hiding-- I think they were the name of [? Schwartz. ?] But I don't-- I'm not 100% sure.  INT: So that was right in the beginning this happened. PB: Right in the beginning, yes.  INT: Continue slowly, other episodes in your life. PB: Oh, that's and-- [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] the life was-- was in Izbica was starting to get very little by little very bad. We didn't-- we didn't have enough food. And we were-- and we-- and the Judenrate assigned every to work, you know, different places. My father and everybody had to do something.  INT: What did your father do? PB: My father was working for the-- for the leather, leather. And he supplied the leather to them, so-- so we had a little-- we had a little better, a little better off, we were a little better off.  INT: Did you get a job assignment? PB: I got the assignment. In the wintertime, the roads were-- the roads were filled with maybe 20, 30 inches of snow. And I had to go to-- to-- to clean the-- the-- the-- the roadway from Krasnystaw to Zamosc the whole-- a whole day.  INT: Who did you go with? Who was with the-- PB: With a-- with a group of boys from Izbica.  INT: Do you remember any of the boys' names? PB: [? Yankel, ?] Moishe. But it's-- was a full group. But we were young, we were full of-- you know, we had the-- full of strength yet-- yet. And this was our assignment. 
INT: When you were cleaning the roads, who watched you? PB: Volksdeutsche, Volksdeutsche, especially one of the name of Schultz. And this was till-- and then in-- in 1941, '42, they started to bring transports from different cities of Poland and from-- and from different countries like Germany and Austria, Czechoslovakia. And Izbica became like a way station. And because of the-- of the-- Izbica could not absorb so many people. And every-- and every-- house, the Judenrate assigned a family. And I'll come up with a story about the episode when a family was assigned from Germany. If you want me to tell you now, I can you tell this family was a world-renowned family. And their name was Rosenbeg, husband, wife and two daughters, and very nice people. And of course, they were-- they were not religious. And my family were religious, they were a little bit-- a little bit frictions from the religious point of view. But later on they-- they became very good friends. And I-- one of the daughters was my girlfriend. By the end, we got-- we have-- we-- we got engaged. And one day-- one day, a Mercedes came to the door. And the Gestapo came out from the-- from the-- from the Mercedes with a package in his hand. He went into the house, and I saw that scenery, so I-- I-- I was hiding under the bed. And he came in, and I noticed-- saw that-- that they embraced themself. 
INT: Who embraced whom? PB: The-- the Gestapo with-- with Mr. Rosenbeg and Mrs. Rosenberg and the children. And-- and I was shaking, you know. And I--I couldn't-- I couldn't comprehend what is going on here, the Gestapo. And they-- and they went in to the other room. They had their coffee.  INT: We're going to stop the tape and continue in the next tape. Thank you.  INT: With Philip Bialowitz, August 22, 1997. Sorry, we interrupted your story about this Gestapo man, coming into the house and bracing the Rosenberg family. PB: I was shaking, waiting under the bed and see what's going on. And I couldn't, I couldn't imagine what is, what, what happened. He's-- he's a Gestapo, and he is, he is, and he's showing such goodwill towards the Rosenbergs. So-- and when he left-- he said goodbye, and they left. They spoke in German. I understood a little bit-- very-- not too much. I couldn't hear everything. When he went away, I came out from the hiding. And I, I asked, Hertha-- she was my girlfriend. I said, Hertha, you have to tell me what's going on, here. And she started to cry. she said, I cannot disclose what happened. And I said-- I, I cannot tell you. Two days later, he came, again, with two packages. And then they had a lengthy discussion. I overheard it-- he's going to give him a job as an engineer and-- to build airport. He was a, he was one of the heads of the Gestapo in [? Krasnica. ?] And after the second time, and it was the same-- they coffee, they ate sandwiches, and-- and they also embraced and-- like a family. After he left, I said to Hertha, Hertha-- you must tell me now, what's going on, because your father told me that I am a member of the family. And after the war, you're going with-- I'm going with you to Germany, and we're going to have a good life, and you shouldn't have any secrets from me. And she said, let's go to the forest, to the woods. We took a blanket. We went to the woods, you know. And we laid down, and we sit down, and we started to talk. And little by little, she came out-- she said that he's a distant cousin of my father, he is a Gestapo in [? Krasnica. ?] And he's helping-- not only us-- he is helping other families in Izbica, too. And I, I was overwhelmed-- I heard that news. And this way, he, he, he saved them till, till the, till the end, till-- till they went to Sobibor. And he himself was killed. [NON-ENGLISH] 
INT: And this family, were they also killed in Sobibor? The Rosenberg family-- when they got to Sobibor, did they survive it? PB: No, they, they were, they, they were killed.  INT: They were killed? PB: You know, they were in a different-- they were, they were hiding in a-- we had two, two places, hiding places, because we couldn't manage to get in one, one place. Their-- for their family, we had a hiding place, and we had a hiding place. And they came out during a, during a roundup, and they thought it's already over. And they picked them all up, and then there was Judenrein that time. And they took them to Sobibor.  INT: Now, you said that you made a hiding place for your family. How did you make a hiding place for them? PB: We made a hiding place underneath the house outside, and the entrance was from inside-- like, with little wheels the whole wall was going up and down. And we were there. And usually, all the-- when they came to pick up Jews-- 1,000, 1,500 Jews during the night-- after that, we could go-- we could go around freely again. They didn't bother us. But when, when, when it came to, when, when the last transports they made was Judenrein-- Jews, free of Jews. And I didn't know that. We didn't know that. And we were hiding in that, in our-- in our hiding place, and overnight, a whole night. And my mother was-- got very sick. And they gave her a compress [? with some urine. ?] We didn't have any food. So I was going to go out, bring water. And I opened up, I opened up the, that, that door. And I closed it. And the, and the whole, the whole apartment was like after a pogrom. Everything's turned upside down. All the, the feathers, and all over-- they were looking for, for, for, for, for valuables-- the Polacks. And the fireman caught me in the room, and they beat me up. I was bleeding, and they took me to the Gestapo, to the prison. 
INT: Who was the man in the-- who was the fireman? PB: A Polish fireman. So I didn't know that this was the end of the, of, of the, of, of Izbica-- that, that that's finished, that it's Judenrein. I didn't know that. I left my family in the hiding place. They were waiting on me to bring the water, and I am on the, on-- behind the prison with 60 other Jews. And they're, and they didn't know what happened to me-- what's my fate. And they came over [? on the shuls-- ?] the Volksdeutsche. He came over. He took out two people. He shot them, like this, in, in front of us. They wouldn't make a transport, because there was not enough people to make a transport. They took us up to the cemetery in Izbica. And we had to dig our own graves, big grave. And they were machine gunned us. And I went-- I fell in. I made believe. They started to shoot-- I, I fell into the grave, and I-- and was three, four people were over me. And I managed to-- my head, to get some air. And some people there were still alive, were, were injured. And I was laying-- make believe that I am dead till about 10 o'clock PM. This was already in the evening time. They didn't cover us, because they were, they were expecting to come back the next day to recover the jewelry, valuables. And I managed to get out-- like, from a slaughterhouse. And I walked down from the cemetery. The whole town-- it was like a pogrom-- valises with clothing, with all-- first of all, I undressed myself. And I and I, and I put on a, a skirt with a blouse-- didn't fit me. And what do I do now? First of all, I went over to the, to, to those-- to those-- to get some water with those [NON-ENGLISH], you know. And I washed myself from the blood. I was all over with blood. And I, and I find a pail with some water. And I-- on one hand-- and I-- and I went, because I want to go over to my family. Just-- so it's already about 16-- 14, 16 hours since, since I left them. And I passed by a Polish bakery, by the name, [NON-ENGLISH]. In the outside was a, the bread-- on those, there was lined up hot bread. So I stole a bread in the other end. And I came back to mine, to my house. And I knocked. They didn't have the strength to answer me-- they were so weak. I managed to open up. And I went in. My mother almost died already. We had no water. And she was sick. She had a headache. Maybe, she had high blood pressure. We don't know what the, what it was. And we were-- I didn't tell them the whole story-- you know, what happened to me. You know, what it will be-- much too much for my mother to, to listen what happened to me. And we, then we-- I told them that it's Judenrein. There are no Jews in Izbica. So what can we do, now? [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] We want to live, you know-- the urge for living, you know-- the instinct. So I took them all out. We went into a place where-- there was, also, a factory of leather. And in the backyard was a big basement. So I figured we'll go-- this is adjoining to that factory-- that they wouldn't come in to look for us. So we went there. Until we get-- over the other side was a big, a big airport-- one took over the other side of the-- 
INT: How many were you? Who was in the-- PB: Me, me, my mother, and, and two sisters. And a little girl was left with my other sister when she went to Belzec. She went to Belzec with her little boy. And she was exterminated, there. And this girl happened to be hiding with us. And she, she remained with us. So we went to that basement.  INT: Simha wasn't with you? PB: Simha was in a different place. He was hiding, there. He was the head of the hospital. You know, he-- it was the, the hospital-- there, they were, the full hospital was filled up with, with, with patients with typhus. Of course, the city could not absorb so many people because of the no hygiene, no food. So typhus broke out, and many people died, including the doctors. So my brother became the head of the-- he knew how to make the injections, and he knew, he knew everything. And he was hiding there in the hospital. And they came--  INT: Where, where was this hospital? PB: The hospital was in the shul. The shul, they made-- from the temple, they made a hospital.  INT: These were Jewish people, dying in the shul? PB: Jewish people. We had the-- the Germans came into the hospital, and they killed the patients, you know. And it was terrible things. So we, we went into that basement. When we came to the basement, we find, maybe, 50 people in the basement, hiding. They, they had the same idea what we had. They ran away from the transports, and they came into the basement to hide. And, and, and we-- and I thought that this is, this is not going to, this is not going to last too long. And we, and we was no food, no toilets. And they came-- went and this. And they, they, they were, they will, they will, they will find us. In the meantime, they picked me, there, to bring food, because there was no food-- that I should bring food. And then come back the next day-- I should come back. So I went to get food. When I came back the next day, the whole basement was empty. My, my mother was there, and my two sisters with the little girl managed to get over to the other side, inside to the compound-- was hiding, because my mother told them to go over on the other side-- maybe, they will be more safer. And when I came back, I find the, the, the basement empty. And they, they, they, they, they find the, the place. The Polacks, they, they, they, they told the Gestapo. With the Volksdeutsche, they came. And they took them to the, to the cemetery. And they were shot, including my mother. And-- 
INT: Where was your father at this time? PB: My father, they, they-- he was hiding in a different place. And they took him to Belzec with a transport. And he escaped on the way to Belzec. He escaped from the train. He came back to the city. The Polacks picked him up. And they took him to the, to the Gestapo. And he was sent to, with a transport to Sobibor. This was before, before we, we, we went to Sobibor.  INT: Now, this whole situation with the typhus and you hiding, what year was this? PB: This was in 1942. Yes.  INT: 1942? PB: And Izbica was terrible, was-- where they, they, they, they did-- they caught so many Jews from all over. The-- Izbica could not absorb so many Jews, so many people. And they brought them to Izbica to keep them there to, to, to bring him down psychological, physically, mentally-- so they shouldn't, when they go, when they take them to the extermination camp, there should be no resistance.  INT: How many transports do you know about that left Izbica to Belzec or to Sobibor? Do you have any idea? PB: Well, every, every week, they came, and they have a transport. Every week, they round up the Jews, and they brought them to, to the, took them to Belzec or Sobibor. They brought in new, new, new, new transports. But Izbica, like I mentioned, was a way station. And in the, in the Wannsee Conference, Izbica was mentioned to take a special part in the liquidation of the Jewish people, because it was centrally located between Belzec and Sobibor. So then was Judenrein. And there's no way-- where to go. I-- where should I go, you know? So my sister-- me and my sisters, were-- they-- I managed to-- to get into the compound, too, inside. And I was, I was hiding. I was laying on a, in the factory from the leather, they had a-- like, a big wheel, huge wheel, like this room. And this wheel-- the processing of the leather with the chemical goes, goes-- this, they used to do it with a horse. A horse used to, used to go around. And that, and that wheel used to move around. And that's the way that the leather processes. Later, they made it electrical. And I was laying on that, hiding on that, on that wheel. In the morning, they put on the, the electricity, and I was going with this, with this wheel around. And I was on the floor, and they find me-- the-- the people what are in charge, they find me. And they let me-- opened the gate, and they let me out. 
INT: Who-- who was in charge at that time? PB: Jews-- Jewish people were there.  INT: Still Jews? PB: They, they, they said that they couldn't-- there are so many, many people have to be here. And, and, and if I don't-- I didn't have any, any papers that I, I am supposed to be there. So they let me go outside in the middle of the day. You know, where should I go? I should go and give myself up to the Gestapo? I want to live. I'm a young boy. I want-- instinct tells me to, to try to live. So I was thinking, what should I do? So I remembered that, that one block away was a hiding place in, in an oven. It was a-- this house was once a Bais Yaakov. So I went up to the upstairs, and I opened up the, the, the hood. I knew that place. It was four boys-- my brothers' friends. I don't remember, exactly, their names. They were there already for a week. And they were so happy. I told them what happened to me-- that time when we were sitting. We were there for the-- the 24 hours. But I have to go and get food. So at, at night, going out, opening up that, that opening and going down, I was not familiar with the steps. And I landed on the floor. Today, If I will have to fall down, I wouldn't, I wouldn't pick myself up, anymore. I would be finished. But in a situation like this, you were like steel, you know. And I was OK. If I would break my leg, that would be finished. And we went to get food. And we were going from one place to the other. And we-- we were in the woods till, till they made the-- they made the [? Judenstaat. ?] In all these little cities, they wanted to lure in the Jews from the, from the, from the forests to have them in one place. They make [? Judenstaat. ?] And you could go around, normally-- live, normally, like before. They didn't, they didn't take you to the extermination camp. And we were there-- 
INT: What time of year? PB: This was-- this was, this was already in 19-- the end, the end of 1942, beginning of 1943.  INT: Winter? It was cold? PB: Yeah, cold. Everybody came back to the, to the city, because they couldn't, they couldn't manage to be in the woods in those frozen weathers and the snows. So they figured-- they had frostbite. They figured whatever will be will be. They, they could not help themself anymore. So we were on that city in, in that, 19-- till 1943 in April, was the, when the Warsaw ghetto uprising took place. They rounded up all the Jews from different places, and they came to Izbica.  INT: Do you know about the uprising at this time? Did you know anything about it? PB: No, we didn't know about the uprising. And we-- but in the meantime, we prepared ourself a big hiding place under the factory, there. We went, went over to the, to a Polish family underground. And-- but it wasn't finished yet. We, we didn't have any, any, any air made. We were going to put in tubes. The tubes-- the air should go through the tubes, because we had it in our house. We had a little tube-- very-- not visible, a little tube. And-- and we got air through this, through this opening. And they came to pick us up-- all the Jews from Izbica. And they came in with the Polacks to this place. And they were looking for those of us. Well, there maybe are a couple hundred Jews, there. They couldn't find us. So the Polacks went around, listening to the walls, like this, to hear any noises. It took us a couple hours, and they find us, because we didn't have any, have any children. We didn't have any, we didn't have any-- no air. So they find us. And they took us out with the hands up. And the Polacks were outside, clapping, like this. And they took us to the marketplace. And were standing by two big trucks with [? additions. ?] And they took us with those trucks. They took us to [? Trawniki. ?] They stopped by [? Trawniki. ?] And they went in-- the Gestapo went into the [? Trawniki, ?] to the, to the office. And they came out, and we continued to Sobibor They were, they were going to take us to [? Trawniki. ?] Probably, they didn't have-- they didn't want to accept us, or didn't have any room, or something. So they took us to Sobibor. On the way to Sobibor, everybody said goodbye. And the little girl-- to my other sister-- she came over. They, they kissed each other. She knew that was going to die. And we came to Sobibor. When we came to Sobibor, the day before, they, they, they, they killed 48, 48 people from Holland-- workers. They had to replace them. They always rotated the personnel, so we shouldn't get too smart to do something. When we came-- well, this is while they're-- this is while-- where they are full. They, they, they, they-- since we came, they didn't change the personnel, because the work, the work didn't go so smoothly when they changed-- had to train the people. And they had transport coming every few days. So they, they, they asked for professionals-- doctors, pharmacists. They-- they asked for shoemakers. They asked for, for different professionals. So my brother raised his hand. He's a pharmacist. So they took him out, and he told the Gestapo that he has a little brother, and I'm his helper. So they were looking for me, maybe, for a few minutes. They'll find me, and I was spared, too. Think this was the first chance of my life that, that my brother gave me. They took me out, too. They-- they were separated-- women and men, separate. And they took them to the extermination camp. 
INT: Now, did you know anything about Sobibor before you got there? PB: I knew. Yeah, I, I knew Sobibor-- we knew Sobibor existed-- and Belzec. But knew-- knowing that Sobibor exists-- Belzec-- this is extermination camp, but we couldn't comprehend-- thinking that this, that, that, that this can happen.  INT: What did you think about it? Where did-- what happened to the people in these camps? When you were still in Izbica, did you have-- you knew about the camp? PB: We knew the camp. They told us-- the, the extermination camp, but we couldn't believe that this will happen.  INT: But they did call it an extermination camp? PB: Yeah, yeah, extermination camp, yeah.  INT: Who told you? How did you get the information? PB: People, some people escaped from, from the area. And they came back, and they told us.  INT: Now, you're in a truck, you've now arrived at Sobibor. Where did they drop you off? What did it look like when you got off the truck? PB: When we came in, we came into Sobibor to the camp, the-- the roads was nice and paved-- nice little houses, you know. We were standing there, there, there, there- this is the arbeits, arbeits camp, you know. And everything was normal, you know, until they separated us. And they picked up the replacement workers. And the rest, they went to the extermination camp.  INT: What side did you go onto? I mean-- PB: We went to the right, and, and then to the left, they, they went to the extermination camp. This was-- the camp was consisted of what-- 1, 2, 3, 4. The 4th camp was the extermination camp. We, we never could-- if we got too close over there, we couldn't come back. So this was very top secret. But it was no secret. A half an hour later, you see-- you saw the flames. The smell-- it was for miles, you could, you could smell the smell from, from the flesh. 
INT: When you arrived with the truck, who met you? What did the people look like? PB: Gestapo, the Gestapo met us. With the Polish people, they didn't make any, any big-- they didn't-- they, they knew, they knew that we knew that this is extermination camp. So they didn't have any speeches. They didn't-- like, like, they have speeches-- I'm, I'm going, I'm going to mention to you-- when the transport from Holland-- how it came out with them. With, with, with us, right away, they made it very short. And right away, they took, took, took us to the extermination camp.  INT: How many? You said, you were saved with your brother. How-- you were 200 people in the trucks, more or less? PB: We, we were a few hundred people.  INT: Few hundred? PB: Yes.  INT: How many people were saved? PB: About 40, 40, 40 people they took out.  INT: Do you know the names of any of the people they took out? PB: They took out, I mean, the Licht, Licht, Licht, and I don't remember exactly all the names. But-- [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] and when I-- after they, they took us out, and we came into this second camp where, where we were-- these was the living quarters-- and the co-workers asked me, did you bring any family with you? I said yes, three sisters and a niece. He said, turn around. I turn around, I saw a big flame. 
INT: Immediately, they said this to you? PB: Immediately-- a big flame. He said, this is your family. So I knew that's what is waiting for us. So that's, that's the end. That's the end of, of, of my journey. But I, also, thought that, at least, I wouldn't have to suffer anymore-- hiding in the places, with the transport, with the walking, and this and this. I figured-- that's, that's it.  INT: Where did they bring you as they took you into the camp? In-- you said into the living quarters-- PB: They, they changed-- they gave us, they gave us clothing.  INT: What kind of clothing? PB: Clothing to change in-- special uniforms.  INT: What color? PB: Blue. And they, they gave us, you know, the, the blankets, and the assignment that, that we're going to, we're going to sleep in the barracks, like, three people on top of the other. And--  INT: Who did you sleep with? Who was assigned to your barrack? PB: Tom, Tom Blatt. He-- and somebody else from [NON-ENGLISH], but I don't remember his name. And I had a-- with him, I had an episode. I think his name was [? Yankel. ?] And I was assigned to, to sort clothing from the transports. And while I was sorting the clothing, I came up to-- I find Hertha's clothing-- my girlfriend from Sobibor. I find her clothing, there. And I started to cry. I was overwhelmed-- you know, what happened. You know, I know that she perished-- their family perished in Sobibor. And then they transferred me to, to, to sort the, the foods that came with the transport, from-- they came from Holland transport-- they came with all their belongings. They came in passenger trains. So I was, I-- while I was sorting sugar, flour-- sugar to sugar, flour to flour, bread to bread, everything what I opened, I opened was full of diamonds and emeralds and, and, and sapphires. And the Gestapo knew about it. They knew about it. They had-- there was a big safe. And I, I had to throw in everything to the safe. But I didn't want to help the Nazi war machine. So I ran to the toilet every time and throw into the toilet the jewelry. 
INT: Tell me about the toilet. Where-- PB: The toilet was not a regular toilet, a flushing toilet. It was, you know, those, those primitive toilets. I, I throw in the, the jewelry. And an hour later, I ran, again. This was my job, every time.  INT: It was inside the barrack? PB: Inside the, inside the compound, inside the compound, yeah.  INT: Where was the barracks for sorters? Describe the location. PB: The sorters-- it, it wasn't on-- in the second, second, second compound, you know. It was the, was, was the, the sorting. And once, one of-- was-- one of the boys from [NON-ENGLISH], he came into the-- to my [? magazine. ?] He asked me-- I should give him some food. So I gave him sugar, I mean, those [? Hollanders ?] jar of butter, and with the, with the salamis. He took that package. He walked out. They were half a block, and Frenzel, Frenzel caught him with that package. And I-- I saw through the window that he is going towards, towards the [? magazine, ?] to that kiosk. So I figured-- this is the end of my life.  INT: Let's stop the tape. We'll continue. PB: Yeah.  INT: Philip Bialowitz, August 22, 1997. Let's continue. You saw Frenzel outside the window. PB: Walking with this friend of mine towards my kiosk. And I thought-- and my mind was that this is the end of my life. I knew that Sobibor is-- I cannot survive Sobibor. But the moment I know you're going to die, you know, the instinct, you know, you want to live. You try everything, maybe you can-- you can help yourself. So what I did, I took some jewelry, and I ran to the toilet. I figured I'll-- so I want to stay in the toilet till this will go over. But he came with him. And I-- and I-- he probably asked him, I figured, who gave you this? And he's going to tell him that I gave him this, and we're both going to die. For five minutes, I was in the toilet. And after five minutes, they called my name in the microphone-- I should come back to the kiosk. So this is the sign that that's it. So what should I do? There was two ways-- I should throw my-- I should throw-- I should throw myself into the toilet there, or to go back to the kiosk. So I went and-- I, I figure I'll, I'll go back. I, I came back. All the workers, the personnel, was standing, lined up, shaking. They were waiting for me. I came over. I was the last one to the left. And Frenzel asked him, who gave you that package? You know, and I was-- I was shaking like this. He said he took it himself. So this was heroism on his part. He didn't want to put me in trouble. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] He came over to us with that little [? bump. ?] He gave us a little bit over, over our faces. He told us to go back to work. And he took him-- he took him over to the third camp, which is maybe about a few hundred feet. I heard a shot. [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] That's what I mentioned in the trial, because the judge asked me, because I told him about this, this episode. I heard the shot. Half an hour later the, the clothing came back. And at night, he didn't sleep with me anymore. So this is proof that he was killed. So but this always-- I always, in my mind, that, that he saved my life that time by not giving information. 
INT: You, you mentioned that you went back to your kiosk. What do you mean by kiosk? PB: So this is a magazine, which they sorted all the-- all the grocery things.  INT: Were you separated from other people or were you on your own? PB: I, I was with another few people, working in the same room. And we were sorting. This was our assignment.  INT: Who was in the room? PB: This was not the-- this was not the-- the sorting of clothing. It's just groceries. And full of jewelry. That grocery was full of jewelry.  INT: Who was in the room? Do you remember any other people in the room with you? PB: There was the, the woman from [NON-ENGLISH], was, was name of Licht. Licht and the other Licht. And another there that I can't recall the names.  INT: Who was watching over you? PB: It was-- I, I didn't-- the Gestapo and a kapo. But he didn't stay there all the time. He always-- he came in, and many times he came and I should give him some jewelry. So that Frenzel, I gave a lot of jewelry. I'll, I'll speak to you about that Frenzel, with the trial that happened.  INT: But you don't know the name of the kapo? Do you remember? PB: I don't recall, really.  INT: Young man? Older man? PB: He was there middle aged-- middle aged.  INT: And in terms of the people working there-- men, women, who were-- who was there? PB: Men. Men were working there, yeah. 
INT: How many altogether? PB: Five, five people working there.  INT: Again, in the terms of the sorting, you said you were in Camp 2, sorting? PB: Yes.  INT: Where, about, in the camp? If you can describe it-- PB: It was there--  INT: When you got up in the morning, let's start your day. You got up in the morning in the barracks. Where were the barracks? PB: The barracks was in the-- in the first camp-- in the first. We were-- the, this was the-- we were-- we were-- the barracks in the-- in the-- the quarters for the Gestapo and all the-- for the prisoners. And the second camp was the-- and the kitchen was there in the first camp. In the second camp was the sorting. And the sorting-- and all the transports came in the second camp. The, the, the railroad-- the rail train came into the second, second camp. And [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] from-- and then you had the third camp. From there they went into a third camp. This, this was the, the final destination.  INT: OK. Describe now in the barracks, you're getting up in the morning. You have always the same clothes on, whatever-- PB: The barracks, in the morning, we had to wash ourself, you know. And we got a little bread and coffee. And we, we-- yeah, we wore the same-- the same clothing. And the, the Frenzel came and took the appell, to get the report, everybody is there, and all the-- all the-- every-- all the numbers are correct. 
INT: How many people in your barrack? PB: About 600 people.  INT: Any names that you remember in your barrack, people around you, your age? PB: It's [? Yankel, ?] Moishe, [? Yankel, ?] Moishe. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] Alter was the--  INT: Kapo? Was there a kapo in your barrack? PB: The kapo was-- one kapo was there. His name was Berliner. I came to him, too, because we made-- we finished that Berliner. We, we killed him, because he was worse than the Gestapo here.  INT: Why do you say he was worse? What did he do? PB: Well, he overdid it. The Gestapo didn't like it. He, he-- but he-- they told him to do-- he did it more than they told him to do. And, and, and before the uprising, which I have come to it, my brother brought poison, and we poisoned him. Yes.  INT: Oh, you say, we-- PB: And the Gestapo knew about it, that we killed him. And they didn't-- they didn't mind. Yeah.  INT: You say we. Who was involved? PB: It was some of the conspirators, which they had planned the uprising in Sobibor. And they thought we have to get rid of him, because he could make a lot of problems for us. And my brother was instrumental in preparation for the-- for the-- for the cyanide to give him to, to kill him.  INT: Who gave him the cyanide, specifically? PB: One of my brother's associates. My brother was, was there in the room. And he told him how to-- how to do it, you know, what-- that-- what to mix it with. 
INT: Don't remember his name? PB: No.  INT: And how-- what were you doing when they were doing it? PB: I knew about it, but I wasn't there inside. I knew. My brother told me that he-- that we want to get rid of him, because he is a nuisance. There might be problems with him.  INT: When did this happen? When did it-- PB: It happened about two months before the uprising.  INT: Day? Night? PB: This was at night, yes.  INT: How did your brother get into the barracks? PB: No, it-- this was in the living-- in the-- where the living quarters we were lived. And he was-- he was-- he had a small, little room there, this kapo, the Berliner.  INT: And your brother also was in the same barracks? PB: Yes, and we managed to get in for some excuse. And he finished him off.  INT: Now, tell me, while you are sorting, where is your brother during the time? PB: My brother was in the-- in the-- in the second-- also in the second compound where was the magazines where they sorted medicines, all kinds of things. And he was in the part of the medicine part. He was sorting. And--  INT: Is that near you? Was that close to you? PB: Very close.  INT: Same barracks, same place? PB: Not same barracks. Was maybe about two minutes away from the other barrack.  INT: Did you see him every day? PB: Yeah, I saw him every day. Now, the transports came to Sobibor every week. When the transports, they didn't come a week, they took us to dismantle the houses in Wlodawa. It's a little city not far from Sobibor. So it would keep us occupied. 
INT: How did you get to Wlodawa? PB: We-- by truck. They took us by truck. And that Frenzel was with us.  INT: How many people? PB: About 25, 30 people.  INT: Men, women? PB: Men, only men. We had dismantled the houses. And I was on a balcony. And they-- and they throw the, the, the, the bricks to me. And I-- and I-- and I lined them up on the balcony. It's so many, many pounds that balcony can take. And I landed down with the-- with the balcony, with the bricks [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] on the-- this was on the-- from the second floor. And I landed down in the-- on the-- on the ground. And the Gestapo came over, ran over with a pistol. He was going to finish me. But I got up. This is miracle that I, I survived, that I didn't break my legs. It's unbelievable. That's-- that was the episode I, I went through, and I survived.  INT: Now, who was the Gestapo man who came to you? PB: Frenzel.  INT: Was he the only Gestapo with you? PB: He was the only one.  INT: Who else was with you, guarding you? PB: It was a couple kapos, yes, from the Jewish kapos.  INT: Again, do you remember their names? PB: No. And I was bruised up very good. And my, my friends-- [? Yankel ?] and Moishe, they took me. They helped me come back to the, to the truck and to come back to Sobibor. I should have stayed a few days in the barracks, but I was afraid to stay there, where they-- where they'd kill me. So I went to work again. 
INT: What did you do? Did you go back to the town? PB: Back-- no, back to Sobibor. To Sobibor we went back in the evening. We went back to Sobibor.  INT: No, but when you said you went to work, did you stay as sort, or-- PB: And to sorting, yes. Now, I'll, I'll tell you about that transport came to Sobibor from Holland. A transport from Holland, where maybe 100,000 Jews came to Sobibor from Holland. And they came with passenger trains, like they-- like they was going on a vacation. They told them they're going to a nice place, a re-settlement place. And they came-- and to-- the train came in. And the staff of the Gestapo was standing with the music, with the waltzes, was playing the waltzes.  INT: Who played the waltzes? PB: Waltzes-- the Gestapo band, Nazi band.  INT: Nazi band. PB: Nazi band. They played the waltzes. And they walked out from-- and I was assigned to help them with their luggage. And they tried to give me tips. I didn't need their tips. I had millions of dollars go through my hands. I needed-- money, money doesn't mean anything. I don't need any money here. This where you cannot survive. I couldn't even tell them what, what is waiting for them, you know. And they came to assemble at the one place. And they, they had a, a personnel officer. And he gave a little speech.  INT: Do you remember his name? PB: [? Franz, ?] [? Kurt ?] [INAUDIBLE]. And he said a speech. And he told them, you came here to a beautiful place. You're going to work here, and you're going to-- after the war, you're going back to your homes. But typhus is going around here, and we have to disinfect everythings. Please undress and keep everythings in order. Your shoelaces, put together your shoes. But before you undress, I will highly recommend that you should send home postcards to your dear ones that you are here in a nice place. So they were clapping, and they were running to the postcards. And three days later, their families came. That's the way they-- that machine worked. That's the way they lured them. 
INT: Now, you said that it looked nice when they came off. And they believed it, and they took postcards. What did it look like? Describe what they saw, the, the people from Holland? PB: They saw nice road, paved nicely, nice trees, beautiful barracks and everything. They even were under the impression that this is really a nice working place. And they're going to be here until after the war. The Polish transports, they know the, the, the barracks is not a-- is not a working place-- this is-- this is an extermination place.  INT: How did the Polish people look? PB: Polish people, Polish Jews knew, knew. The Polish Jews knew they were going to die. This is not a working place.  INT: How did they come in looking, the Polish people? Were they different from the Holland people in terms of how they were-- PB: They came-- the Polish people came in cattle train cars. You know, in cattle cars, you couldn't move around, there. You-- they came out already, they were already half dead they came out. But the Holland-- from Holland, they came nicely dressed, beautiful dress with all their belongings, everythings. They couldn't imagine that they're going to die. And I was assigned to cut their hair. For three, four times, I was cutting their hair.  INT: Where did you cut it? What was-- PB: Right before the entrance to third camp. Maybe 20 feet away was already-- was already going into the third camp. My heart was bleeding. And when I cut their hair, I couldn't even tell them what, what is-- what is waiting with them. Even if I would tell them, they wouldn't believe me either, what would happen. 
INT: Who was cutting the hair with you? Other people? PB: Boys.  INT: Remember anybody there? PB: Young boys, yes.  INT: Anybody was there with you cutting hair? PB: Cutting hair was one, Ephraim, one was [? Yankele. ?] And he-- the Gestapo was in the middle of the room to make sure that we're not giving information, we were talking there.  INT: Who was the Gestapo man in the room? PB: Frenzel.  INT: Always Frenzel. PB: Yeah, Frenzel, yeah.  INT: Now, when you were meeting them at the train, did you have any other uniform? Did you change your uniform? PB: We had a special uniform, a special-- that you put on the whole-- one unit, like a blue uniform, a special uniform.  INT: Was it-- PB: It's like a [NON-ENGLISH] kommando, [NON-ENGLISH] kommando.  INT: Was there somebody in charge of that kommando? PB: There was a few Gestapo, but that Frenzel always, he was all, all over. And Gomerski was there. And this was-- this was-- and then they, they, they, they went through to a little place. They had to give back-- they have-- they have-- they have those-- their small pocketbooks, which they have all their, their personal things. They didn't-- they didn't want to part with them. And they had to give this away. And they were-- hesitated to give this away. And they're starting to beat them. But when they gave it away, they gave-- they got a-- they got a receipt. So when they come back, they will get it back. This is the way they worked. Everything was [? missing. ?] 
INT: When you cut their hair off, were they fully dressed? PB: No, undressed. They were all undressed. This was the last-- was about 20 feet away. So this was in 20 minutes, they were dead. While they were consuming the flames, the second group is going through the same procedure, the same speech. The second group is prepared to go over the same procedure to go into the death camp. That's the way they worked with everything-- they worked with precision. That's the way here now. Now. I will tell you, a-- about an episode with a transport which came from Minsk. Transport came from Minsk. This, this transport was, was-- it was under way maybe for 10 days. And in doing the trip, they tried to-- they tried to escape from the little windows. So they stopped the train, and they-- and they put [? fluoride ?] in the cars, the cattle cars. There were maybe a couple hundred people in the car. And when they arrived, it was on a Sunday. They arrived in a Sunday to Sobibor. And Frenzel came over to the gate. And I was there by the gate with some of my friends. And they, they said-- [NON-ENGLISH]-- volunteers. So I couldn't run away. I had to go. I didn't know what, what is waiting for me. I didn't know what he's taking us. He took us over to that platform. The train was standing with cars, maybe about eight, nine cars. And they told us to open those cars. When we opened the cars, I saw the scenery, so I wanted-- I laid down. And I wanted the, the-- I should get shot, because every person was weighing a ton-- swollen up from the-- from the decomposed bodies. And a child was on her mother's arm. And the child, maybe, was 100 kilo. And the Frenzel came over, made pictures. And he tells-- he said-- what a wonderful [NON-ENGLISH] this is-- what a beautiful scenery this is. And he beat me up good, I should take out the bodies. When I started to take out a body, the skin-- the skin remained in my hands. And I fell down again. I couldn't-- I started to cry. And I figured why I have to go through this-- those experiences? I'm going to die here anyway. Why shouldn't I finish now. I can't-- I can't look at it. They beat us. And we had to work. And the, the people what there's-- they came out-- they were alive-- they were mentally sick. They were running around. They didn't know what-- they, they, they were crazy. And some of them were half dead. They put them on there, like [? in rows. ?] And they put them to the third camp for the extermination. So this is a-- this is a-- an episode which I still have dreams about it. And I mentioned this in the trials, that it had a very detrimental impact on the rest of my life, being so young and going through all those experiences. So this is one of the episodes in Sobibor. 
INT: You said that this transport happened to come on a Sunday. How did you know it was Sunday? PB: We knew Sunday. We knew there. We figured out every day. We figured out the holidays even. The holidays, we knew we had to pray. You know, on the holidays, we had-- we prayed so secretly.  INT: Where did you pray when you prayed? PB: In, in the barracks. The barracks in the--  INT: Who led you? PB: --in the side. Nobody saw us. It was at night. In the morning, we went to-- we pray.  INT: Did you have any Siddurs with you? Any bibles with you? PB: Yeah, we had very few bibles. Yeah, also, by heart, all we repeated-- we repeated. By-- and if you want me to speak now about the uprising, the preparations what happened.  INT: Just before, I went to get a little bit more description-- PB: Yeah.  INT: --for you. PB: Yeah, yeah.  INT: Was there any time that you saw the Gestapo playing around with people, using people? PB: Well, I have another episode with Wagner. This is Wagner, which he, he has committed suicide in Brazil. He was a vicious man. He killed so many people. And he was beating people. One confrontation with him-- he took me-- after the transport went into the extermination camp, people-- when the people undressed, it was-- it was on sand-- that thick sand. So when they undressed, they put the valuables, the jewelry, the, the diamond rings and the jewelry underneath the, the sand. And, and that Wagner knew that. He was a smart guy. He knew what they-- what-- that they would find jewelry. He took me-- just me. He picked me up. I should help him And I went to the sand and took out diamond rings-- 5, 6, 7 carat diamonds-- emeralds, rubies, watches, expensive watches. And I had to hand them over to him, you know. 
INT: Where was the sand exactly? PB: This was in the-- in the second-- when they came out from the-- from when they-- from, from, from the cars, they walked over a little place. They had a little place over there where they undressed. And this is the place where they undress. Over there, they put their valuables in on the sand.  INT: So this was still in the second compound? PB: Still in the second compound, compound.  INT: You never got into the third compound? PB: Me? If I would go in, I couldn't come back. This is-- this is-- nobody could get, get out from there, because they-- every-- they kept a secret from us from the third camp.  INT: What did you see? How did you know it was there besides this-- the fire? PB: The flames, the flames.  INT: But on the street? PB: The, the clothing-- the clothing came back from those transports. I saw to the clothing right away.  INT: In, in time-- in terms of what you saw, was there a fence? Was there something hiding the area? PB: It-- all fence around-- all around-- that camp was all fenced up. And all around was mines. In the middle of the night, if, if an animal stepped on a mine, they took us out in the middle of the night to count us like diamonds, because this was a top secret camp. Belzec-- everybody knew about Belzec, about Treblinka, about Majdanek, Buchenwald. But Sobibor was top secret. Nobody knew about Sobibor. And even the-- if anything would happen and the war would end, nobody would know Sobibor exist. And we put Sobibor on the map. 
INT: Tell me, how many towers do you remember seeing? PB: I saw about 10 towers. And the towers was managed by the Ukrainians. And our plan was-- when we made the uprising that the-- that the Ukrainians will go over with us to help us execute the, the uprising. But we were wrong. They were shooting at us. I'll come to it later.  INT: Now, in terms of the surroundings of Sobibor-- there was one fence enclosing the whole area? Were there more than one fence? PB: The whole-- the whole camp was one fence all around, you know. And there was no way to get out from Sobibor.  INT: Past the fence, what did you see? Was there anything you could look at? PB: And also, also was like, like holes against, against like infantry, you know. You couldn't walk. Like holes-- even if you escaped, you couldn't walk. You had to-- you have to lay down-- and, and when-- because it was not safe. They made such a-- such that we-- that we shouldn't be able to, to, to walk out. So it was very well protected. And the only way to get out from Sobibor is through the main gate. With the plan-- what I'll come to-- where the plan was to go out through the main gate. Another episode I had with with Wagner-- he took out maybe six boys to empty a, a well. This was his satisfaction. To empty a well, he put two boys inside, three, and three outside. And they would-- they would throw in the pails to empty with pails the, the, the well. And while-- he, he helped throw it in, too. And while they throw in the-- throwed in the pails, the water became like blood from the-- they opened the scalps on their heads. This was his satisfaction, you know, to empty that well. So he was-- he-- this was his-- he had such a mind to-- he had to-- had, had to beat up people. 
INT: Were you inside the well or outside? PB: I was inside the well. I was all bleeding, you know.  INT: How many times did you do this? PB: For 45 minutes, we were-- we were this-- in, in, in that-- in that well.  INT: How many times did he do this to you? PB: No, this was only one time when the-- when we did it. And after this, he told us to wash us up. And, and we should go in to-- to get the-- to get to the-- to the-- to the first aid-- to get first aid. So this was a-- this was an afternoon satisfaction for him.  INT: You said you went to first aid. Where was first aid located? PB: First aid was-- in the second camp was first aid with a doctor, a dentist, and first aid.  INT: Were they Jewish doctors? PB: Jewish, yes. Jewish.  INT: Now, when you went to eat, when you went, at lunch, to eat, where did you go? PB: In the compound we were living where the kitchen was there. And we, we got soup and a piece of bread.  INT: How did you get it? What was the system they used to get it? PB: Well, we, we were standing in a line and to, to, to get a little soup.  INT: Do you know many people were there at the same time? PB: We was in groups, 300, 200 people, until they got all the-- took a-- took an hour till they, they-- everybody got his lunch. But when I was working, I had-- I had enough food. Because I was sorting was a lot of-- they came, the transports from, from Holland. They came, like I mentioned, they with, with everythings. So they have butter, bread, and sugar. They had everything there. 
INT: Did you bring food back to the barrack? PB: I brought home to the barracks. And I-- and I shared with my associate in the barracks.  INT: Remember any other names-- PB: And also--  INT: --any other names of people from your barracks that you remember personally, from the camp? Any other person that comes to mind? PB: [? Yankel, ?] Moishe that I have mentioned.  INT: You mentioned Tom Blatt? What did-- PB: Tom Blatt, he wrote a book about Sobibor.  INT: What did he do in the camp? PB: He, Tom Blatt, he was burning the-- he was burning the documents, the documents from the transports-- pictures, all the papers. He was burning them. And once I helped him too with burning those papers. And that Frenzel passed by. He didn't like the flames. So he came out the door with a kapo. And he gave me 25. I should let-- bend down. So I, I, I came home with-- I came home swollen up like this, you know.  INT: Where were you burning? Where was this burning? PB: This, this was a little, little, little-- small, little house. And all the, the, the paperwork that came in over there-- and this was to liquidate all the papers with the pictures. This was the place.  INT: Now, when you worked in the sorting, when did you start your day, what time of the day? PB: We started at 8 o'clock in the morning. 
INT: Did you have-- PB: After breakfast. And we, we came home for lunch. We came home. We had to sing a song-- special songs we had to sing, like a military song.  INT: Do you remember any? PB: I don't remember. My brother remembers.  INT: What language? PB: In German-- in German. And we came home. We have the lunch. We went back to work.  INT: How long? PB: But the transports-- if the transport-- if the transport didn't come, they tried to occupy us with different type of work. And at night, we had entertainment-- music and dancing. And we had people from France and from Holland, they were very talented singer-- opera singers and, and, and, and musicians. And they were dancing. And the Gestapo were dancing too inside, you know, with us.  INT: In the barracks? PB: In the barracks, you know. They wanted to, to take off our minds from, from, from making any, any problems here-- the all-- uprisings.  INT: So people had instruments inside the barracks? PB: Instruments, yeah.  INT: They allowed people-- PB: Yeah.  INT: --to keep-- PB: They keep. And they, they, they, they played music, and they were dancing. And beautiful-- in the evening, they made it with lights around, so to, to bring us up a little bit, because we saw what's going on, to, to keep us a little bit, morally, you know.  INT: What instruments do you remember that people played? PB: They, they played-- one, I remember-- one from France, he played the violin [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] so beautiful. Professional people, you know-- the music. 
INT: Thank you. We'll stop the tape. PB: Yeah.  INT: Thank you.  INT: Tape four, interview with Phillip Bialowitz, August 22, 1997. We left off that you were in your barracks at night and there were people playing music. And we said there was a violin. Were there any other instruments that you remember? PB: There were-- one, one fellow, he was playing the piano. And I compare him to Rubinstein, this-- his qualification. He was professional. And oh, what a beautiful-- even the--  INT: You had a piano in the barracks? PB: They, they arranged everythings, you know. They, they, they arranged, the Gestapo. They wanted to make your-- to make our life a little bit entertaining, so-- because we-- they knew that the-- that maybe they find out that they, they did something in Treblinka. They tried to make an uprising. So they wanted to keep us a little bit happier mood.  INT: Right. PB: And also, they did not object about the barracks with girls, girls. And they had also a different assignment. Anyway. And many girls had boyfriends. And I had a girl also. She was a girl-- my girlfriend from [? Siedliszcze. ?] I'll come to it during the uprising, what happened. And, and they were not against it. They knew that we, we go to their barracks. We share food. And we, you know? And made love, some of 'em, you know? And, and they, they did-- some things they did in order to, to keep us, you know. And they knew that, that our days are numbered anyhow. 
INT: Did you also have any games, like playing cards, chess-- PB: We play--  INT: --checkers? PB: --in the-- we, we played in the barracks, yeah. We, we had.  INT: They let you have. PB: Yes. And so this was the entertainment part. And also, when I come back, which I didn't mention to you before, while the transport in Izbica, I was picked up with a group of people. And they took us to the railroad station, to that-- to that big place. And from there, they were supposed to take us to Belzec. And while we were walking to the-- to the station, to the-- to the, the-- to the, the railroad station, for-- to be transported, it, it came to my mind I'm-- I am not going to run away. I'm just going turn around, and I'll start to walk normally on the sidewalk. I turn around. I didn't have any, at that time, any, any armbands, any, any stars of David, because they took us out from the-- from the hiding place there with shirts. I walked home, back, and nobody ever paid attention. They thought than I'm a Polack. And I walked back home. This is--  INT: When was this? Do you remember? PB: This was in 1942.  INT: Winter? Summer? PB: This was in the summertime. This also, also one of the miracles which I went through, from that cemetery, from the transports, from many miracles I went through, you know? When I-- and when I, I go to Sobibór every-- to, to revisit Sobibór, to pay respect to the quarter of a million Jews which perished. And I'm standing. And in, in my mind came that so many thousands of Jews came, architects, doctors, scientists. They could have make the world a little better place to live, and they perished. And how, how did I survive? I'm only one of the 11 survivors of Sobibór. I cannot comprehend, you know, what, what really happened. 
INT: Now you said-- while we're back in Izbica-- you said also that you were given a job disinfecting houses. PB: Yeah, this is a very important question you asked me. I was assigned. My-- so my brother was in charge, and he, he made me that I am-- I will be the disinfector of the houses from Izbica. So I was wearing a special armband, a white armband, and written in German-- disinfector. And this also give me a little-- a little privilege not to be transported so right away. Because I had a very important job to perform. So they didn't want to there that they-- that-- that they, they themselves couldn't get sick. Those are the Volksdeutsches AND the Gestapo. But this was another assignment there.  INT: When did the typhus break out in Izbica? Do you remember? PB: When they started to bring the transports from different places. And the-- and we, we, we-- I-- the hygiene, we didn't have any hygiene facilities. And we didn't have the, the plumbing or the water, and water sewages. So this, this all developed in a-- in a-- in the sicknesses.  INT: When did they bring the first transports? Do you remember exactly? PB: In 1941. And they, they packed up the city-- the city with so many people, it's indescribable. But the Germans, when they came to Izbica, they made our street like a garden, with flowers. You know, they, they, they wanted to make the-- they wanted to live a little bit like they used to live in Germany a little bit. They didn't realize that this is just a-- oh, this is just a transit place. Yeah. 
INT: Now, your house in Izbica, where was it located? PB: It was located not far from the main street. It's in the side. That's up on the main street. It was a corner house and like a-- nothing to talk about it. It's-- in today's standards. But in that time, we, we managed, you know? And for a small city like this, and where the Jews didn't have any, any possibility to-- for education and, and industry, they were-- they, they didn't have any opportunities in Poland. They, they, they qualified. They were-- they could do anything if they would have the, the opportunity. So the city was very poor but very religious, and cultural, and a very, very into this Jewish community.  INT: Let's move back now-- PB: Yeah.  INT: --to Sobibór. In terms of-- now we know that at night you, you-- PB: Yeah.  INT: --you were allowed to entertain yourselves. Now, did you-- was there a leader in the barrack, somebody that you looked up to? PB: Well, we, we knew that the-- our end is going to end in, in, in the extermination, in the third camp. But our aim was that one person should get out from Sobibór and to tell the world what happened here. But chances for, for survival in Sobibór was null. So we started to organize. We were about 40 people. We started to organize about making a revolt. But between 40 people was only a 10, 12, a closed circle, which they were like the main, main command. And we-- my brother was on the-- in those group, which they planned to make a revolt. Because we had 600 people, 600 Jews, and we were afraid for the Jews themselves, that they shouldn't-- that so there shouldn't be any informer. 
INT: Just one minute. Were there any other people in the camp? Were there other prisoners besides Jews? PB: No. This camp was specifically for Jews only, because they-- after the war, they, they put on a monument that here, about 250,000 people were killed-- Jews, Gypsies, Russians. And this was not true. Because I am a living witness to this. And now, after the government changed, they took it off. They changed it. Well, but we made a-- we protested to the Pope. And this was strictly for Jews only. Like Belzec was only for Jews. Treblinka was only for Jews. This was not Majdanek or Auschwitz or other camps, which many nationalities came.  INT: Now tell me, in the 600 Jews, can you think of all the Jewish nationalities that were in the camp? From what countries? PB: From many countries. We were Holland, France, and from-- and Holland, France, Germany, Austria, many countries. We have a mixed-- were mixed countries, mixed people.  INT: Did the people get along from different countries? Or were they suspicious-- PB: Yeah.  INT: --of each other? PB: No, we got along, but we were suspicions that they-- we shouldn't-- we shouldn't come out with that plan, that nobody should inform the Gestapo.  INT: Now, you said there were-- PB: So we tried to be secret everything. We made the meetings in secrets. But we prepared a plan to revolt, but we are lacking in military art. We didn't have the military art, because we were never trained in military art. So this was-- the, the execution of the revolt was a problem. 
INT: Now, what were the ideas that you had in this group in the beginning? PB: In the beginning we had--  INT: How did you think of escaping? PB: The escaping was-- is to, to, to kill most of the Gestapo, to, to cut electricity and telephone, because every hour, they were in contact with a garrison from Lublin, if everything is OK. So we had to do it less than an hour. Because if they don't have communication in an hour, they know that something happened. So we have to do it swiftly. And we have to do with precision. And also, with all this, the, the chances were null. But maybe one will get out to tell the world what happened.  INT: Did you know the name of the 10 to 12 leaders? Do you have the names of them in your head? PB: [? Liebel ?] Feldhendler, he was the leader, or he was a rabbi son-- son of a rabbi from Zolkiewka. Aaron Licht, my brother, was-- Josel Licht, and--  INT: What were their jobs? What did Aaron Licht do in the camp? Normally, what was he assigned? PB: He was working also in, in the same-- the same place that my brother was working, but he was sorting, not medicine-- different items. Yes.  INT: And Josel Licht? PB: And--  INT: What did he do? PB: --Josel Licht also in the-- that-- in that magazine.  INT: Sorting. PB: Sorting. 
INT: And your brother was sorting? PB: Sorting the-- sorting the, the medical part, medical-- pharmacy things.  INT: And Fendhendler? PB: Medication.  INT: What did Fendhendler do? PB: Feldhendler, he was working in the-- sorting clothing-- the clothing.  INT: But you didn't sort clothing. PB: I sort clothing too. That's why I came up with the-- with my girlfriend Hertha from Germany. I came up with her clothing. And then--  INT: So first you sorted clothing. PB: Yes. And then they transfer me to the [INAUDIBLE].  INT: OK. Let me ask you, which I forgot to ask you before-- when you took the jewelry, did you hide any, thinking you might need it? PB: I'll, I'll come to it-- to it too. So the, the-- [PAUSES FOR 5 SECONDS] so we, we were planning. The plan was a very good plan, but we-- well, I mentioned that we were lacking military art. We needed somebody with military training. So it also was a miracle. A transport came with 1,000 Jews. In, in the 1,000 Jews was a few hundred POWs Jews, POWs from Russia. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] And they took out 40 people to work from, from this transport. And this is the type of people we, we, we were-- we were looking, you know? We needed the, the people like this. POWs-- they are military trained. And we-- after they-- after they took them around, we tried to make contact with them. But it wasn't so easy, because we were afraid. You know, we didn't know what we're dealing with, because the, the whole thing can be jeopardized. 
INT: Where did these POWs live? What barracks? PB: They were living in our barracks.  INT: Same barracks. PB: Same barracks, yes.  INT: How many barracks were there that you were all together? Do you remember? PB: About three barracks.  INT: Three. PB: Three barracks and one-- and one-- next to a barrack where they did some work, different type of work-- shoemakers, shoemakers. There were tailors. That's just when, when I lured in the Gestapo, when I was assigned. I had an assignment. I mean, I'm like a messenger. So this, I'll come to it later. I-- so we tried to make contact with one of the officers-- was a lieutenant, was name was Sasha Pechersky. And he was a lieutenant in the Russian Army. They all were Jews. And we contact him. And we planned together. So, so Sasha Pechersky took part on the military part of the execution of, of the-- of the revolt. And the regular planning was Leon Feldhendler. He was the architect of the revolt. And Sasha Pechersky, he had his people from his-- from the army, what they took out. And he-- and we assigned different type of people, whereby they should be-- when I called those Gestapo to pick up a nice coat, or jewelry or something, they'll come in, and they will wait for them with the, the axes and knives to kill them and to take away the, the, the arms from them.  INT: How were they going to get the axes and the knives? PB: You got it from the magazines we were working. We, we had knives. We-- somebody was working in the-- with the different types of things-- axes and the-- and, and like plumbing. They brought in other things in-- pipes-- to the camp. Everything was organized with precision. 
INT: How did they find the axes? How did they find the-- PB: They were working there in those magazines where they had all those things. You know, they had all those things, and they smuggled in to the camps, the, the second camp. Wherever they worked, they brought in those things. But nobody knew about it, only the 40 people. We contacted a few women, and they helped us too. And they-- in this-- and they-- the, the Russians were very instrumental to make this thing so successful, that it was successful. And we had to do it in one hour. So we had to cut the electricity and telephone. And I started to call in the Gestapo to-- I find a nice leather coat. He said, leave me alone! I don't have time now. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] I said, oy, [NON-ENGLISH]. I, I-- so I have already problem. I came back to him 15 minutes later, said we find something in jewelry, you know. He went in. He got undressed to put on that coat. While he was undressed, they immobilized him, and they cut there with the axe. They cut his head.  INT: Now, who did that? Who did the cutting? PB: Those Russian, Russian POWs in that-- in that magazine from the ready, ready-- already sorted things, you know, where they had to ship. Every week they shipped away those things.  INT: Now, were there other messengers like you were? PB: There was another messenger. Tom Blatt was also a messenger. 
INT: Ah-ha. Only two of you? PB: Yeah. Yes.  INT: There weren't more than two. PB: Was another one, I think. I don't remember his name. And in--  INT: Were you the youngest in the camp? Or were there people younger than you? PB: I was-- there was younger than me, I think. I was young, but there was younger than me. And I, I had to relay to the main command what-- that this and the-- this and this Gestapo is dead already, and the-- and the-- and, and the next one. Every time they kill somebody, I ran into the command, where Pechersky was there, and I gave him the report.  INT: So you spoke directly with Pechersky. PB: Yeah, yeah. But, but that-- that's what happened. And we killed one by one, one to the shoemaker, to the watchmaker, to the-- we killed them one-- everything there. They came to the appointment that they, they-- to, to meet death. They had a appointment with death. Yeah.  INT: How many were killed this way? PB: We killed 10 Gestapo--  INT: 10? PB: --and one, one Ukrainian.  INT: Who was the Ukrainian? PB: Yeah, he was a lieutenant. And he came in. After we killed all the Gestapo, we-- one Gestapo, we ran into him, and to his office. You know, when you run into the office you see on the faces, the-- that, that something happened. So he, he tried to resist. And they were-- they-- and they-- we'd-- we could-- they couldn't-- he, he was going to take out the pistol. They immobilized him, and they started with knives. And he was screaming. And my brother was outside with a hammer, with a steel bar and making noise-- you shouldn't hear. 
INT: And where were you at this moment? PB: And I was-- I was running around to the messengers, making report. And then I-- then they-- the-- that Frenzel, he, he saw that there's no-- there's no telephone, no communication. And he ran into this officer. He met him-- he laying on the floor bleeding-- dead. And the-- and the revolt was still going on. And a truck came in with a few-- with a few Gestapo. They started to shoot. And we were in the camp already, taking the appell, and Sasha Pechersky came. He stepped up on the table and said, my brothers and sisters, the war is almost over. Let's get out of-- from this place and tell the world what happened. If somebody will, will survive, we should tell the world what happened. And a chance for survival are very little. But-- and maybe somebody will get out. People started to get disorganized, because the whole aim was to get out to the main gate, because there was no mines there. They started to run all over, and with the-- with the stepladders on the-- on, on the barbed wire. And I went up on a barbed wire, and my finger was, was cut from the barbed wire. It was bleeding. And in-- over, in then started the mines. The mines were starting to go up like the-- like Stalingrad.  INT: Well, they knew about the mines. PB: Yeah, we knew were the mine. 
INT: Didn't they have a way? PB: We knew the mine and figured, we'll go out the mine. Where we'll go the mine, we'll get killed. But the-- but the next-- the next wave, maybe there was a way.  INT: They didn't think about trying to-- PB: No.  INT: --set off the mines before? PB: No.  INT: They didn't plan it. PB: To set out a plan? No, we couldn't with all around mines. Mine, mine, mine luck-- I don't know. It came to my mind that I should run near their casinos, not, not, not in the front. And then near the casinos they put mines, artificial mines. They were not real mines. And I stepped on an artificial mine. It picked me up, and nothing happened to me. And I ran. And whoever passed by the good mines, they got killed. But later-- anyway, I was running. And I saw the girl was, was bleeding. I go over there. That's my girlfriend, Estelle. She was my girlfriend. And I started, can I help you? What-- tell me. You, you, you all right? She didn't respond. She was dead. I kissed her, and, and I was-- and I continued running. And it was the-- you saw the movie. It, it was like in Stalingrad, you know? The-- and the, the-- with the rackets. They were looking for us all night.  INT: Before we get out of the camp, how did you communicate with Sasha Pechersky? PB: Yeah, before, before, with Sasha Pechersky, I went to a-- to-- I, I, I get-- I let him know what happened, you know, how many-- 
INT: No, but what language did you communicate in? PB: In a little bit in Russian and Polish. Yes.  INT: He understood Polish? PB: Yeah, yes. And the-- and Russian. I speak--  INT: And you-- PB: I speak Russian.  INT: You spoke-- PB: Yes. And another thing I, I forgot to mention. One day, before the uprising, my brother came over to me, and he told me like this. Take a couple of jars of jewelry, and hide it under the trees, about two or three feet down. And in case we survive, in case, we'll have something, you know, maybe which will help us. And he brought me a bottle of cyanide and a compass. If you get injured, I should drink the bottle, because they burn little people alive. And if you survive, the, the compass will show you how to get out from the woods. Because maybe it's about 20, 30 kilometers radius, forest. So, so this helped me a little bit. But I, I was also like it's a miracle. I met my brother in the-- while I was running, I met my brother. You know, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah.  INT: OK. Before we get to that-- and still, we're in the camp. When you're in the camp, how far is the woods from the camp? Do-- how-- do you see it? Do you see the woods? PB: Yeah, the woods was there. They made it. They made an-- a, a compound in the forest for, for the-- for those camp, for that-- for that camp, the examination camp, the second. So they took on the other wall-- all, all around those woods. Yeah. 
INT: Did you ever go out to those woods? Were you ever in a kommando to go out to the woods? PB: Yeah, no. I-- it's good-- it's good you--  INT: No, before, before the uprising. PB: --it's good you remind me about this. We had one episode. When once the transport didn't come, they took a group of people to the [NON-ENGLISH] commander. They took him to, to cut trees, to keep him occupied. So lunchtime, there were Ukrainian and a few Gestapo. Lunchtime, one of the Ukrainian took two people to get water. They went to get water, and those two prisoners killed the Ukrainian, and they took away the weapon, and they escaped. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] The Gestapo and the-- and the-- and the-- and the-- the Gestapo and the Volksdeutsche there, the Ukrainian, saw that he didn't come back. They went to look for them, they find the Ukrainian dead. And those two prisoners ran way. So they-- they started to-- so they started to round up all the people, and the people knew already, the prisoner, they knew that something happened. He didn't come back. They decided to run. And they started-- the, the Gestapo started to shoot. And a, a few of 'em escape. And they all picked them up. They picked them up. Some of them were injured, bleeding. And they brought 'em into the camp. And they took the all person out, the 600 people. They took us to the third camp. They were standing on the third camp. Lined up. You saw that movie. They lined up, and they were going to shoot 'em. And the, the Gestapo gave a speech. He said, if this-- if the-- if you're going to repeat what they did, this, this is going-- this is waiting for you. And they were shot-- machine gunned-- they were all of them. They were-- they, they were killed. 
INT: You didn't see it, though. PB: I saw it! I were-- we, we were standing there. We were-- we, we--  INT: The did it in front of you. PB: --we watched. We watched that. We were witness to it. He brought there-- they brought us over especially to, to see the scenery, in order not-- to, to scare us, not to do anything. But the movie was portrayed a little difference. The movie was portrayed that each prisoner had to go to pick a, a partner. This wasn't true. And I objected to the producer, because I was a technical advisor to the movie And I protected-- protested this, but this did not happen. I was a witness, they'd killed him, but they did not go over to take a partner. He said, well, we invested a lot of money in this movie. We had-- we had to make the rating. It should be a high ratings. And it didn't happen here. It happened in another place. And so I let it go.  INT: You never, though, went out in this [NON-ENGLISH] kommando yourself. You never were able to get out of Sobibór to do any work. PB: I went into [NON-ENGLISH] but there was a-- to dismantle, dismantle the houses.  INT: Right. PB: And the kommando, I wasn't. My brother was in the kommando. Yes.  INT: In which kommando? PB: In that-- in the woods. But this day, he happened not to go there. Something they-- he had a different assignment. 
INT: Who went there? Who went in this [NON-ENGLISH] kommando? Do you know? PB: Some of the, you know, I knew them, but I don't remember the names. From different countries-- from the France, from Holland, from the different countries.  INT: And what did they do with-- when they went out of the camp? PB: They cut-- they cut the trees, branches. And they killed-- they, they beat 'em up-- make 'em, you know, miserable, you know, to, to do a day's work-- hard work.  INT: You don't think it had a purpose, the kommando? PB: No purpose. No. Like, like the purpose to empty the, the well. This was the purpose-- just to, to bleed, to make us bleeding. And they get the satisfaction. So this was-- and we were running out, and 600 people escaped; 300 died during the uprising; 300 escaped. But many of 'em didn't go out from the camp even, because they wouldn't want to move. Where did they go? From France, from Holland, they, they-- there's no place. They don't know the terrain. They don't know nothing. And so they, they burned them alive, and many of 'em escaped. They-- and they, they were sneaking around in the-- in the forest. They came back to the main gate. So about 300 escape. From 300, 48 survived the war, after the war. But most of 'em were killed by the Polish people.  INT: How did that happen. PB: They came-- they came to-- they came to hide. They came for food, and they killed them. So, so-- but I, I was briefly in the partisans with my brother, in a group. 
INT: You-- did you escape just with your-- PB: Yeah, the brother.  INT: --and now you said you met him. PB: Yeah, I met him, and we were in a group. We went-- we, we, we went into a partisan. It was not a, a official group of partisans, but it's like a-- they were in the woods fighting. And I-- we were-- we were there with them too. But we had a little weapons with us. So--  INT: What did you have with you? PB: I had a pistol, yes.  INT: How did you get the pistol? PB: I got it from my brother. He had two, so he gave me one. So we escaped, and we were in the partisan with some of the Polish partisans. And they send us on a-- on a mission to lay, lay mines on, on the railroads. And they machine gunned us from behind. So we escaped. We were only-- very brief. So we couldn't stay there. So we went to hide in a-- and with the Polish families. So first we went to a place, the name Ostrzyca. We went to Ostrzyca to a Polish family. And we, we took along some gold pieces, you know, to help us. You know, we took in the-- in, in our clothing, we was hiding a few gold pieces, a few dollars. But the main thing, what I was hiding those two bottles. Maybe it's a couple million dollars. I'll tell you what happened. We went-- I hide it in-- I hid it in a-- in-- under a tree, a few feet behind. And so with those gold pieces, we gave that Polack. He should hold us. He need-- he need to, to, to buy food and to give us to eat. So this Polack, he gave-- he made us an up-- on, on the barn, he made in a double wall. We were there. And he was starting to drink in the bars. And when he drink, he started-- he's talk that he's holding Jews. So the AK-- you know the AK? This is the fascist group in Poland, were, were fighting against the Germans. They came in the daytime, and they told them we were-- he told him they should go show him where, where we are hiding. They will come, and he came to kill us. So there's five ran in with a-- with a pail, with, with-- to milk the cows. He said, my children, [NON-ENGLISH]. Help yourself. So we knew there's trouble. So that little window on the barns-- you know, we started to jump from the windows like from parachutes. 
INT: We will stop the-- PB: Yes? Yes.  INT: --tape, and we'll continue. PB: Yeah.  INT: Five. Interview with Philip Bialowitz, August 22, 1997. Before we continue with you leaving the barn of the Polish people, let's still go back to Sobibor, and I'll ask you a couple of more questions. In terms of the uprising, when did you decide to do the uprising? PB: We decided to do-- it was in October, three months before. We was planning three months the uprising. And the, the planning was, like I mentioned, execute-- the planning was made 10 people, 10, 12 people. But 40 people knew about the uprising. And [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] Russia Pechersky was instrumental in, in-- to be the uprising should be a success. Otherwise, we didn't know what was going to happen. But one mention-- thing I forgot to mention is that the day, the day we were supposed to do the uprising, a day before, two truckloads of Gestapo came to the camp. And we thought that, that something happened, they find out. They're going to kill us. So we postponed. We postponed the uprising because there's going to-- they're going to be reinforced by the manpower. We wouldn't be able to, to be successful. So we were waiting to see what was going to happen. So it happened that they-- this was only a social togethering, social togethering. So you are relieved, you know? That the next day, they went-- they went back. Once they went back, the, the-- so we made that they-- that they-- we, we postponed. That day, we were Sukkot. Even to the Sukkot, our Rabbi Sasson, that he gave us the green light to go ahead and we do the uprising. 
INT: Why did you choose that day, the day-- the day before Sukkot or the day of Sukkot? Was there a specific reason that you decided you should do the escape that particular day? PB: No. We, we, we made the-- we saw the transports are not coming anymore, and our days are numbered. They're going to, to, to-- we're going to be executed.  INT: How many days were there no transports? PB: It was maybe for, for two weeks. And the-- this Frenzel told us in the-- in the trial that if we would have waited another 24 hours, we would have been dead. They were going to kill us. So the timing was perfect timing. So when-- and-- so I'll go back when we, we, we, we, we, we, we jumped from that-- on the barn. We jumped down when she told us they are come-- came to kill us. We jumped down to the-- to the corn field. And in the middle of the day. Also, if I would have to jump today, I wouldn't get up anymore.  INT: Now, how many people were you hiding there? PB: We were there, four people.  INT: Who were you? PB: Me, and my brother, and, and two Lichts. Name of Licht. And we were-- we came to another-- to Tarzymiechy. We came to another-- to another-- to a place. And in this place-- I know it's name, but I forgot the name. This place, we couldn't stay too long because this was like a transit place. You could wash yourself up, eat, because other people knew about this, this place. But we didn't have any other place to go yet. And this wife had diabetes. So my brother gave him a prescription to the pharmacy, and he gave injections. So he gave a little by little. We should go-- we should stay a little longer there, you know? In the-- in the-- in the-- in this time, meantime, we find a place, Masuryk. Michael Masuryk, his name, what we, we were hiding. Michael Masuryk. It was a Jew from this-- from this-- from this village. His name was Duce. And Duce was-- he was going around in that village free. Because he was well known. He was born there. And they didn't bother him. And he was going around. And then he managed to, to be free in that village. And he find out that we are-- we are hiding in this and this place. And he was a friend of my brother. And my brother spoke to him, he should find a place for us to hide in. So he find a place for us, with Masuryk. A very poor family. And they-- we promised him we'll give him 3,000, 4,000 zlotys a month. But the money we were getting, we got smarter. The money, we're not giving him the money right away. We are going to-- my brother is going to the pharmacy once a month to bring the money from the pharmacy and to give him the money. My brother was hiding in the hay. So he doesn't know that he's not here for 24 hours. This way they shouldn't know that we have money. They shouldn't kill us. I don't know, maybe they would not kill us, but to make-- to make it more-- to be more on the-- on the safe side. So this is the way we, we-- he, he carved out a hiding place underground. And we were there. And once, the partisans were very, very active there. And they derailed a train with the supplies to the Russian front. This was maybe three blocks away from the railroad. The Gestapo, when Nazi came-- the Nazis came, and they surrounded the whole village. And they went house to house to look for the partisans. So if they would find us, we are the partisans, you know? We did it. They were-- they were-- they run away to the-- to the-- the whole family ran away to the priest. And the Gestapo were walking over our heads. We had those little pistols and the little machine guns. This wouldn't help us nothing. They would open, they would throw in a grenade right away. So, so we were lucky they, they didn't find us. 
INT: Now, this is still in the small village of Tarzymiechy? PB: Of Tarzymiechy, but that [? Yanek ?] Masuryk, by, by, by him so we-- and we were there till the liberation in 1944 by the Russians.  INT: What time of year? What time of year? PB: This was 1994, in July. Something like that. And the Russian-- the front was three kilometers away from the village. And we wanted to get out from there. So we, we stopped a-- we stopped a Polish farmer and with his two horses and a wagon. He should take us to, to Zamosc, this was our biggest big city. So we put our belongings to the-- to the-- under the carriage. We get-- we got-- we went back to get the rest of it. We came out, he disappeared. So we don't have anything. We could not go to Zamosc. So we went over to the main road, and we stopped a truck with the-- with the supplies for the front. A Russian major came out, and he spoke to us Jewish. Jewish officer. And we told them we survived the war, and we, we wanted to get to Zamosc. And that, that the Polish farmer took away all our things and he run away. He said, go on the truck. We went on the truck. He made a U-turn. We almost went into a ditch. It was a narrow, little street. And about a kilometer away, we, we, we find that Polack. And the-- first of all, we went over. He beat him up. He didn't kill him, he beat him up good. He told us to pick up the straw. We picked up the straw. There was a whole cow, a dead cow, four-- he came from the slaughtering house. Four, four pieces. He tell-- he tell the, the, the Jewish officer tell us to take the cow and to put it on the truck. Who can pick up a few hundred pounds, you know? We were weighing maybe 80, 90 pounds. We managed to get out the cow to the truck. It was a big effort. And finally, we got out the cow to the truck with all our belongings. And we thought he's going to take us to Zamosc. So he said, I cannot take you to Zamosc. I'll take you first to the front. I have to-- they have to-- I have to unload all the supplies. So going to the front, the Katyushas and the-- and the artillery, and the machine guns, was-- I thought, that's the finish. I survived Sobibor, all the things. I am liberated. And here I'm going to die here on the front, you know? But to him, it's nothing, you know? We have to go there. The, the, the artillery pieces exploded around this rock. Also a miracle we didn't die. We unloaded. He took us to Zamosc. He took us to Zamosc. So we went into our [NON-ENGLISH] house. Over there was all the Jews, what they're survived from our surroundings. They came to the [NON-ENGLISH] house. And at night, everybody told their stories, what-- their experiences and everything. 
INT: Were they mostly from Sobibor or other areas? PB: No, from different areas. So the Pollacks passed by. They couldn't digest that a few Jews remained alive. They throw in a grenade. One woman was injured by the kitchen. But the grenade didn't go into the window, went into the wall. Only, only a part of it when in. Otherwise, many other people would be killed. This was the first thing. This was the first-- the first day of, of freedom. In the morning, I'm a free man. I go out with my friend, with Motela Altman. He just passed away in Israel. I went out on the street to breathe the fresh air of the freedom. And I thought they are going to put us on a carriage and took us around, all of us, city by city, that I survived Sobibor, and I'm alive. So a policemen came over. He said, [NON-ENGLISH], show me your documents. I said, how can we have documents? We are Jews. We are survived-- just survived the war. He took us to the NKVD, because the police was connected with the-- with the Russian NKVD. He told them that we are Gestapo, Germans. And they, they throwed him into the basement with all the criminals. So this was the second episode after the survival, you know? The third episode after survival, the front was by Warsaw.  INT: Well, let's finish. How did you get out of prison? PB: Yeah. The prison-- I get out. They were-- they-- I came out, and I, I proved it to the-- for the NKVD. I told him that we are Jews. And they, they are not-- they, they are the same people that helped the, the Germans, when, when they were the police, they helped the Germans. And they let us out. 
INT: Let me ask you another question. What was the main language that you always spoke to your family at home? PB: Yiddish and Polish.  INT: And where did you learn-- you said you had some Russian, you had some German. Where did you learn these languages? PB: Well, German is, is similar to, to, to Yiddish. And then my father comes from, from [NON-ENGLISH]. Those colonies all around were, were, years ago, were Germans, German colonies. So he spoke-- he spoke German too. And that's why I learned in the house a little German. And Russian too. We were living not far from the Russian-- and we spoke a little Russian in the house. So I picked it up. Yes. So--  INT: So you left now this prison. You, you proved your way out. PB: Yes. And--  INT: Who were you arrested with? Who was with you? PB: I-- with my-- with my friend, Motela Altman. They were-- we were freed. And we went to-- and we went to Lublin. And in Lublin, they took everybody into the army, young boys. The Russians took every-- all the boys in the army. They took them to the front. They stopped by Praga in Warsaw because they wanted the-- that the-- that the Polish AK should fight it out with the German. And the, the German should, should win with the-- with the partisans. And then they'll-- then they'll go into Warsaw, because the AK were fascists and they were against Russia. So they picked up everybody, young people. And many of them went, went-- like, free. They wanted to be in the army to, to take revenge. But my brother told me I shouldn't go because we survived. So we were-- nobody'd be left from, from the family. I shouldn't go. So he, he, he met a, a Polish officer. He was a colonel, a Polish officer. He used to be-- before the war, he used to be his friend. And he was-- he was in charge of the-- sends the-- sends the letters from the post office. It was a very responsible job. And he made me employed by this-- with this-- he was the [NON-ENGLISH]. He was a manager. And I should work there as a technical advisor there. So I was sorting the letters there. And in the letters was all the places where the AK had to have those meetings. And I gave a report to the-- to the NKVD there and to the [NON-ENGLISH]. So they picked up those guys. They picked up those guys. And one night, they came over at night, where I was sleeping with my brother. And they took me over to the-- to the security office, where there was [NON-ENGLISH], which was like, like the NKVD from Russia. And they made me sign-- I should sign a paper that I am the head of the AK, so they can show the, the Russians that I am the head from the AK, so that I am against Russia. Because the AK was against Russia. I said, I'm not signing this. I said, I'm not signing. He was one over with a-- which he was-- which he was beating up on the-- on the interrogation by the Gestapo. He was also working with them. So he beat me up. He broke my nose. I was bleeding. And they throw me into the basement with all the criminals. And my brother, they, they told him to go, but the Russians in the-- in the-- in the-- the fortress was electric. So we thought we were going to be killed over there. And so my sister-in-law went to Lublin to the government and she told them what happened. 
INT: This is your sister-in-law who-- Simha's wife? PB: Simha's wife.  INT: What was her name? PB: Lola.  INT: What was her last name, her maiden name? PB: Lola, Lola, I think, Elbert.--  INT: OK. PB: No, Lola Kopelman.  INT: Kopelman. PB: My other sister-in-law was, was Ada [? Elbert, ?] my other sister-in-law.  INT: No problem. Lola Kopelman. So now she goes to Lublin? PB: She going into the government, and she told him that we are arrested. That my brother and me, we are arrested. We've just survived the war, and the people arrested me. They're fascist themselves. And they made me that I am the-- I am the head of the AK. So they-- we were there two days, and we-- they let us out. And I came to Lublin, and I went into-- to the main-- the main, like, attorney general. And I told him the whole story. Went to work as a-- free, you know, to help out. They accused me of this and this. And the one where they arrested me, and the one which-- at interrogation, they were-- they are fascists themself. And they were working with the Germans too. So he told me not to go back, and to give the names, who they are. I gave the names, and they, they told them to escort the prisoners to Lublin, onto Zamosc. So they escorted them, and they, they, they took them all to Siberia. So this was my satisfaction. And from there, I didn't want to be in Poland anymore, and I went to Berlin. 
INT: Before you left for Berlin, were there any moments that you wanted to do something revengeful, that you wanted to get back at what happened to you? PB: Revenge, you mean, with the-- with the--  INT: Did you hurt anyone? Did you get-- PB: The Polish people?  INT: Polish, German. Was there any moment where you felt, you know, these people have done terrible things to me and my family? PB: Let me think of something. We did a terrible thing, but I don't want to mention it here because it's going to be-- it's going to be recorded, and in classes, and for the education [INAUDIBLE]. But I'll tell you--  INT: The truth is the truth. PB: What?  INT: The truth is the truth, though. What happened happened. If you feel comfortable. PB: I told two Russians that I knew a family, you know, near-- in the [NON-ENGLISH], near Izbica. They killed, maybe, a couple hundred Jews. But if I tell the Russian they killed a couple hundred Jews, they wouldn't do anything. So I told them they killed a few hundred POWs, Russian POWs. Because they were transporting the Russian POWs in the millions. They were working on, on-- they, they were transporting them by foot on the main road. And this-- and I told him that this, this family killed all of the Russians. So we gave him two bottles of vodka. And he told us the next morning, 4 o'clock in the morning, they-- we should meet. So we brought a whole case of vodka. And he came with two other [NON-ENGLISH] with the-- with the machine guns. And he went over to that village, and he surrounded the whole village. He put the whole house on fire. 
INT: With the family inside? PB: I don't know what happened to the family. Yes.  INT: OK. PB: Yes.  INT: OK. PB: But this was a little bit of a revenge because they killed 200 people, some of them were my family too, you know?  INT: Any other incidents before you left Poland that you recall that happened to you or someone next to you with the Polish people, with anyone around you? PB: After I, I survived I went to Izbica, to the cemetery, to look for my mother's grave, as she was killed with 60 other people. And a Polish young boy, maybe he was-- I don't remember his name. He was in my class. And he wanted to kill me. He was-- he, he was-- I, I run away from him. But I was running faster than him. If he would have caught me, he would have killed me. And then they surrounded us in Izbica, the Polish people. And we were very afraid that they were going to kill us because they could not digest that the-- that the Jews survived. So we, we managed to get into the headquarters from the military. And we told them that we are not safe here, we-- they're surrounded us. They said, well, we have to go to a big city. They gave us a few grenades. They put us in a truck to Lublin. They said to concentrate in a big city. We cannot help you. This was another episode. But we went-- 
INT: When you went back to Izbica, was your home still left? PB: No, everything was demolished, all-- everything was demolished. And then from Lublin, I went-- I wanted to get to, to get the-- to, to get those two bottles of the jewelry. Now, this could help us, you know? Little bit easier life. So we went to-- I took another few people, me and my brother, and we went to the Sobibor. But coming near Sobibor, there was a big fight with the partisans, was AK with the Russians, like a front. And then I said, we're going-- I said, we're going to be killed here. We survived Sobibor, we're going to go for the-- help with the jewelry. And we left everything, and we went to-- and I went to Berlin. Now, coming back-- I'm going back later. Now we-- I made a documentary with Michael York. The name was And, and I had a part in it. We went to look for the-- for the jewels in Sobibor. We went. It was a very interesting part. And we went to-- even the producer told me that the-- that my part was the highest rating. They showed it on television, and on cable worldwide. We went to-- for the jewels. And I had a few Polish people there helping dig. And I went looking for the trees, which they're older than 48 or 47 years. Because the branches, I was counting the branches. Because they-- after, after we made the escape, they, they, they, they put up trees, those pine trees. So I figured those are young trees. I had to go for the old trees. So we were looking and looking. We couldn't find anything. The terrain changes. The Polish people turned over, upside down, everything. You know, they were looking in the toilets. They were-- where I-- where I throw in the jewels all over. I said, we're not going to find anything. So we went to Izbica, to the cemetery. And this was the main emotional part on the movie, where we find all the skeletons. And I was holding the picture. I was holding the skeleton and I said, this could be my mother. And I, I-- all of us-- all over, bones, you know? And the Polack that went with me told me, this is the place where your mother was shot with 60 people. And I was holding that skeleton. And I took the skeleton with its bones, and I took him to America. And coming to Frankfurt, so they, they went through the machine. And they spotted all the bones, and they stopped me. They were going to call the police. It was a young fellow, and I told him the whole story. This is my family. I'm taking to America to bury it. And he was very emotional. And he said, I'm doing it against the law, and I'm going to let you go through. He let me go through, and I brought it to, to the States. And here, they didn't check me, you know, on the Kennedy. And I-- and I-- and I buried those bones here on the cemetery, for my society. 
INT: Is society from Izbica? PB: From Izbica, yeah. The society from Izbica. So this is-- this-- I-- coming back, what happened here. But I still have--  INT: You've now moved to Berlin. How did you get to Berlin? PB: I got to Berlin by truck. A Russian truck took us over from, from, from [NON-ENGLISH]. They took us over to the other side, to the American Zone.  INT: How did you get through? PB: Get through-- the Russian's, their truck, they had the, the-- they knew the patrols there. And then we went through. They bribed them, and we went through. And I went into Camp Schlachtensee. And over there, we were disinfected, and we got a place where to live. And from there, over there, I was staying maybe one year.  INT: What did you do there in the camp? PB: Over there, I went to school there, went--  INT: Who ran the school? PB: The Hebrew school in the camp. And I went also to-- I have also went to school outside, in the private lessons. And the-- and we were-- we had a nice, very cultural life in, in Schlachtensee. [DRINKS] We also had [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] big, big dignitaries come to visit us, like the Mayor LaGuardia came. I have a picture of him, LaGuardia when he came. I was supposed to bring it. From the-- from Berlin. Going to Moscow, he stopped in Schlachtensee. And from Schlachtensee, I came to Heidenheim. 
INT: You said you studied for a profession. PB: In Heidenheim, I, I studied to be-- I wanted to be a dentist, but I didn't have the education, the background. I tried to, to, to go to school a little bit in Heidenheim. And I worked with a German doctor half a day to do practical things. And I learned the whole profession in three years. And I opened an office in Heidenheim. My brother was the president of the DP camp. He gave me a few rooms. I made an office, and I was-- you know, I was doing very well. I did better than the regular doctor in the-- in the-- in the-- in the camp. For, for special-- for special situations, like somebody came with a wisdom tooth, or an abscess, so here, they also have specialists. So I had a German doctor. He came every Wednesday for two or three hours, and he took care of those special things, special things.  INT: So your brother was always with you? PB: Yeah.  INT: You were with your brother. PB: My brothers, yes. And--  INT: Did you know your other brother was alive? PB: My other brother was there in camp too, in Heidenheim.  INT: Tell me about your reunion. PB: Yeah.  INT: How did you find him? PB: Yeah. My brother came from Russia right after the war. He came to Zamosc, and he, he couldn't recognize me. He was so excited that he left me a little boy, and here I am a man. It was a very happy reunion. And we were together. And we were together in Germany. And then they went to-- we were supposed to go all to Israel. It was, at that time, Palestine yet, but the war was going on. And they went to Israel. They were Zionists. And I was supposed to come also with the-- bring the dental equipment and everything to work in Germany-- in, in Israel. And over there, why would I come with my knowledge, my friends, they didn't have my knowledge. They have offices now. There already was a few years, they couldn't open offices. So they sent me a letter I shouldn't come because we, we survived, three brothers. They are in the Army, and I-- they'll take me, right away, to the front, and nobody would be left on the family. We need somebody to, to survive. I should register to the States. So I registered through the-- through the Joint Distribution. And they sent me a contract to go to Columbus, Ohio. 
INT: Now, who-- where were you staying? Still in Heidenheim? PB: In Heidenheim. Now, from Heidenheim, they took me-- they transferred [INAUDIBLE]. They liquidated Heidenheim. I went to Landsberg. Landsberg. And from Landsberg, I went to the States. So I registered to the Joint, and they sent me a contract to go to Columbus, Ohio, to work as a dental technician. So I didn't come to New York. I came to Boston. And from Boston, I went to Columbus, Ohio. They waited for me on the railroad.  INT: Who waited for you? PB: The, the Jewish Committee. And they gave me-- they gave me, the first week, they gave me $17. And they, they gave me a room. But I got a job right away. And I was working. And I was making, right away, money.  INT: When did you arrive in America? PB: In 1950.  INT: What-- when? What time of year? PB: I came in March. And I-- and I start-- I, I wanted to, to get into Ohio State University to complete my studies. But the Jewish committee, they talked me out of it. They said, we have enough doctors here. And you should try something else. I didn't have the support. I didn't have the financial means. So I stayed as a dental technician. They made me manager in the place. But I didn't have any social life in Columbus, Ohio.  INT: We'll stop, and we'll continue on the next tape. 
INT: Bialowitz, August 22, 1997. So that you said you were lonely in Ohio. PB: And I took vacation. I went to Canada. And from Canada, I went-- came to New York. And I met many of my friends. And, and I decided that I'm going to move from Columbus to New York. And I came back and I told my boss, that I am-- I am sorry that I have to leave you, but I cannot adjust myself here. I don't have any friends and I am moving to New York. He said, Philip, you have a-- you are like a member of our family. Sooner or later, you'll take over the laboratory. And if you want more money, we'll give you more money. I said, it's not the money. It's just, I have all my friends in New York. He said, well, if you decided to go, then you'll break in somebody else, two weeks. We'll pay you for the-- for the airfare. And if you have any problem in the future, the door is always open for you. And this was the end. And I came to New York. And I worked briefly as a dental technician. And then I decided if I cannot become a dentist, I want to give up the whole thing. I ought to be a doctor dentist, or not to be altogether. So I switched to jewelry. So I went to a place, to, to, to a jewelry manufacturer. And I told them I had five years experience. I didn't have five days experience. He told me to come Monday, try me out. He tried me out. And they-- and I struggled the whole day. 5 o'clock, he looked at the jewelry. He said, Philip, it seems to me you only have three years experience. I was very happy. I said, I'm not adjusted here yet and I don't know the chemicals or whatever. But he said, I am happy. It's still good enough. And after three months, he made me manager of the jewelry. So it's a-- I-- it's-- the beginning was very hard for me, till I find myself the right thing. But finally, I, I did all right later on. 
INT: Where did you live in New York? PB: I lived in-- in the beginning, I lived in the-- in the Bronx, in Highbridge, near Concourse. And then I moved to Rego Park in Sherwood Village. And then I moved to Little Neck. And we got--  INT: You married along the way. PB: And we got married. When I got married, I moved to Little Neck. And I have--  INT: When did you get married? PB: Yeah, my first marriage was in, in 1958.  INT: Mhm. And your first wife's name? PB: It's Rela, yes. So when I, I have-- I have five children. I'm-- my biggest revenge for the Germans is that I, I have five children. I build a new family. And, and they wanted to destroy my-- me too. But they didn't destroy. I instilled in my children the, the values. And that they-- and they should continue to perpetuate all the what we went through. And this is-- this is mine satisfaction, this, against the Nazis. What they wanted to finish up the whole thing. And I am--  INT: No, before we get away from your children, you also have grandchildren. PB: I have, yeah. That's right. I, I have-- I have a daughter in Israel. We have six grandchildren. And we're very happy. I'm visiting them every year. And--  INT: Let me ask you, though-- PB: I hope-- and I am also busy, I am also busy with lecturing in schools and synagogues. And even got invited to the-- I was invited to Social Security Office. It was 500 people. And they came to touch my hand like I would be a saint. I told them the story of Sobibór. I gave, also, a lecture in Stanford University, California. And I am in, in demand. Because we're only 11 survivors of Sobibór. And we have to tell the world what happened. We have to perpetuate. But soon, soon nobody'll be left to tell the story. Because there is-- there are deniers already that the Holocaust didn't happen. So we, we have to continue and to, to see that such atrocities shouldn't repeat itself. 
INT: You said that you were involved in war crime trials. Can you tell us about it? PB: Yes. I went to a couple trials. The first trial what I went is in Frankfurt right after the war, at the-- and it was against Gomerski. And when I saw Gomerski, I was so excited that I took a chair. And I wanted to throw the chair on him. So they, they stopped me, the police. They told me, you're going to be in the same cell with him. [LAUGHS] I couldn't control myself. But he got life imprisonment.  INT: What did you testify? What was your testimony? PB: Testimony? I saw with my own eyes how he killed people. How he-- how he beat and, and he was terrible, that Gomerski. Everybody took part in Sobibór, in, in the extermination. Didn't come there for vacation. They came, they have a special purpose-- to kill. And the other trial was in Hagen, near, near [NON-ENGLISH]. It was against the Frenzel. [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] When I came to the trial, and I started to-- and the Frenzel, he-- I gave him a lot of jewelry. And, and he had a lot of money, so he hired the best attorney. And the attorney started to interrogate me like I would be on trial. So I asked the judge, did I came here as a witness, or am I on trial? Or, or this murderer is on trial? And to the lawyer, I said, if you put on a uniform I might recognize you too, from profile. [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] He came over during the recess. He accused himself that he's not a Nazi. He was appointed. He this and this. I said, if you-- if you're such a liberal-minded lawyer, you wouldn't take on this job. To defend him would be-- he wouldn't go with me very easy. Because I was very young. I lost all my family. And the way you interrogate me, I don't like it. And there was a full room of students, college students, high school students, to participate in that procedure. And they came over to me, they embraced me. And they-- and they told me, this is how our grandparents felt. It's not our fault. I also, when I arrived in, in Hagen, I was-- I was-- I had a note on my desk in the hotel that there-- the woman, husband and wife introduced themselves. They are-- she's a professor on religion. And he's an architect. And they are on the welcome committee. They want to make my stay as pleasant as possible. Because we, we know that you're going to go through very bad experiences during the trial. And we're coming, 7 o'clock, to pick you up. 7 o'clock to pick me up. And they took me to their house for dinner. And, and I saw on the walls Jewish artifacts. And I asked her, what is this? She said she's a religious teacher. And she collects artifacts, or religious artifacts. And then she said she's going to call her parents to come. So I thought she is going to call her parents, the parents, the father will come in. And I will recognize them from Sobibór. Because he the little older generation. So they came in. He came in with an attaché. And he showed me that he is-- he's rebuilding the synagogue in Hagen, to make it a historical [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] [? fact. ?] And he also-- he also gives lectures in universities about the Jewish population in Hagen. He has all the names. So he's doing good deeds. And they took me to the opera, and to all kinds of musical, the cultural events. And I said, what kind of Germans are these? I said, they're different Germans. Well, maybe some of them are still-- they may be all right. A small percentage. 
INT: How did you feel being in Germany, after all you went through? PB: I, I, I could be in Germany. I could remained in Germany, have a very-- a very good life. I mean, monetary. But I didn't want to remain in Germany. But I, I, I don't go to Germany just for pleasure. If I go, I go just to take care of some-- my businesses and things. So it's-- the trials made a very big impact on me, going through all the experiences. And I got sick during the trial, to tell all the episodes, what I went through. And being so young, it had a very big effect on me.  INT: Were there other witnesses there from Sobibór? PB: Yeah, with my brother--  INT: Do you remember-- PB: My brother was there. Tom Blatt was there. There was many other witness. Esther, Esther Raab, and many witnesses.  INT: Did you people talk together? Did you reunite and talk about your experiences? PB: Well, we talked about it, you know? We knew, we knew our experiences, everybody had, they can write the volumes of books about Sobibór. And I can write about Izbica and Sobibór. And I can write what happened during the war. And, and I was on-- I was interviewed on the And they asked me what happened after? Well, I told them that, that mine-- my-- the escape from Sobibór was not the end of it, my journey. It was still a lot of struggle, suffering, till I got the-- till I've been liberated by the Russians. So there was constant struggle. And after I survived, I had to struggle to, to live, because I, I didn't-- and I could've been killed too, after the war. 
INT: You had told me before that you had met a very-- you didn't meet, but you saw a very famous person at Sobibór. PB: Yes. There was one episode during my stay in-- during my being in, in Sobibór that Himmler came to visit, to visit, to participate, to visit, see how 200 Jewish girls were gassed in Sobibór. And he was looking through a-- through a special screen to see, slowly, how they put the gas in slowly. And how they-- how they were gassed.  INT: How did you see him? Where did you see him? PB: I saw him, he came into the camp. And he was paraded in the-- all the camps. And, and they brought us 200 girls from, from Majdanek. And, and they were gassed there. And he-- and he was-- he was in-- he came in to, to see that, the scenery.  INT: So you saw him as he was-- where were you when you saw him? Where were you in the camp? PB: By the-- I was, was sorting. We went in the-- he passed by where the sorting to the third camp. And over there, he was-- I was told people were walking right near, near him. That he was looking there, in the-- how they-- and they could hear the screaming outside, on the-- from, from the-- from the girls, how they scream. Because they, they, they had a slow death. Slowly, they put in the gas, carbon monoxide. 
INT: Any other people that came to visit the camp that you knew about during your time? PB: There came all kinds of people. I didn't know them personally. They, they didn't seem to-- I didn't know they arranged then it. But they came to visit there. There, the-- how the camp works. Because this camp was like a model. You know, everything's so smoothly worked. And it was top secret. And, and the revolt of Sobibór will go in in the annals with Jewish history. But what we did, except the Warsaw ghetto, but from the camp, Sobibór was one of the biggest uprising in World War II.  INT: When you came to America, did people want to hear your story, in 1950, 1955? PB: When I came to America, I didn't talk about it too much. I couldn't, I kept it inside. I couldn't come out with it, because it was too much, for me to go over the-- all the, the, the suffering, what I went through. But it's only, like I mentioned, only the last few years, where I-- where I came out with it. Because I feel-- I find that, that-- figured we have to tell this story to the world. And we have to perpetuate. Especially the young children, make sure that when I go to a-- to give a speech, I tell them that to bring along the children. Otherwise I'm not coming. Because it's more important for them, they, they should tell their own-- their children and their own, their grandchildren, what happened. 
INT: Did you speak to your children as they were growing up about it? PB: I spoke to my-- my children were aware of mine suffering and what happened to my family. And then I instilled in them the values, they should continue. And my son is a second generation. He speaks about the Holocaust. He goes to conference, sometimes to Washington, to participate in, in the Holocaust. And he's going to-- I know it, he's going to continue to do the good work.  INT: Now, I know that your daughter in Israel is very religious. PB: Yeah.  INT: Orthodox Jew. How do you see religion today, after all you've been through? PB: Well, I, I tried many times to become more religious. But every time I tried to become more, more religious, it comes back to me, all what happened. What I saw, children, how they're being killed, torn apart. And rabbis, and other things. So I am trying to-- I have children. They went to Hebrew school, tried to give them a good education. But my children are more religious than I am. Maybe because I went through all the things what I saw, whatever happened. And I belong to a synagogue. And I am-- I belong to the organizations and the youth organizations, everythings. But I'm not-- I'm not Orthodox.  INT: Do you think you would have remained Orthodox if the war didn't happen to you? PB: If, if the war wouldn't be, I would be Orthodox. My, my-- I came from a very religious family. Like I mentioned, all the rabbis came, visited. They stayed in our house. And we were very influential. And father was the leader. And we-- very religious. And I always went every day to shul with my father, to say [INAUDIBLE]. And the holidays were something, you know, big events. Were looking forward for the-- for the big event, for the holidays. So it would be different. But I-- but the war changed everythings. It's not of my making. 
INT: It happened to you as you were a teenager. How do you think that colored your life, that you were such a young man at the time that all of this happened to you? PB: My life was interrupted entirely because of the war. Because like I mentioned, my plans were I would be something else, you know? And I would have brothers and with my three sisters, who were, I mean, so beautiful, so talented. We would have, maybe our family maybe 150 people. Cousins, I don't remember the names. But I know that we had cousins, uncles, all kinds of-- all in different places. They all perished. And then me, it, it, it had a special big, detrimental effect because I was so young. And to see all the sufferings, all the killings and everything, why? Why did it happen? What did I do? Why did my niece, seven-year-old, going to Sobibór? Blonde, blue eyes, beautiful. And comes over and, and to say goodbye to me a half an hour before she went into the gas chambers. So this, everything's has an effect on me. I still have dreams. And, and member-- remembering all those things is-- it's incomprehensible.  INT: A last question. A message that you may want to give your children and your grandchildren? PB: Well, the message is that we have to continue to perpetuate and to tell the world what happened. And especially the children. We should continue, and to-- and to, to see that, that the things shouldn't happen again. That's all what I can tell. 
INT: Thank you much. PB: Yeah. Well, [? shalom. ?]  INT: Mr. Bialowitz, tell us who's in the picture. PB: The-- this picture is taken in 1941. We send it to my brother, to Russia. That's why we, we got it, the picture. Otherwise we wouldn't have anything left. This picture is part of my family. From the left, from, from the-- all the way at the the top, the left, the first-- the first row, is my sister, Toba. Next, my mother, Biala, my father, Scyia, and my other sister, Branche. And the two children are-- the two children, one is, is--  INT: These were your sisters' children? PB: My sisters' children.  INT: And, and that your sister is holding? PB: I don't remember. I don't remember, right now, the names, even.  INT: No problem. Your sister is sitting and holding? PB: You see, this-- no, the sister is standing there to the right, Rivka. And in the middle is me. And then the next is Simha. And, and the end is-- toward the end is mine-- my sister's husband. And the, the last one is-- she was like a housekeeper in, in, in the house.  INT: Was she Polish? PB: Cook, a cook. No.  INT: Jewish? PB: Jewish, yes. Yes.  INT: Did she live with you or come in? PB: She lived with us, yes.  INT: What was her name? PB: I'll tell you, it was Brancha. Oh that was it, Brancha, yeah. 
INT: And this was taken in Izbica? PB: In Izbica, 1941.  INT: Thank you. Please tell us about this picture. PB: This picture is taken after we escape from Sobibór, in the woods. We are-- we were briefly in the Partisans. And this picture was taken in 1943. By the end of 1943.  INT: Do you remember the name of the group of the Partisans that you met? PB: They called it this part of the Parczew Partisan. They moved to Lublin area. But we were not too, too long over there, because we had very bad experiences with the Polish Partisans.  INT: So this-- PB: We were afraid to be there.  INT: This was around October, '43? PB: This was October, '43. After-- this was-- October was the-- was the uprising. This was a couple of months later.  INT: And you were how many pounds at this point in your life, after Sobibór? PB: How many pounds?  INT: You-- how many-- how much did you weigh? PB: I weighed maybe 95 pounds, 90 pounds.  INT: Thank you. Mr-- PB: This picture was taken in 1944, in Lublin. Near the [? Lubartowska ?] Street.  INT: Where did you get the suit? PB: This was, I-- this is the one-- the suit was like from-- I was working like there, like a military, in the military suit. And I was. And they made me a-- like a-- an officer. Like a lieutenant. 
INT: In what-- in what-- PB: In that-- while I was working, I mentioned, in that-- in that office in the [INAUDIBLE], the [INAUDIBLE], you know? And I was just a officer. Because it was a high-- a high-- a highly-important job.  INT: This was under the Polish? PB: Yeah.  INT: Thank you. Please tell us about the picture. PB: In this picture, it's taken in 1946, in Germany. The name of the city was Heidenheim. And I was studying to be in a dentist. And this was taken in a German doctor's office. I was working with him as a practicant for half a day, every day.  INT: And Heidenheim was considered a DP camp? PB: Heidenheim an der Brenz. The-- this was-- the DP camp was in Heidenheim. But this was in the city, outside the camp.  INT: Thank you. Please tell us about the picture. PB: This, this picture is-- was taking last year. And this is the place where I was hiding. And this is part of the family. And some of the family aren't around, even born yet, when the-- when I-- when I was hiding.  INT: Would you please tell us about-- PB: This picture is taking recently. In the center is-- this is the Masuryk's wife. Her name is Maria. And I am pointing the place where I was hiding. Because they changed the-- they, they moved around different places, the, the barn. So this is the place I was hiding. Then next to Maria is, is her son, Jan. And this is his, his, his, his, his-- this is Jan's son. The-- this is the grandson then. This is the grand-grandson. On the other side is the daughter. And the next one is Jan's wife. 
INT: When did you take this picture, do you-- PB: Last year.  INT: 1996. PB: '90-- yeah, '96.  INT: And this is where you were hiding after you escaped from Sobibór-- PB: After I escaped from Sobibór.  INT: --till liberation. PB: Yes.  INT: And these people, you honored? PB: These people were honored, Yad, Yad Vashem. They got a medal for Gentiles, Righteous Gentiles. And there was a ceremony in Poland. For them and for other people which got the medals.  INT: Who were you hiding with when you were in their-- PB: Me and-- me and my brother, and another three people. By the name of Licht. And one woman, Lola [NON-ENGLISH].  INT: Thank you. Please tell us about the picture. PB: Those two pictures were taking a few years ago, while I made the commentary with Michael York, the name, And we went up in Izbica, to the cemetery. And I saw a scenery. It's unbelievable. The bones and skeletons, laying all around the cemetery. And this is a-- this is a skeleton I'm holding in the hands, that the Polacks told me that my mother was shot in this grave with 60 other people. And I were holding this, this skeleton. And this could have been my mother. And I took all the bones. And I took them to America, and to bury them in our-- in our society, in Izbica society.  INT: Thank you. Can you please tell us about this monument? PB: This is the cemetery in Izbica. And I'm standing here in front, myself and my daughter, Simone, in front of the-- of the, the monument. Which is-- this monument was dedicated by a priest what he, he converted to-- from Judaism to Catholicism. And he dedicated this for the-- for the-- all the Jews in Izbica, and his family. And, and he has a place where he's going to lay there too, near, when he dies. 
INT: When did you go and visit this cemetery? PB: Every year. And I was there this year.  INT: Thank you. Please tell us about the picture. PB: This is the cemetery from-- Izbica-- from Izbica Society in Queens. The-- this is the bones being buried, which I brought from Izbica, Poland. And this is my son and with members of the society.  INT: Where is the cemetery for the society in Queens? PB: I don't know exactly the name. But it's, it's in Queens, in Kew Gardens, I believe, yes.  INT: Thank you. Please tell us about this picture. PB: This is my daughter, Evelyn, and my son, Joey.  INT: And-- PB: But Evelyn passed away when she was 16 years old.  INT: When was this taken? PB: This was taken the, the last few months before she died. The last couple months before she died.  INT: Thank you. Please tell us about the picture. PB: This picture is taking in the graduation in, in Scottsdale, Arizona. This is my son, Michael. And this is myself.  INT: Thank you. Please. PB: This is at the graduation of my high-- of my son's, Joey's, high school. And this is my other son, Michael, and myself.  INT: So this was taken back in about 1991? PB: This-- yes, 1991.  INT: Thank you. Please tell us about the picture. PB: This picture is-- was taken last year. This is my daughter, Simone. And all my six grandchildren. 
INT: This was taken in 1996, in Israel? PB: 199-- in Israel, yes.  INT: Where do they live in Israel? PB: In Beit Shemesh.  INT: Thank you very much. PB: This is my son, Joey, at graduation, at high school graduation. And that's my other son, Jeffrey.  INT: So we made a mistake. This graduation was in 1992. PB: 1992.  INT: In New York. PB: New York.  INT: Thank you very much. Please tell us. PB: This is my brother, Simha, in [NON-ENGLISH], and his sister-in-law and his family, made in [NON-ENGLISH] a few years ago.  INT: Thank you very much. PB: Welcome. [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] Joey is here to represent the rest of my family, which they couldn't be here. Go ahead. JOEY BIALOWITZ: OK. Well, I am-- I am my father's son. And that means that I am a second generation, what they say, Holocaust survivor. And that has affected my life in a very unique way, I think. First of all, what I wanted to just say is that for anyone who ever wishes to deny that the Holocaust ever happened, I'm also here as a witness. Because I was-- I was someone who grew up in my father's home. And I saw how he was affected. And I think that the way he was affected was actually-- the way he affected me was actually a great gift to me. And it was a gift to me in many ways. I've learned-- I've learned from him in a lot of ways. He's very-- he's a very overprotective person, which I guess a lot of Holocaust survivors are. But that can be expected. You know, they, all survivors like my father have, have, you know, loved people. And they've lost people that they've loved. And they, they want to, you know, always you know, keep, keep a short leash on their children especially. But, but that's helped me grow into a good person. I think in America, especially, the people who are successful are the kids who grow up on short leashes. And I have learned from my father. He's a-- he's a role model to me. And I not only learned from his strengths, but also his, his weaknesses. And those are things that have, again, been affected, you know, by the Holocaust. He's-- let's see, he has a tendency to see, you know, a lot of the good things in life. And also, some of the bad things. Because so many bad things have happened to him. So I, I also try to incorporate that into my life. Now, as a-- as, as a Jew, you know, I believe that, you know, I'm very thankful to my father for, you know, continuing the Jewish tradition and living on. And that's been a lesson to me.