INT: My name is Linda Swimer, and I'm interviewing Helga Samuel, on the 23rd of June 1997, in London, England. CREW: OK. My name is Linda Swimer, and I'm interviewing Helga Samuel on June the 23rd, 1997, in London, England. Helga, can you give me your full name, and spell it for me? HS: Yes. My full name is Helga Judith Samuel, and my maiden name was Kreiner-- that's K-R-E-I-N-E-R.  INT: And what is your date of birth? HS: My date of birth is the 11th of September, 1927.  INT: So how old are you now? HS: [LAUGHS] I will be 70 in-- in a couple of months-- in September.  INT: And where were you born? HS: I was born in Stettin, which is now Szczecin, which is now-- which was taken over by Poland.  INT: Right. I'd like to start with you telling me a bit about your family life. Can you describe your father to me? First of all, what was his name? HS: My father's name was Bernard Kreiner-- Bernard Israel Kreiner. And he was born in Romania, in Chernivitsi, in Romania, and then came to Germany-- I don't know when. It must have been-- he was born in 18-- in 1885, I think, something like that. And then he came to Germany, and lived in-- came to Stettin.  INT: Do you know why he came to Stettin? HS: I don't know. Maybe it was a job.  INT: And have you got a favorite memory of your father? HS: Yes, I think in our little weekend house. We had a little weekend house outside Stettin. We had an apartment in Stettin, in the town, and this was a little weekend house where we spent many, many holidays, weekends. And I think sort of seeing him tending the-- the vegetables. And we grew strawberries. And we grew asparagus. And raking the paths-- because little tiny stones-- and he used to rake the paths. And I think I remember him like that. 
INT: And-- HS: He was 16 years older than my mother, so he-- to me, he was always fairly old.  INT: Did he spoil you? HS: Yes, he spoiled both his daughters.  INT: Tell me about your mother. What was her name? HS: My mother's name was Margaret, Margarete Wilhelmina Florentina Ringhandt, that's R-I-N-G-H-A-N-D-T.  INT: And how did she meet your father? HS: Do you know? I don't know how she met my father. But it must have been in Stettin. She worked in a store. And I don't think it was a store where my father worked as a-- he was in the accounts department. He was a financial controller in the accounts department. But it must have been in Stettin.  INT: And did you know your grandparents at all? HS: No, I didn't. Not either-- not on either side, sadly.  INT: But I-- I believe your mother's father-- your mother's parents were not Jewish, is that correct? HS: That's right, yes.  INT: So your mother changed. HS: Yes, my-- my mother wasn't Jewish. But she changed her religion when she married my father. And she became more Jewish than a lot of Jewish people. You know, really, she-- she always reminded me of all the holidays, and what we were going to eat, and all the cooking, and so on and so forth, that we would have on those holidays. We lit the candles every Friday night. But we had a fairly liberal upbringing. But-- and that really was quite something, you know, because in those days, it was unusual thing to happen. But my mother had the mikvah-- is it the mikvah? Yes. And she-- she became-- learned everything, and she became Jewish. 
INT: And did your parent-- did your father's parents accept the situation? HS: They must have done, yes. I don't-- I don't know whether they were alive, even when they got married. I'm not sure.  INT: And-- HS: They were married in-- on the 18th of March, because to me, it's always sort of a special day, and-- you know, it's my parents, when they were married-- in 19-- 1918, I think, or 1920. Yes, around that time-- or before.  INT: And do you have a-- a favorite memory of your mother? HS: Well, my mother came, then, to England, you know, eventually.  INT: A childhood memory. HS: As a child memory-- yes-- also that she used to take us to-- to buy clothes. She used to do my hair. I think I remember that. Because in those days, you wore your hair with a comb in it, and it was sort of curled up, and a little comb in it. And sitting and-- and-- and spending time with us, and you know, cuddling us, and so on. I have, you know, very lovely memories of my mother.  INT: And I believe you had a sister, is that correct? HS: Yes, I have a sister.  INT: And what's her name? HS: Her name is Inge-- Inge-Rose-- or Inge-Rose Heilbrunn.  INT: And is she older or younger than you? HS: Yeah, she's older. She is three years older than I am.  INT: And did you get on when you were children? HS: Not wonderfully, I don't think. She was used to, you know, being the baby. She was supposed to look after me on many occasions, and she didn't. [LAUGHS] And so maybe that was, you know, one reason. And she had her own friends. But we were together a lot. I mean, we-- we-- we went skating together. We went-- what else did we do? Tobogganing in the winter. We went to the seaside together, and to sort of-- they called them [NON-ENGLISH]-- not very far away from Stettin, because that lies on the Oder, which is the river. And it was a place called-- it was [NON-ENGLISH], which is where you-- you go and you swim. And you know, it's-- and there was something to eat, and so on. And we would go, and maybe with my cousins, as well. And you know, she-- so we were together a lot, yes. Of course, being older, we-- we didn't-- we did go to the same school, but of course, we weren't in the same classes. So we had different friends. 
INT: And can you describe where you lived to me? HS: Yes, we lived in an apartment in town, [NON-ENGLISH]. And it was on the third or fourth floor, I remember. And we had a balcony. And it was a large apartment, with the bedrooms at the side. And this was in Stettin, because we did move to another town later. And I remember that was a room-- because we used to have a maid living in-- and her room was at the back of the house. And it was the-- the big apartment houses in Germany where there's a big front door, main front door, and you ring the bell there. And then you go upstairs, and you-- you know, then it's your own apartment. And it was very pleasant. It was lovely. And I had a friend that lived opposite, and we used to wave to each other across the balconies.  INT: And did you go to school with her later on, or you-- HS: Yes, I did. Yes, in fact, I remember her name, but I don't know what happened to her.  INT: What was her name? HS: Her name was Ellen Lachmann.  INT: Right. HS: So I don't know what happened to her. But I had lots of other friends as well. In fact, I-- I did get in touch with one and wrote to her again after many, many years. She lives in Australia. And she said she was going to write back to me, because we were very good friends, and I often thought about her. But she-- she didn't then write back to me. And I think I should maybe contact her again. 
INT: Mm. I'm sure. HS: Yes.  INT: Now, tell me. Did you have a favorite food that your mother cooked, or anything like that? HS: Favorite food-- I think my mother's cooking was all delicious. It was, you know, German cooking. We had-- I always remember, we used to go-- when we went for a walk-- because the parks were quite near where we lived in town-- and my sister and I used to go along-- if we went to the park, there was a delicatessen shop. And we used to go in. Because in Germany, you had cucumbers in a barrel-- big barrels of cucumber, and I think rather like the East End used to be here in England. And we would buy a cucumber each, and we would eat the cucumber. And the food, I think, just various dishes, sort of goulash. Fish-- we had a lot of fish. My mother used to go-- because again, Stettin, being on the Oder, you had a lot of fish. And we was-- used to go with my mother and buy the fish. And you would buy it-- it was still alive. And you would bring it home, and you would kill it-- or my mother would kill it-- you know, bang it on the head. But it was custom. I mean, I didn't-- I didn't watch that, but those were the things that I remember.  INT: So how old were you when you started school? HS: I must have been five or six. 
INT: And did you like going to school? HS: Yes, I think so. I think so, yes. I did. Yes.  INT: Did you go-- HS: I was happy at school.  INT: Did you go to a Jewish school? HS: Yes, we went to a Jewish school, both in Stettin, and later in Leipzig.  INT: And you stayed at the school for how-- how many years? HS: Well, this-- we left-- we left Stettin in 1937 and moved to Leipzig. So I was there until 1937. It must have been seven-- from 1930, I suppose.  INT: And did your mother take you to school? How did you get there? HS: Do you know? I don't remember. Part of that of my life is really-- it just seems to have disappeared. And I mean, a lot of my life lay dormant for years and years and years, because when I-- you know, when I came to England, I-- I became very English. And so we didn't talk about it, and I didn't even think about it. I-- I shut it away.  INT: Right. HS: I don't remember a lot of those things.  INT: And did you go to synagogue at all? HS: Oh, yes, we used to go to synagogue-- not-- not every week, but we did go to synagogue. But I do remember my mother telling me-- and I must have been very little-- that when we used to go and visit the store where my father worked, and everybody would say hello, Frau Kreiner, you know, [GERMAN] Frau Kreiner. And I was still very young. I was with my mother, and I seem to have pictures of that in my mind. I remember that quite vividly, because everybody saying-- everybody knew my mother. 
INT: Because of your father? HS: Yes, because of working there.  INT: And did you have-- what about other family? Did you see many other families? Do you remember that? HS: Yes, on my mother's side, we saw a cousin and her-- her parents. And we used to go to their flat. And also, we went quite often to Berlin, where my father's sister-- one of the sisters lived. And we used to spend a lot of holidays there, with Tante Susie, and it was a favorite place.  INT: Do you remember how you got there? Did you-- HS: We went by train.  INT: And do you remember any of the journeys on the train? HS: Not really, no. But talking about trains, you reminded me that, very often on a Sunday, we used to go and have lunch at the station-- in Germany. That's quite something. There's always a restaurant in the station-- or there was, all those years ago. And we would watch the trains going by, and that was really quite fascinating. You know, we would sit quite near, and we'd watch the trains going by. And that-- that I remember, too, yes. We used to go to lunch quite often.  INT: So tell me about going to Tante Susie. HS: Tante Susie-- that was also-- it was-- she was older than my father. My father was the youngest, actually. And she would take us for walks, and-- and so on, and maybe out to the-- to the zoo in Berlin. And I got to know quite a lot of Berlin. And then I got to know her-- my cousins on that side, as well, and my second cousins. 
INT: Were they similar ages to you? HS: Yes, yes, the second cousin, more of an age line. Because being this great age difference, she was one of the older sisters, I think. And my father being the youngest, there was quite an age difference. And this-- the one second cousin, still lives in Berlin. He's a professor at the university. He's-- he was in Germany all during the war, because his mother was Jewish, but his father wasn't. And so she was hidden in Berlin, all during the war. But-- or most of the war. And he was able to go to school. But she had to go and work in a factory. And it was always, you know. Day to day was a tremendous worry, because she didn't know whether she would be taken away. But because her husband wasn't Jewish, he managed to keep her there. But [? Gert, ?] my second cousin, said-- he told me that when he used to go to school, because he was half Jewish, he was always taunted. And you know, and-- and then the teacher would say, who is not-- who is-- who's Jewish, and who's half Jewish? And they would be made to stand up. And so he was made a-- he was taunted, you know, made a spectacle of, which is very sad. He had a very, very tough time in the war.  INT: And while you lived in Stettin, were you aware of any antisemitism at all growing up? HS: No, I can't say I was. Not then. I think it was-- well, it must have been a little bit. And we went on a holiday. And I remember one holiday, and I think we were still in Stettin then. We hadn't yet moved to Leipzig. And we had our cases. We went on the train to the Black Forest somewhere, in a lovely little place. And when we got to the hotel, there was a notice outside, [GERMAN]. Jews are not permitted here. And of course, I had seen there were signs in other places-- restaurants and so on-- even in Stettin, I think. And we went in, and my father went up to the reception desk, you know, and we stood there with our cases. And this very stern-looking receptionist looked at my father, and she said-- because my father looked very Jewish-- [GERMAN]. You are Jew, you are a Jew. And he said, [GERMAN]. So she said, [GERMAN]. You're not allowed to stay here. And we had to pick up our cases and leave and come back home. I think we'd just stayed one night, and we came back. 
INT: And do-- do you remember, did you discuss anything like-- in the family about that sort of-- HS: I don't think so. I was too young. Remember, I was only seven, eight. So I-- I don't think-- I think those things were sort of kept away from-- you know, kept from me. Maybe my sister more so, but we had a very sort of a-- a loving home life. And yes, I-- I-- I remember birthday parties, and the table being laid with all the presents. And we used to celebrate Hanukkah and Christmas, so we got double presents, [LAUGHS] which was lovely. And you know, those things I remember. You know, things as you're talking to me, things are coming back to me. And--  INT: Tell me about a birthday. HS: Birthday-- well, I had a party. I've got some photographs, still, of all my friends at a party. And they all bought presents. And when I-- you know, the presents aren't unwrapped in Germany. So on the morning of your birthday, you walk into the room, and everything's laid out on the table. I remember that. And it was lovely. And we had a party. And sometimes, we used to spend-- my birthday fell maybe in the holidays, or we would make it. And when we were at our weekend house, we would have the parties there, which was lovely. Because I remember that, you know, all the children together, and we'd played games, and we had a lovely tea. And you came on the tram, because it was outside the town. You went by tram to this weekend house. The place was called [NON-ENGLISH]. And then in the evening, going home, all the children would be given a little lantern, and we would go march in the procession. We would all go back to the tram station, and you know. And then we would come back, and we would see my-- I would see my guests off on the tram. It was lovely. And we all walked along with these-- swinging our little lanterns. 
INT: Very nice. HS: Yes, I remember that.  INT: So, have you any other favorite-- HS: That's--  INT: --memories of yours? HS: Favorite memories? In-- in Stettin?  INT: Mm. HS: What are my favorite memories? I think, going tobogganing and going skating. Those were the sort of favorite memories, because the snow was wonderful. And you know, it was really winter, and we had wonderful winters. I think I remember that very well. And we used to go to Dresden for a holiday at Christmas, or in the holidays, again.  INT: Mm-hmm. HS: And there we went tobogganing and skiing, and stayed in a hotel, where we met up with a lot of friends of my parents and their children. And yes. I remember that. That was very nice.  INT: Did your parents ski with you? HS: No, they didn't. And there were always lots of squirrels. You had these lovely red squirrels in Dresden. And-- the red ones, not as we get here, but lovely red squirrels. And we used to feed the squirrels. You know, we had pictures taken of feeding the squirrels. And that was really lovely.  INT: Very nice. HS: And we had nice summer holidays as well. I remember going to the seaside-- a place called [GERMAN]. And you know, my father was always with us then, because he-- he loved being with us. But because he was-- I remember him, sort of, because he was older, he used to come home at lunchtime, and he'd have a rest in the afternoon. He'd go to sleep for a couple of hours, and then go back into the office and work some more. That was the custom in Germany. You would have a big lunch. My mother would expect him. We would have lunch. Because also, school starts very early, you see, in Germany-- before 8-- or at 8 o'clock. And then you come home lunchtime, and then you don't go back in the afternoon. 
INT: I see. So did you have to be quiet while your father was sleeping? HS: Yes, we did. [LAUGHS]  INT: And were you supposed to sleep as well? HS: No, no, we didn't sleep. We would play games. We had our-- our lovely-- we had our bedroom, and we had our [GERMAN], which is a-- a child's room, you know, like a playroom. And we would, you know, invite friends. And I think even sometimes our maid would take us out, because she was really nice. Now, yes, because she also was-- was like a nanny in a way. I don't think we had a separate nanny, because I remember an incident. I-- I used to have earrings, you know, it was the fashion in-- in Germany. We would wear earrings-- little-- even very little girls. I mean, it's a fashion here now, but it wasn't for many, many years. And I remember my nanny-- I just got out. She'd picked me out of the bath, and she was wearing a big shawl. And I put my arms around her neck, and the earring was caught-- got caught in her woolen shawl. And it pulled into the flesh. So we had to send for the doctor, and he had to take it out. It was bleeding a lot. You know, I must have been crying. And the doctor said to my mother, you know, little girls shouldn't wear earrings. So he rather frowned on it. [LAUGHS] That was one incident there. 
INT: And can you tell me any more about your summer holidays? Any other memories there? HS: Well, that one-- you know, it's funny how the things stick in your mind, and that nasty one, you know, when we were in the-- the-- trouble-- there were already the troubles. And otherwise, no. It was just lovely seaside holidays, as you would have-- your real family holidays.  INT: And-- HS: And we would also go-- I remember, though, we used to go at weekends. When we had had lunch, we'd walk down by the river and see the big ships. I remember that as well. And you know, just for a Sunday afternoon walk. And also, I remember my mother used to dress us alike for many, many years. I think until-- I think until I was about nine, until we moved to Leipzig.  INT: Did you mind that? HS: I don't think I did. I think my sister did. I think my sister did. She minded it.  INT: Was that of German-- HS: I--  INT: --custom, or just something your mother liked to do? HS: I think it was a German custom. It was a German custom, yes. Hmm.  INT: So were you-- HS: And she used to--  INT: --similar to your sister? HS: No, completely, completely different. She was dark, and I was fair-- I was blonde. And we were different in nature. And I don't know. I think maybe I was a bit spoiled, you know? But my-- my sister was sometimes a little bit-- sort of, she would do the opposite to what my mother said. But I think you get this with girls, very much. And I can see it now with my daughter-in-law and my granddaughter sometimes. 
INT: Right. So you stayed in Stettin till 1930s-- HS: About-- yeah, '36 or '37. But because--  INT: So why did you move? HS: --well, because there was trouble at the-- at the firm. It was a Jewish big store, Jewish store, called [GERMAN]. And very well-known. And they said that they had-- the books were-- weren't right. And the owner of the store fled to Switzerland. And my father was arrested and taken into custody, because he took the rap for it at the time. And he was imprisoned, in custody, for about a month. And I remember, my mother flew to Switzerland to see if she could talk to the owner and try and get him released. And I remember, we had a very good lawyer, because I remember, too, the lawyer coming to the flat. And-- and once my father-- my father was released-- he managed to get him released. And I remember my father coming home in the prison uniform. I remember that.  INT: Can you describe that to me? HS: And he was crying. It was with stripes. That was the prison uniform. I remember that, and he was crying bitterly. He was sort of crying with relief that he was home. And my parents invited the solicitor, or the lawyer, and they all-- I remember they stayed up all night, apparently. My mother used to tell me this in later years, that they stayed up all night talking about the whole thing. And so I think my father decided that he would move. But instead of moving, and perhaps leaving the country altogether, he-- he moved to another town and got a job in Leipzig. 
INT: I-- can I just-- HS: Because I think, you know, that the-- the German-- the-- the Jewish-- the Jews were very good Germans in those days, you know. They-- they were-- they-- they couldn't believe that anything was happening. And I think there was a language barrier. I think nowadays, it's different. It would be different.  INT: Can you tell me how you felt when your father was put in prison? HS: Well, I must have been very frightened about the whole thing, you know?  INT: Do you remember? HS: And I remember sort of going into bed with my mother, yes. And then my mother went off to Switzerland, and I think we were looked after by a nanny or by an aunt. And for that time. And-- but she was only away a few days. I was very frightened.  INT: And did your father take the blame because it was a Jewish shop? HS: Yes, well, they-- the Nazis blamed him, because it was a Jewish store.  INT: Was that the first time you were aware of-- of Nazis? HS: Yes, yes, mm-hmm.  INT: And did your parents-- HS: And--  INT: --talk to you then about that, or at all, or not? HS: No, no. I was too young. I don't think they did. No, they didn't.  INT: So how did you feel about leaving Stettin? HS: I suppose I just sort of accepted it. But I-- I remember-- and I don't know whether that was in Stettin, or whether that was later in Leipzig. Because then things snowballed even after we'd moved to Leipzig, you know, and things became worse-- towards the end of '30-- well, middle of '37-- end of '37 to '38. And we used to have to-- if you were standing in the street, and the Nazis were-- came marching along, you would have to stand still, and you would have to give the Hitler salute. Otherwise, you were just taken away. I remember standing there as a little girl having to do it-- you know, following my mother and my sister-- to take that. 
INT: And how did you feel? Do you remember how you felt? HS: I hated it. I was frightened. I used to be very frightened of men in uniform, and policemen, even when I came to England. I was frightened, at first, you know, until I-- I wasn't very-- you know, you didn't have any security. You feared.  INT: So when-- when you packed up your belongings to go to Leipzig, did you-- HS: Yes, it was sad leaving Leipzig, because we had-- we left all our friends. And we moved to Leipzig because of the job. I suppose my father said, no, it won't happen that side. I don't know. I-- I've never found-- I never found out why. I think he used to talk about-- and-- and when my mother told us, when we were here, that they used to talk about perhaps emigrating to Holland, or going to Holland-- which of course, would have been worse, still.  INT: So tell me about life in Leipzig. HS: When we came to Leipzig, again, we-- it was of course-- well, it was difficult, it was a changeover of schools, and-- and friends, making new friends, and everything, you know, and a new apartment. But that was also very nice. And-- but I believe it doesn't stand anymore today. I've never been back. I've never wanted to go back to my hometown. In fact, I never wanted to go back to Germany. I did go back with my husband, because being in the toy trade, he went to Nuremberg a couple of times, about 10, 15 years ago. And I would go with, as interpreter. And the-- the thing that I hated most was that, because it said in my passport, born in Germany-- although I was British. I-- you know, my mother and I became naturalized Britain-- British before I married my husband. And I just hated that, that they would see this, you know, at the border, that I was born in Germany. But I did go back, but I was always very pleased to leave. And I acted-- and-- and even in-- a couple of years ago, we went back to Berlin, actually, at the invitation of the-- the mayor of Berlin, which was very nice, because I had spent many, many months with my aunt in-- in this aunt who lived in Berlin. And we had-- it was a really-- they looked after us, I must say, very well. But I-- I was completely English. I just, you know, I felt like a-- an-- a foreigner in another country. I felt I had no affinity with it at all. And I was very proudly English. 
INT: Tell me about the flat in Leipzig. Can you describe it to me? HS: Yes, it was also big, and there was a river running right by the flat. And I remember, too, there was a-- a very large attic-- an attic in the-- in the block of flats. And we-- you would be allowed to use part of this attic. Each flat was allocated a part of the attic. And we used to store apples up there. Huge trays of apples we used to store for the-- right through for the winter, which is a really wonderful idea. [LAUGHS] And--  INT: Did you pick them? HS: --yes. No, no, I think we bought them. We bought them. I can't remember. Although, we had our own apples, you see? We'd-- oh, no, that was in Stettin. We must have been the same in Stettin, where we also had an attic. And we used to pick the apples from our trees in the little weekend house. Yes, we did.  INT: So was life difficult for you in Leipzig? HS: Well, that's when it became difficult-- going to school and seeing, yes, we had-- by that time, we had-- you know, the troubles were beginning. That was in '38. I mean, it was really beginning. Because we had stones thrown up at the windows. And although we knew neighbors and people in the street, you know, they didn't-- didn't talk to us. And--  INT: You didn't live in a Jewish area? HS: No, not at all. No, we didn't live in a Jewish area. We lived in a very nice part of the town, I remember. It was a very nice part, with the river running alongside. And not far away were the universities. And we used to go roller skating there, because it was asphalt. It was wonderful near there. You know, because in Germany, it's nearly all cobbled streets. But this part, it was all asphalt. But I believe it was, you know, bombed all-- don't know what happened. I mean, I don't know what happened, in [INAUDIBLE], but though, in that time, we used to go there roller skating. 
INT: And-- and your father had no problem getting a job in Leipzig? HS: No, he must have got the job. And again, the same sort of position as that. And you know, those were the problems-- until he was taken off the street. He was-- he was arrested while going over to the barber shop. And that day, I hadn't gone with him. I used to like going with him, because I'd sit there and read all the magazines. And he used to sort of say I was his lucky mascot. And this day, I'd been invited to some friends, and I didn't accompany him. And on the way back, he was arrested.  INT: We'll just stop the tape there and carry it on in a minute. Thank you.  INT: Can we just go back to Stettin? Is there anything else you would like to tell me about your mother in-- in Stettin? HS: Yes, I remember my mother used to have a season ticket for the theater. And she would go every Saturday afternoon, which was sort of her treat.  INT: Did you ever go with her? HS: I suppose to some sort of very light things, yes. We must have gone, yes, we did go. Because it was the Stadttheater in Stettin. It was a very nice building.  INT: And did your father go as well? HS: He went sometimes, yes. But maybe he was working, you see. I think it must have been in the week. Maybe it wasn't on a Saturday and because we were-- had finished school, and we were able to go with. But she used to go. That was her treat. She used to go with her friends. 
INT: Very nice. HS: Yes, very nice.  INT: And anything else about going to school in Stettin? HS: Yes, I-- I remember actually when I started school-- matter of fact, I have a photograph of it. And in Germany, it's the custom to have a big bag of sweets so that you enjoy your first day at school. And it was called an Schultüte. And in fact, when I went back to Nuremberg at the Toy Fair, I saw a stand with all these Schultüten. And I wish-- and I bought one and brought it over to England just as a reminder of my childhood. And that was very nice, actually, so that you felt quite happy going to school.  INT: That was a German custom? HS: That was a German custom, yes. It was in-- in Stettin when I was a little girl, yes. And you know, the bigger the bag, of course, the better. [LAUGHS] That's-- and that was a lovely memory, yes.  INT: Did you share it with other friends? HS: Oh yes, you'd share it with your friends. Well, everybody had a bag. Just everybody in the class who'd started school had bag sweets and fruit, maybe biscuits, cookies.  INT: So going to school, you would-- you would go by yourself, or the maid or your mother would take you, or-- HS: Yes, she would have taken me, yes.  INT: The maid, or your mother? HS: Sometimes-- I think sometimes the maid, sometimes my mother. But we would go on the tram because of all the trams in-- in Stettin, and that's how we went, by tram, I think. 
INT: So it must have been quite difficult for you to leave Stettin. HS: It was, yes. I suppose it was. And I think we had bicycles, too. We used to go cycling, which we then took to-- to Leipzig with us. But yes, it must have been.  INT: Do you remember if you cried when you left? HS: I think I did. Yes, I think I did.  INT: So let's go on to Leipzig. You were saying your father was in the barber shop? HS: Yes.  INT: And you usually went with him. HS: Yes.  INT: You-- you went with him-- you always went with him, did you? HS: Nearly always, yes. I always went with him because I used to enjoy reading all the magazines while he had his hair cut. I suppose I was Daddy's little girl.  INT: Did you go-- did he go regularly to the barber? HS: Yes. I suppose every three or four weeks, I suppose, yes, he did.  INT: And why did you not go that particular day? HS: I was invited to some friends, and for some reason I suppose it was-- maybe it was a birthday party or something, so I was invited to out. And I didn't go then. I just remember my mother then telephoning and saying that because my father was arrested and didn't come home, and she was getting very worried, where was he? Two men-- plainclothes men-- you know, you know, but not in uniform, plainclothes-- men had taken him to the police station. And she got a phone call from the police station to say, your husband has been arrested and he will be sent to Buchenwald. And would you please just bring-- take his personal belongings, but just bring some warm clothes. And she must have phoned then and asked me to come home, and I suppose my sister-- maybe my sister was with me, but I don't remember that. And we came home, and my father was gone. 
INT: How did you feel? HS: Terrible. Very upset. Cried, of course.  INT: And what about your mother? HS: My mother, too. She was distraught. Didn't know what was going to happen. Of course she was. It was a very sad time.  INT: So how long was he in Buchenwald? HS: My father was in Buchenwald six weeks. But because he'd served in the First World War and had won medal, he was released. But we had a card from Buchenwald from him to say-- you know, I have the card. And it just said, please, don't send any money and don't send any food. Just send me some more warm clothes. This is-- we know why he was there, and we didn't know if he was coming home or what was going to happen. But before that, we had an-- an incident when-- when I was just telling you when the windows were broken and so on. And this is before the Kristallnacht when all the synagogues were burned. And the Nazi boots came up the street and they stopped at the front door. I mean, this was quite a usual practice. You know, they would do this. And they stopped, and my mother quickly hid us in the bedroom, turned all the lights out. I remember that vividly. She hid us behind the bed and hid my father as well. And we heard the boots coming up, and we had to be as quiet as mice. And the boots just marched up and came-- sort of came to our-- we were on the first floor. And then they walked upstairs. And they-- they apparently arrested the man from upstairs and then they left. You can imagine how frightened one was, I mean, as a child. 
INT: I'm sure. HS: Was very frightening.  INT: Yes, it must have been very difficult for you. HS: It was. It was very difficult. And that sort of, you know, sticks in your mind.  INT: How would you have been then? HS: I was 10. I was 9 or 10. That was already in Leipzig.  INT: Right. So was this your first real experience of antisemitism? HS: Yes, yes.  INT: This was-- HS: --except for the-- no, that-- when I told you--  INT: Yes. HS: --we went on holiday and so on. And there were notices then gradually, you know, you were not allowed to go to this restaurant or that restaurant. You would just-- different places had notices up. You know, Jews not allowed.  INT: So what year was your father arrested? HS: That was in the beginning of-- that must have been the beginning of-- or in-- in '30-- '38. '38, beginning of '38.  INT: Right, so '37 already there were lots of evidence on the streets. HS: Yes, yes. And even, I think, earlier than that. I-- I think so.  INT: Right, and-- HS: But in those years from, you know, '36 onward, '35, that I knew of, really--  INT: Right. HS: --as speaking from my own personal experiences.  INT: Did you ever ask your parents what was going on? Do you remember that? HS: [SIGHS] I don't think so. I was just very frightened. I mean, I didn't know what-- what had happened. Why didn't-- why wasn't Daddy there? Why were we on our own? But I suppose with friend-- you know, we had lots of friends. And of course, it was then after the Kristallnacht, which was in 1938 when all the synagogues were burned at night, and the next morning going to school. 
INT: Can you describe that to me? HS: Yes, yes. We-- we got up and we went to school as usual. We had just seen sort of in the distance there were flames that night, and you could hear the fire engines going. But of course, we didn't really know whether my mother-- whether, you know, Jewish people surmised, I don't know. But we were on the tram, and I remember vividly sort of people laughing and talking about it. You know, synagogues [NON-ENGLISH]. And I don't know. I had a most terrible feeling. And we got off the tram at the stop-- the usual stop. I was with my sister. And as we walked along towards the school, the teachers came towards us and said, go home, go home because the school was burned to the ground.  INT: So how did you feel? HS: I felt terrible, of course, and very, very frightened. I just wanted to get back home-- very frightened.  INT: And-- HS: And I don't know-- I don't know whether that somebody-- we-- I suppose we just got on the tram and went home. I know my mother wasn't there then, but I don't know.  INT: So-- but during the night of Kristallnacht, you were in the flat? HS: We were in the flat, yes. I just remember sort of in the distance seeing flames, or seeing red-- the skyline red and people running around and rushing about but not anything from then. I don't know whether my mother knew-- knew then what-- what was happening, but I just remember going on the tram and going to school the next day, being told to go home. 
INT: And at this point, though, your father was still with you, is that correct? HS: Yes. At the Kristallnacht, he was still with us.  INT: He was still with you. Right. HS: Yes.  INT: So after that-- HS: He must have been then with us, because after that-- or was it before? It might even have been during that time because that was November, wasn't it? 1938, it was November. So I think he had already been-- he had already been taken away-- arrested and taken to Buchenwald. Because then came the cry, you know, send the children away. My mother heard from friends that there was going to be a Kindertransport, the first ones. Because the Jewish community in England had got together with the refugee movement in Germany. And they said, you know, send the children away. And my mother, being on her own, had to make that decision to send us two girls away, not knowing whether she'd ever see us again. And she had to take that decision on her own.  INT: Did she-- HS: So that was-- that's something.  INT: Did she talk to you about that at all? HS: Well, we were just-- we knew that we had to go, that we were going to go, send away. And I remember the night before we left, you know, we were in-- in bed with my mother. And I kept saying, Mummy, please don't send us away.  INT: And what did she say to you? HS: Well, she told us, you know, it was-- it was for the best and that we-- you know, we would be saved, or we would be all right. And she would see us again. You know, she assured us that she would see us again. But she didn't know at that time. So that was very hard for her. 
INT: Sure. Do you remember what you packed in your bag? HS: I packed the things that I wanted, I think. A doll I took, and I took my little locket. I had a locket around my neck with a photograph of my parents-- and some clothes. And of course, we weren't allowed to take any money or anything. And we knew then the next day we were going to go and all meet together in Berlin. So we went to stay in Berlin overnight. You know, we-- we went to Berlin the next-- the next day, and then all went to-- the first Kindertransport left from Berlin. And that's when we knew. And I didn't have any-- I just came with my sister. The friends, I think, came differently. They didn't come on that first Kindertransport.  INT: But you weren't able to say goodbye to your father? HS: No, of course not. No, he wasn't there.  INT: So it must have been very difficult for you. HS: It was. It was very difficult. It was very heart rending, as you can imagine.  INT: So how long was the time between the Kristallnacht, really, and-- and the decision-- and your mother's decision? HS: Well, we-- we left at the end of November. So it was during that month. It was the end of November that we crossed over to England, that we came with the first Kindertransport. We came to England on the 30th of November and arrived in England on the 1st of December. And-- 
INT: So during those sort of three weeks, do you remember-- I mean, did your mother tell you much beforehand, or how-- HS: About what to expect?  INT: No. HS: No, no, not anything really.  INT: About that you-- she was going to send you on the Kindertransport. HS: Well, she told us that she was going to send us with-- with other children, and that she would see us again. She assured us she would see us again. But of course, she didn't know that. She was telling a white lie. How did she know?  INT: And how did you feel inside? HS: Terrible. I mean as I say, you know, I didn't want to go. I just kept saying, please, please don't send us away. But you know, she-- she was determined. And she had been advised, because you know, friends had said that this was the best thing to do. It was the only thing to do, save the children. And--  INT: So you got to Berlin. HS: And we got to Berlin, and we all met, those 500 children the next morning on the platform at the Hauptbahnhof in Berlin. And we all got into carriages, each one with a little case with the labels round our necks, you know, to say that we were coming, and a name on it. And just-- we were only allowed 10 marks each to take with us. And I had my toys, I suppose, or my favorite doll, things like that. And we were allocated different carriages, and you can imagine the scene on the-- the station. 
INT: Must've been very difficult. HS: People crying. It was-- it was difficult, yes, yes. It was very heartrending. And you know, and as the train pulled away, everybody was waving goodbye, trying to be cheerful. And in a way, it's strange. Because perhaps with children, then suddenly because of the-- it's almost like an adventure. You know, once-- once you had left. Because once you had said goodbye to-- to your mother, that-- that was it, you know. And then you sort of all settled down in the. train. And then the next thing was when we got to the border, the train was stopped. And the Nazis boarded the train. This was-- we were still in Germany. Here was Holland, here was the border. And they came in one-- one Nazi to each compartment. They pulled down the blind, and we were made to stand up in-- in the-- in the gangway. And they pulled all the cases down from the racks, and they threw everything about, everything-- looking for money, looking for jewelry, or anything of value. They made us hand over 10 marks. They took my little locket, and other children had to-- you know, had Mogen Dovids and so on. I had a Mogen Dovid, as well, which I brought over with me. Yes, that went. I mean, that's what they did. You can imagine how frightened we were. And there was one little girl who I think she-- her mother had her prep-- prepared her for becoming an adult. And so she had this-- these few sanitary towels. You can imagine how she felt. It was-- it was really that-- you know, things like that which they couldn't have cared less. And then they just left the train and marched out. And we had to sort of try and find our belongings again, put them back in little cases. I mean, we were only allowed a little case. And as the train started again, you know, we let the blinds up. And we sort of hung out of the windows, and-- and we shouted. As soon as each carriage was across the border, we shouted at them, you know, we shouted. Thank goodness, you know. I don't know what we shouted, but I remember shouting. And we crossed, and I suppose we just all realized we were free. We were suddenly-- you know, we're free. Must be. And then we were-- when we got to the first station in Holland, that was wonderful. Because on the platform, there was a Red Cross, large, huge trolleys with sweets, and drinks, and hot drinks, and everything you could desire, and all these sort of lovely people handing up, you know, things to the children. That was very nice. And we had escaped. 
INT: And did you make friends at all on-- on that train? HS: Yes, yes. On-- well you know, as much as-- well, we didn't know where we were going. So I suppose you made friends a little bit. I mean, the friendships came later. I think you just sort of-- you were with your family or-- or sisters, or brothers, you know. And I was with my sister.  INT: And how old were you? HS: I was-- I was 11, and she was 14.  INT: So do you remember anything else about that journey? HS: Oh, yes. When we crossed, we were-- when we got to the hook of Holland, it was getting dark. And we all got on board ship, and it was a terrible night. It was a terribly stormy night crossing over to-- to Harwich. And nearly everybody was ill up on board. I mean, we didn't sleep. You know, we had-- I think-- I don't even remember having a cabin. We were just sort of-- I think-- we were everywhere because there were 500 children with this first transport. And it was a really awful journey anyway. We got-- we arrived the next morning. I suppose the excitement, and the having left our parents-- the whole-- you know, your emotions are just-- you just don't know. It was so mixed up. And the next morning, we all got dressed, and we went in for breakfast. And we were told to assemble again on deck. And as we assembled on deck, coats on with our little-- with our labels around our neck. And we looked down on the quayside, and it was just hundreds and hundreds of photographers, photographers rolling, and cameras rolling. And there were pictures taken, which I didn't discover until many, many years later when I went to an exhibition at the Wiener Library because I didn't even know these pictures had been taken except one, which was-- appeared in the And I-- I've had that many, many years. And there, the-- I must've looked quite sort of pathetic or something, you know, or really this poor little lost soul. And bewildered, I should think is the right word. And the-- a-- a photographer came and-- must have been a journalist or photographer. And he came, took my hand, and pressed something into my hand, which I think was two and [? sixpenny P, ?] a coin. And he led me to the gangplank and called a nurse over. And I had my picture taken. He was looking at the label around my neck, and I've got that picture. And that little girl walking down on the plank-- gangplank appears every-- you know, every year when they celebrate-- or not celebrate. But when the pictures of the Kristallnacht and the Holocaust come again on the television, there's this little girl walking down the gangplank. It's just a snippet, and that's me. [LAUGHS] And-- 
INT: How does it feel when you look at that? HS: I'm very moved. You know, you start to-- somehow that you relive the whole thing.  INT: Of course. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] Must have been very difficult for you. HS: Yes, because you didn't know-- you didn't know what was going to happen to you. You didn't know what-- you know, where you were-- where you were going, or what was going to happen to you. Except you were-- you were all together-- all these children together. And from then, we were-- we went on a train, and we came-- arrived at-- we knew it was Dovercourt Holiday Camp. And it was a [INAUDIBLE] holiday camp. And you can imagine in the middle of winter-- this was in the winter, December-- freezing cold. And we were all in chalets, four to a chalet. And-- but everybody was-- you know, people around were very kind. And we had-- we-- we-- you know, we had our meals in a main hall, and we learned to speak English, and we learned to-- to learn-- we learned English songs. And we had very good food while sitting at long trestle tables. And the one thing that we didn't like were kippers, and porridge we had to get used to. And I've never liked porridge since. [LAUGHS] Kippers I quite like. And-- but it was very cold. You-- if you wanted to go out in the middle of the night, you had to go to the toilets in the middle of the night, you had to go outside. And from there, you were allocated-- or, you know, people in England said that they would take children into their homes. And some would come down and say-- sort of ask the people who were in charge, you know, where does this little girl come from, or that little boy? Or you know, how old is that one? Because they tried to get the same age group. And then they would say, well, I'll-- I'll have this boy, or I'll have this girl. You know, they would then choose them there and then. And then we were suddenly told one day that we were coming to London, that we were coming away from-- from the camp, and we were going to be fostered by families. But unfortunately, they couldn't find a place for my sister and I in the same family. So she was-- but we were both coming to London. And-- 
INT: How did you feel-- HS: Well--  INT: --to be separated from your sister? HS: Terrible. Because you know, having been separated once from your mother, and here we were going to have-- there was going to be another separation, which was very hard to take. That was really very difficult. And I didn't realize-- well, that didn't sort of-- I didn't feel that until I-- I was in my new home when I arrived there in the evening. You know, we arrived there during the day, but that same evening when I spoke to my sister on the phone, you know, that-- that was very hard to take to be separated again. But I didn't mention, of course, that the strange thing was that the night that we crossed that-- from November to the 1st of December, my father was released from the concentration camp. And he arrived at the flat, and there was-- the door was locked. There was nobody there. He must have had a key. I suppose he'd been allowed a key, because he came in and my mother had left him a note, which I have to this day to say that, my darling husband, when-- if you come-- if you are released, if you should happen to come home and we are not here, please phone these friends and you will find out what has happened. And the shock for him must have been tremendous. And he just-- after that, he just could never go into our bedroom. He-- until he came to England. You know, I mean, he-- he was-- he was sort of finished. You know, his girls had gone. They'd been taken away. And this must have been very hard for my mother when she went back and sort of, you know, came face to face with him again to explain what she had done. But he just-- he just couldn't enter our room. And-- but that was-- wasn't that strange coincidence? It was that night that he was released while we crossed to England. 
INT: So why was he actually released? HS: Because he'd served in the First World War, and he'd won some medals and I think a cross-- the Iron Cross or something. And he was in the cavalry-- served in the cavalry for Germany in 1914, '18 war. And that was why he was released. A few of them were released that day.  INT: All right. So your parents stayed in Leipzig, is that right? HS: My parents stayed in Leipzig, yes. And I don't know, they-- because then when we arrived here in England and I went to the-- my-- this foster family, they met-- when we-- when we were told we were coming to London. So we came on the train, and our foster parents met us. And there was this very, very kind looking couple standing on the platform. And they sort of beckoned-- they knew it was me. I was-- was coming to them. And my sister was with me, and her lady was there, too. And then I knew I was coming to this family. So we exchanged-- we said goodbye to each other. And you know--  INT: Did you cry. HS: Yes, of course we did. Of course we did. Cried bitterly. I mean, there's so many times that one's cried. Anyway, so we said goodbye, and we exchanged telephone numbers, and we would phone that same night and speak to each other on the phone. And I went off in a-- in a car-- a chauffeur-driven car. And this lovely couple were sitting in the back and being comforted and driving past St. Paul's. That's where his-- this-- my foster father, his business was in St. Paul's, and he was pointing out things. And he knew a few words of Yiddish. Mine was a Jewish family. My sister was going to a non-Jewish lady. And when she arrived there, apparently what I heard in the evening when we telephoned each other that she had wanted her to look after her baby. And the minute she'd got her into the flat, she sort of said, I'm going out shopping. My-- my sister was 14. She'd never known how, you know, to deal with a baby. And she went out shopping and left her with this baby. So she was-- you know, and when we spoke to each other on the phone, she was crying that end of the phone, I was crying this end. And it was-- but my foster father, Uncle Harry as I called him always-- I called them Auntie Kitt an Uncle Harry. Because she always said, I'm not going to take your parents' place. You know, I am-- you have your mother, you have a father, and I'm just an auntie to you. They were absolutely wonderful people. And they could sense that there was something which was really very remiss. And then in a few days, they managed to have my sister fostered by a brother. So we were both in-- with brother and sister in the same family in this large family in Ealing, which was really very nice in the end. 
INT: Did you speak any English when you first went there? HS: Not a word. Not one word.  INT: So it must have been very difficult. HS: And I just knew through the-- you, know-- he-- my Uncle Harry would speak a few words in Yiddish or sort of German, and that was all. I-- no, nothing. I came into the house, and there was this lovely coal fire burning. And the maid made us some lunch and brought in the lunch, and everybody was just so kind.  INT: Do you remember how you felt? HS: Terrible. I felt-- you know, I felt because it was in this-- can you imagine how you would feel in-- in a strange country in a strange house with strange people? How do you feel? You feel terrible. And-- and not even with your sister now-- you know, I mean, at least I'd been with my sister having left my mother and my home. And anyway, they were so wonderful. And, you know, the days passed, and--  INT: Did you cry a lot that first day? HS: Yes, I did. The first day, I cried all day. Yes, I did. And--  INT: Did they have any children of their own? HS: Yes, yes. They had two children. That's why they-- they wanted me to be a sort of-- it would be nice for them, and it would be nice for me. And so they took me into their home. But as it turned out, I was more of the age of the son than the daughter, and he was my brother-- my new brother, my newfound brother. And-- but you know, we shared a bedroom, and they were-- they were just wonderful. They were so kind, all of them. And they took me into their home, and I was treated like one of their own children. In fact, it used to be, you know, when it was Christmas-- or Hanukkah, Auntie Kitt would say, you know, to the-- to her own children, if I can't afford to buy a present for you and for Helga, then you're not going to get one at all. So everything was shared, and I-- I-- I had exactly the same things as they did. And in fact, my education, which was wonderful because she wanted-- her own daughter went to Haberdashers'. And she wanted me to go to a-- a good school. And she went to Haberdashers' to see if perhaps they would do something towards this refugee problem at the time. The-- you know, the war effort-- or this is before the war, of course-- towards this problem with the Jews or trying to help all these Jewish children. And-- but Haberdashers' wouldn't do anything about it. And then she went to the other school, Notting Hill and Ealing High School. And I remember going with her to see the headmistress. She'd made an appointment. And there was this lovely lady wearing her gown from college or from university. And she was very kind, and she's-- she arranged with the board of deputies. She spoke to the board of Deputies. And so I was adopted by the school. So Auntie Kitt and Uncle Harry didn't have to pay for my education. They paid for my uniform and things like that. But I had-- so I was very lucky, was, indeed, very lucky. I'd found a wonderful home, and that's how I started learning English then. 
INT: Did you learn English in their home, or did you have lessons? HS: Well, I had lessons. And before I had-- even I had elocution lessons privately until I-- and then I--I gradually picked it up. You know, you do-- you just do learn. It's the only way to learn a language is to actually go to the country. And I learned to speak English-- took time. And then these-- this lovely family knew that to the-- you know, what was going to happen to my parents. Or they-- so they helped to get my parents out of Germany. And they guaranteed.  INT: OK. We'll just stop with tape there. Thank you. HS: Right. Do you want--  INT: --adopt your brother and sister? HS: Very well, really very well-- they were-- they were really very kind, you know. And maybe they realized that I couldn't speak English. And, and very kind, they were wonderful. I suppose we had our squabbles, like any children. But, you know, we, we went to synagogue. And we had Friday nights. And it was a lovely family. They really were. And they were most wonderful people.  INT: Can you give me a happy, a favorite memory from them? HS: Well, there's so many. I can't really give you just one. I mean, there are very--  INT: OK. Give me-- give me a few. HS: --very, very favorite happy memories, because-- [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] what can I tell you? It was such a happy home. And the cousins used to come at the weekend, and we would have parties. And we would have Friday nights. Or they would go out and go to synagogue. We would-- everything was shared. And I had a-- and I had shared the bedroom with my adopt-- my, my, my, my foster, foster sister. But she's really my sister. I always look upon her as my sister. It was very-- we are very close, even now. My brother, sadly-- or my adopted brother, sadly died a few years ago. But-- so that was a great loss to all of us. But they-- they've been absolutely marvelous. Everything was shared. 
INT: So you were very lucky. HS: I was very lucky, yes.  INT: Did you feel lucky? HS: I felt happy, I suppose. And, and I felt-- I think I felt secure suddenly. You know, it was a normal life. And Auntie Kitt also sort of-- she bought me an English school uniform. She wanted me to be completely English, because she didn't want me to have any more troubles after all those terrible weeks that I'd been through, and my sister. And she didn't want us to have any trouble. And so she-- it wasn't referred to, you know, anything German. Even my clothes, I had some lovely clothes bought for me and some given to me. And-- but they were very English because the continental clothes that I came in were very continental. I mean, we have the styles now for the children, but not in those days. And she just didn't want me to have any more problems, that the people would say, you know, where's this child come from somewhere that I was a refugee. She didn't want it. She was wonderful. They used to call her, actually-- she was always looking after people who didn't have as much as she had. And, you know, and she-- and she used to be called Salvation Kate because her name was Kitt-- Kitty. And she was just very, very kind. But she always sort of-- she-- then I wrote letters to my parents. And they then got together with the community in Ealing, the Jewish community. And this community decided to set up a hostel for refugee boys. And then they guaranteed a family with brothers and sisters, and guaranteed for my parents to leave Germany, if they could, if they could get visas to, to come out of Germany, that they would guarantee for them and keep them until my father could find a job. And you know, and-- so therefore, once this hostel was formed, they then said that my mother could have the job as cook, hired a cook, housekeeper. And there was another lady who was the matron of the hostel. And this is the only way my mother could come out of Germany, as a domestic, and my father too. So they managed to get-- and I think we were actually on a list to go to America. We had a number to go to America. So we were supposed to be in transit. But once my parents arrived, which was-- I mean, Auntie Kitt and Uncle Harry, when my parents came, thought they would never be there on the station, on the platform, that that train would come and they wouldn't be on it. But they were. 
INT: Tell me about that. HS: So they, they managed to escape. Well, that was a most wonderful reunion, as you can imagine. And they seemed to sort of gel very well with this-- with my wonderful foster parents, my parents. And, you know, here I suddenly had two, two of everything. And it was-- it was wonderful. And so they set them up in this hostel. And my mother was the cook there.  INT: In what year did your parents arrive? HS: '39, May '39, just before the war. And of course, here, you know, one already knew there were problems and whether there would be a war. So I mean, I think it was a wonderful thing for these people to do for my family, my Auntie Kitt and Uncle Harry. I mean, how did they know how they were going to survive if war came? How did he know? And yet he took on the responsibility of another family.  INT: Did you ask him, or he just said to you, I'm going to do it? HS: They just did it. They just did it.  INT: All right. HS: Didn't ask me, no. Why should they ask me? I mean, they were doing their, their, their sort of, you know, what they felt they had to do. They had to help.  INT: So when did you-- HS: I mean, there were a lot of Jewish people who were wonderful, and a lot of Jewish people who gave a lot of money. But whether-- but there weren't that many, I don't think, who took children into their home. I don't know. I can't-- I don't know. I mean, all in all, with the Kindertransport, there were 10,000 children came, from the first one in December until the beginning of the war, came to England. I mean, England was wonderful. 
INT: Mm. So tell me about how you heard that your parents were going to come out? How did you feel? HS: Well, we'd written, and they wrote back. And they said, oh, you know, it's wonderful. Meet us at the station. And I have the telegram still. Meet us at the station so-and-so. And we're arriving on that day. It was wonderful. It was a great reunion. I mean, it was very lucky that my father was released. It was one of those miracles, you know, that don't-- didn't happen very often. Because my father, actually, after he arrived in England, he, he was a broken man. I mean, he'd been through so much already, you know, in the concentration camp. He used to tell us, you know, how he had-- that they had to go and-- in the quarry and had to build roads and this sort of thing. And he was even-- he was then about 60. Because as I told you, my father was older than my mother by 16 years. And so to me, he was always, you know, older. And he had-- they had a terrible time, I mean. And he didn't live very long. He, he died in 1947. He just couldn't take it, you know, coming to the-- not knowing the language and having had to give everything up, handing it over on a plate. Because they came with nothing. His life savings being taken, his life insurances, life savings, everything. You had to give up a, a-- what was it called? [NON-ENGLISH], you know. You had to give all your money, hand it over. So he had to, you know, try and start again. And he just, because he couldn't speak English, he didn't get a job. But then the hostel was there. And my mother worked there. And I used to go home after school. I would always go to the hostel and say hello to my parents and then come home to my home, do my homework, et cetera, you know, lead a completely normal child's life and school life. And so I was never stopped seeing my parents or anything. I mean, these people just didn't take over. They encouraged me to be with my parents, spend-- I used to spend my weekends with my parents. You know, go there after lunch and be together. But then, of course, unfortunately, the beginning of the war and war came, my parents were interned. But this happened, of course, to all German refugees. And again, they were separated, which was hard to take. Because my mother went to Douglas. The women were all taken to Douglas. And my father went to another town, Erin, I think-- I can't remember the name of it-- on the Isle of Man. And my mother, because when they were all sort of rounded up and when these men came and said you've got to be interned, and they had to pack again-- I remember being there, actually, which was quite dramatic, again, that they had to leave. And my mother spent one night in Pentonville Prison. This is where all the women were taken to until they were sorted out, and then taken off to the Isle of Man. And my father did tell us afterwards the story that when they all were sort of-- they were all given an-- a category, A, B, and C. And, and there was somebody in front of him, and they, they-- and then-- there were two people. And my father said he remembered this, this man from the concentration camp, somebody he met up with. And this man saw that there was another person, who actually was a Nazi, was trying-- who had come over, who recognized him. My father hadn't, but through a friend, you know. And he used to tell us a story how somebody was recognized, tried to come over as a refugee. Yes. 
INT: How did you-- how did you feel-- HS: And they were away for six months.  INT: --watching your parents pack up their belongings? HS: That was very sad. I know that was terrible to be taken away again. But, you know, they couldn't-- you couldn't help it. They couldn't help it. But I mean, how did they knew who was a good and who wasn't good. And then gradually, of course, they were released after six months and came back to the hostel. And then the hostel was dissolved because all the boys were either had found jobs. They were in-- ranging in ages from 14 to 17 and 18. And so you can imagine what hard work that was for my mother, not having been used to it, you know. We used to-- I used go and help her peel potatoes. They would have buckets full of potatoes to peel. You didn't have a potato peeler in those days-- feeding 20 boys, hungry boys between those ages. But anyway, you know, you survive. And you just carry on. And you pick yourself up. It's amazing what, what human nature can do.  INT: Did you ever feel divided between your mother and your-- HS: What, my affections?  INT: Yes. HS: That's a good question. I, I don't think so, no. I don't think so. I was very fond of the family, but then this was my mother, my real mother. But my Auntie Kitt was, was like a mother. They were both. And, and he was. He was so loving and, and so wonderful. 
INT: And was your sister equally as lucky as you? HS: Not quite, because she was older. And then in the war she had to do war work. And she was in a-- worked in a factory. And also, because she came to my Aunt Kitt's brother, and he had a young family, and he sent-- I mean, she was in a very, very happy home. She had a lovely home as well. But because she was older-- and he sent his family over to Jamaica to get away from the war. But Inge couldn't go with. He couldn't afford it. So she stayed here with the grandmother, and she lived with the grandmother. And she, sadly, always said in later years that she was abandoned. And she was abandoned twice. She was abandoned by my mother. And she always said my mother abandoned us. Now I, I could never see that. I think my mother did the most wonderful thing, as it so turned out, you know. Look what happened in other cases. But she did the thing that she felt right to do. So it wasn't abandoned. She sent us to freedom. At least she thought-- she felt that at least we would be saved, even if she wouldn't-- she and, and her husband, my father wouldn't be saved. I suppose I would do the same thing. I don't know. And I know what a terrible thing it must have been, because when I look at my granddaughter now, you know, when she was 11-- she's 12 now. And I sort of think, what a terrible thing for my mother to have had to do, what a decision to take on her own, without my father there at the time. You know, when I look at this little girl, it brings it home. Anyway, so I mean, she was in a very good home as well. And she had to do war work. And she, she then joined the American Forces because they had-- in the war, at the end of-- this is the end of the war, she joined the Civil Censorship Division with the American Forces. They wanted people who could interpret and translate. So she went back to Germany, to Frankfurt. Meantime, I had a normal life. And I took my school certificate, my matriculation. And then, of course, it was the war, during the war. We were evacuated at the beginning of the war. 
INT: Where to? HS: In, in-- we were on holiday. I was on holiday. I went with my foster family. We went to Devon. And we stayed in Barnstaple. We stayed down there when war was declared. We were there on holiday in September. You know, it was the beginning of September. August holiday, we were there. And we stayed in Barnstaple. And we were there for a-- about two years. And then we came back to London.  INT: So in that two years, you didn't see your parents. Is that correct? HS: Yes. No, I didn't see my parents.  INT: And how did you feel about that? HS: Well, we corresponded. You know, I was growing up. I knew that they were in London and that they were-- they had been released from the-- I mean, they had come home from the Isle of Man. And they were able to continue their life. And then things were all right, you know. And I think we just, you know, we corresponded. And I knew they were here. I don't know whether I came-- I didn't-- we didn't come up to London. No, we didn't come up to London. I mean, the, the, all the wives and children stayed in Barnstaple. And the husbands used to come at weekends. So, you know, this is my foster-- my Uncle Harry, my foster father. And so--  INT: Do you remember being scared with the air-- with bombs? HS: With the bombs and things? 
INT: Yes. HS: Yes, very much so. Mm-hm. It was-- we were. I mean, when we came back to London, you know, we had all the flying bombs and so on. And we used to go to a shelter at the corner of the street. Because I still lived with my family, and my parents were still in the hostel. But then when the hostel was dissolved, my, my parents-- my Uncle Harry saw that they had a flat. And they took in boarders. And that's how my mother then made her living. You know, we let rooms.  INT: And was that near your foster family house? HS: Yes. Yes, just within minutes, you know, walking distance, or I had a bicycle. I used to cycle there. I spent all my time with my parents. I mean, a lot of my time with my parents, if I wasn't doing something with the synagogue or schoolwork or whatever.  INT: Did you find it easy to make friends here? HS: Yes, I made friends at school--  INT: When you first went to school? HS: --and in the community. Yes, when I first went to school. Everybody was very protective of me as well, I must say. You know, this little girl who couldn't speak a word of English. And everybody was very kind, I remember-- the teachers and also the children. I had some very nice friends.  INT: Nobody sort of taunted you or anything because you were Jewish and-- HS: No. No, not at all. I found no antisemitism in England whatsoever. In fact, my parents, because they weren't allowed to bring any money, they did send us over a bicycle each when we were first arrived, you know, to my family. And the bicycles, of course, the German bicycles had very wide wheels, the rims of the wheels. And so Auntie Kitt said, no, you're not going to have those bicycles. So they gave them away or sold them. And I got an English bicycle, because she didn't want me to be taunted. And this was a, you know, a German bike-- that I was different. 
INT: Now, and what was it like going into the shelter? HS: That we used to go nearly every night. We used to go in the shelter at the-- at the corner of the road. And well, whenever there was a-- the sirens were going and, and the bombs were coming over, we used to go to the shelter. It became a way of life, going into the shelters, actually. And in fact, in the end I took my school certificate in the shelters in 1945, in the dining room, which was in the cellars of this-- well, not the cellars actually, but underneath the school. And these were reinforced. The dining rooms were reinforced as shelters. And that's where we took our matriculation, our school certificate, with the bombs going over, over our heads. Yes, it was all quite something, living through the war years, as I'm sure your parents have told you.  INT: Were you scared? HS: Scared of the bombs, yes. You were scared. I think we were all scared. I mean, once, especially when you had the, the doodlebugs. And they would stop. You know, you would hear the sound of this thing coming. And before it came to you, in the distance, it would suddenly stop. And you knew that when it fell it would be fairly near, fairly close. But again, we were quite lucky because the shelter was bombed at one time. But we weren't in it, thank God, the shelter at the corner of the road where we used to go. We used to wear sirens suits that you slipped on quickly, rather like suits that we wear now, you know, sort of jogging suits. But these had-- in fact, Winston Churchill used to wear one, had a zip right up to the top. And these were warm. You slipped them on quickly over your pajamas or, or nightdress. And off you went. 
INT: And were you ever aware of shortages and things like that? HS: Oh, yes. Yes, of course, we had ration cards. And we were-- we had to-- you know, we were careful. And we had shortages. You know, you didn't-- you had a certain amount of meat, and a little meat. And you had egg, one egg a week. And you made things out of dried milk. And you cooked with dried milk powder and all substitutes. But, you know, we, we managed. You got by. You survived.  INT: And did you have much of a sort of social life at this sort of time? HS: Yes. We belonged to the synagogue. And we joined a youth club that was there. And we used to go there. And otherwise the family were a very united family. So we had a new-- they always invited my parents if there was a, you know, at a-- at one of the Jewish-- at festivals, at festival time, like New Year. And my parents were always invited. We were very, very close. They were wonderful people. And also the other people in Ealing were really wonderful, I must say. All the families, this Jewish community, were, were wonderful people.  INT: So where were you at the end, when you heard about the end of the war? HS: I was in London. And I had taken my matric. I, I went to the Lycée Francais in Kensington to take a commercial course, which my foster family paid for. And I was in London then, and-- the end of the war. And I then got a job, my first job, Swiss Bank Corporation, in the correspondence department. And then my foster mother said, you know, you will stay with us while you are still learning and while you're at school because your parents can't afford to keep you. But once you get a job you'll go back to your parents, which I did. So she encouraged me to do that. And then I went back to, as I say, my father died in '47. I hadn't long been home. And I was able to work and keep myself. And we took the borders in. And that was that. And we managed. 
INT: Was it a big wrench to leave your foster family? HS: Yes, but I was so close. And I-- it was only 10 minutes away. And then I used to go and see them, always, at weekends and as much as I could, of course. So we've always been, you know, we were always very close, all their life, till they both died in recent years. And my mother lived until she was 85. So once, you know, we-- and then once, of course, in latter years, she managed to have a lawyer. And she managed to get some of the money back that my father had as life insurance. And she managed-- the lawyer managed to get this money for her from Germany. And my mother had a pension. And then she was able to live on that, look after herself. But for many years it was a struggle, of course. You know, our lives were completely different. Everything should have been quite different if it had been-- if we hadn't had this most terrible time. But, you know, you survive.  INT: How do you see your life being in Germany, if you hadn't come here? HS: Well, if we hadn't come, I suppose, we would have had a normal middle-class life, carried on with friends. And we were supposed to go to Switzerland to a finishing school. But of course, that never happened. But I mean, I was lucky. I was lucky. And I was lucky because I was so well looked after. So many others weren't. But I was very lucky, except, of course, my, my father lost a lot of his family in the concentration camps, in Auschwitz. 
INT: Did he? HS: Yes. He did, his brothers and sisters and their children. But-- [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] yes. But, you know, I was very lucky. And they were lucky. My mother always said I was born on a Sunday. I was supposed to be a lucky child, when you're born on a Sunday-- Sonntagskind.  INT: And how did you meet your husband? HS: I met my husband at the youth club in Ealing, at this youth club that I joined. And that's where I met him. And he's English. And, and also, do you know, that this wonderful family paid for my wedding, which was absolutely marvelous, because my, my parents, my, my mother couldn't afford it. My mother couldn't afford to pay for our wedding. So they paid for my wedding. And in fact, even when we managed to get a little flat, they helped us with the flat. We paid for the carpets and things when we moved, you know. It was marvelous. So very generous, very generous and very loving. And they are my family because I have no other family. I have one cousin in Germany, but that's about all. My sister lives in America.  INT: And are you close to your sister? HS: No, not very close to my sister at all. I suppose it was the age difference and the way our lives went. And, and I think she suffered very much because of what happened. You see, I was very young, and maybe I was able to adapt as well, I suppose. You know, I adapted, and-- because I had all this sort of love and this kindness around me. And she did to start with. But then when she married, when she went to Germany and then she married and went to America, I think she just felt that America was going to be land of plenty, and everything would be there. And it wasn't so. It was hard work, you know, and to keep alive. And then when she want-- when she was in America, she wanted to be in England. When she was in England she wanted to be in America-- very unsettled soul. And I think that this all goes back, because I suppose she was that much older. It was much harder for her to be separated from my mother at that time, when you're a teenager. 
INT: And after you got married, you had children? HS: Yes. I have two sons. And they are both-- but because, you know, it was the war or after the war, and one didn't talk about Germany. And my, my husband being English, so I was completely English. And all this story just sort of lay dormant for years and years and years, because one didn't want to be-- talk about it, you know.  INT: Did your husband know about it. HS: Well, he knew that I was-- I was a refugee. Yes. And of course, he did. Yes. And it was a Jewish family. My husband's family is Jewish as well. But, you know, just in general, one didn't talk about it. And so my sons were brought up completely English. And later, and, and sort of when they became teenagers, I did try to teach them English. But it was very difficult because my husband didn't have an ear for languages, and therefore, didn't take to, you know-- and as I was the only one in the family speaking German, it was difficult to persevere to get them to speak German. My younger son speaks more German than the older one. But--  INT: Do you think the, the Holocaust affected the way you brought up your children? HS: I am told, yes, that people say, yes, that I was overprotective.  INT: Do you think you were overprotective? HS: I don't know. I didn't think so. I mean, I, I support them. Maybe, because-- I don't know. But they are-- they are different in their ways, my two sons. And perhaps-- I don't know. This is what I'm told, you know. But then I, I could-- perhaps I couldn't help it. Maybe it was an insecurity that was there, but that I was not aware of. I mean, I didn't think so, you know. I just protected my children. They were my children. Perhaps I did. 
INT: Have you ever told them in detail your story? HS: Yes. They know my story. They know my story. I didn't talk about it very much, no. I mean, I've talked more about it to my grandchildren, at least my granddaughter. The others are too young, really, to appreciate it. And I've been to-- I go to my granddaughter's school and talk about it. And I've been to different places and told my, my story. And I think that, you know, she is-- she is more aware of it.  INT: Do you still dream about your experiences? HS: I can't-- yes. Well, they, they, they come back. I think as you get older, your-- you relive your experiences. And also, because it lay dormant for so long, and I know many people, even today, won't talk about it. But I, you know, I think when I dream, they are vivid to me when I talk about them, those memories. And they're, they're very painful, the certain memories. And they are vivid when I think about having been hidden, or having to be hidden, and, and the fright and the sort of anxiety that you go through. And the pain and anguish, and you know, the emotions that you go through, having been sent away or leaving my mother and leaving my sister, and just being in a strange place. Those emotions come back sometimes. But very, very seldom because, you know, I, I had a very happy life with my husband too. So I, I felt security there. 
INT: Did you ever give up hope as a child? HS: How, how do you-- how--  INT: That-- HS: Hope of what?  INT: --once you were sent-- that you would never see your parents again. Did you ever think like that? HS: No. I think I just hoped I would see my mother again. I would see my parents again. I don't think I ever gave up hope.  INT: Do you have any particular message you'd like to, to tell us? HS: In, in-- how do you-- how do you mean?  INT: For people-- HS: I think people should talk about it. And I think it's important that, that the children know. Because you know, it will be forgotten otherwise. And this is not a good idea. They, they should know. And I want my children, my grandchildren to know my roots and, and what happened to me, because I think it's important to teach them, to teach children. I mean, there are so many refugees in the world these days, you know, from all sorts of countries. And it's all very difficult, isn't it? I mean, at that time-- but that, that time of the Jewish situation was the most terrible time, wasn't it? And therefore, I think that never to be repeated again, that I think that the future generations must know about it. They should know about it. And it's really very good that it's become part of the school curriculum. And I will try and tell as many people about it as possible. But of course, there was something, you know, of course, when we came, we were-- we were called refugees. And you know, you had nothing. You came with nothing. And you were a refugee. But now, of course, you are-- you survived all those terrible times. And you're called a survivor of the Holocaust. I mean, I, I was lucky because I, I never had to go to a concentration camp. I was saved. So it's different for me. But the people who did manage to survive, [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] it's very hard for them I'm sure. 
INT: Thank you, Helga. HS: OK. I--  INT: --went back to Stettin or Leipzig, Helga? HS: No I have never been back, no. And I don't think I want to go, because I think I'd like to remember those places-- have the happy memories. I don't want them to be spoiled by going there now. I don't. I don't-- at the moment, that's how I feel-- whether if I-- when I get older, people say that, you know, you change your mind. And-- and the strange thing was that my mother went back to Germany, despite all the things that happened to her. She used to go on holiday to Germany. She would go, because she said, I will go back, and I will talk to people, and I'll tell them how terrible things were, to make them aware. Because of course, everybody used to say, we knew nothing about it. We didn't know what was going on.  INT: But did she have sisters in Germany? HS: Yes, she had a sister in Germany still. And I have a cousin. I have two cousins, one on my mother's side, and one on my father's side, and the one who is half Jewish, you know, and the other one. And she used to go and visit her sometimes. But she would like to go back to the places that she visited with my father. She would go to Baden-Baden. And she would go to a couple of other places where she spent. I suppose that was her recollections of being happy with my father in the good old days. 
INT: And did your aunt ever-- have you ever visited your aunt or she ever come here? HS: No, I didn't. No, I didn't. But I-- my cousin has been over to England. But my aunts have died, because they were older as well, you know. Though, they're-- they're all dead. But my cousin has been to England. She's been here too and stayed with us. And-- but I've not been to her, to-- to visit her. I really have no motivation to go to Germany. I did go back for a week to Berlin, as I said. And that was very interesting. That was very moving, actually, too. Because we went back to the apartment house where we used to-- where we used to stay with this aunt. And it's still standing. And that was really a-- a-- quite an emotional visit. And what also struck me on our visit to Berlin, which I found very emotional, in this-- in one of the squares, they have a placard in the ground, and there's a big hole in the ground. And you looked-- and the placard says, this is the time of the Holocaust and the Nazi time-- something that says that. And you look down, and there's a glass plate. And you look down, and there are empty shelves. And it's all lit up inside, all these-- but the shelves are all empty, which meant to say that the German, that the Nazis burned all the books, all the education, all the most wonderful books in the-- the literature, the German literature. There's nothing there. Isn't that sad for this-- the new generation? 
INT: And what happened to that aunt in Berlin? HS: The aunt in Berlin was taken away to a concentration camp with her son. And we found this in the book, in the memorial book, in the Juden-- in-- in Juden-- what's it now? In Juden museum, in the Jewish Museum there. There's a memorial book, and you can look up to see. And the names are down there.  INT: But I believe you went back to Holland? HS: And they were destroyed.  INT: Is it? You went to Holland. HS: Oh, I went back. I've been to Holland on a visit, yes. And on that first visit to Holland, on a weekend with friends, we went to see the Anne Frank House. And I found that very moving, because I kind of affiliated with that little girl. And I sort of lived it, you know, relived all that sad time. And it was very moving to go up into the house and to open the door, and to go up into the rooms where Anne Frank was living. And that was-- it just brought the whole thing back. And I was-- started crying, and everybody was crying around. [LAUGHS] It was very sad. And then, of course, how this all came about again, this whole story of coming to England and-- and about the Holocaust, is when I went to the Vienna library where they had an exhibition about the Holocaust, in 1988. And as I say, everything had been laying-- lying dormant, really and truly. And I went into the library. I went, actually, to see, because I knew they'd also had some details about the concentration camps, and I wanted to see if I could find my father's name amongst all the others that were taken there. And as I went into the vestibule, into the hall, there was a large montage on the wall of pictures of the children coming. And I came face to face with myself, of all the pictures that were taken on the first Kindertransport. And I just couldn't believe it. And I had never seen these pictures. And I sort of looked and I pointed. I said, that's me! That's me! And everybody was standing around, and they all came rushing up, and-- because I was crying. And it was very emotional. And the curator came down. And he said, I've-- I've got some of these pictures for you. You can have some pictures. I will get them made. And that's the first time I knew of any of these pictures, which is amazing. And then I went into the other room, and there I saw the list of the people who had been taken to Buchenwald. And I found-- I have it, a copy of it. I found my father's name amongst the men that were arrested, and the actual document, the letter from the Nazi-- Gauleiter, or whatever he was-- who ordered that my father should be taken to Buchenwald. I have that. And they wrote-- I wrote to-- to Buchenwald, because it's now a museum. And I asked them, you know, to verify this. And they wrote back, and they sent me details, and saying that my father was there. So it is the truth. It happened. I have documents. It is not made up. 
INT: Did you have a-- a-- a thought that it might have been made up? HS: I never, no. I never had the thought. But because of things and the way people are talking, and the antisemitism--  INT: I see. HS: --that there is about again, that-- and people who say that it didn't happen, I mean, it-- it's just unbelievable. Of course it happened. How six million Jews-- what happened to the six million Jews?  INT: Have you anything else you'd like to share with us, Helga? HS: I don't think so. I mean, I've talked about my life in-- in Germany before the war, and my journey and my coming here England. And I don't think so. I don't think there's anything else. I can't think of-- have you anything that you want to ask me?  INT: Do you-- do you think that your-- HS: Oh, yeah, sorry.  INT: --life has turned out well here? HS: Oh, yes. It has. Of course it has. And also, one, yes-- one lovely thing I would like to say about this wonderful family that-- after 50 years, in 1989, I'd-- I-- I'd been with-- it was 50 years had passed, right, since I came into their home. And they presented me with a book, which said, this is your life. And they've written in there. It's an amalgamation of photographs, of little stories, of my story in it of coming to England, and of their story, the way they saw me coming into their family. And I thought that was a wonderful thing to do, to present me with this book. 
INT: So you were very fortunate. HS: I was very fortunate. I was one-- truly one of the very lucky ones. But I think it's sometimes quite good to hear a-- a story that was very sad and very traumatic a time, that it turned out quite well, and that there were such kind people. Because there was, perhaps, many that weren't, and-- and-- and so many that were very less-- much less fortunate than I and my family.  INT: Well, thank you very much, Helga, for sharing your experiences with us. HS: Thank you.  INT: Helga, can you introduce man sitting next to you? HS: Yes. This is my husband, Jack [? Laurence ?] Samuel. And we've been married 47 years now, which-- this year-- which is a-- we have been married 47 years. JACK SAMUEL: We have. HS: It's a long time, yes. JACK SAMUEL: And I hope we continue to be-- HS: Yes. JACK SAMUEL: --married. [LAUGHTER] HS: Have-- look forward to our 50th. JACK SAMUEL: And how's the interview gone? HS: We met-- JACK SAMUEL: Good? HS: No. Yes! I don't know. You-- JACK SAMUEL: Yes? Fine.  INT: Is there anything you would like to say? JACK SAMUEL: Well, I could only say that the only good thing, perhaps, that came out of the Holocaust is that I met my beautiful wife, because otherwise, I wouldn't have done so. And it's made her-- how-- what effects has it had on her? It's made her a very loving of myself and her mother, and her children, and her grandchildren, and very possessive of them. HS: [LAUGHS] JACK SAMUEL: But she's a very lovely lady, and I'm glad to have her. And that's about all. [LAUGHTER] 
INT: OK. Thank you very much. JACK SAMUEL: OK. Thank you very much.  INT: Helga, can you describe that to me? HS: Yes. My mother's father had a carriage and horses, and this is in the original document that shows that His Majesty, at the time-- I can't read the date-- 2nd of December 1900, in Stettin-- and that he was commanded by His Majesty to bring the carriage and horses and an equipage, which was the carriage and horses, and to-- to take some guests to the palace. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] And that this--  INT: Did he ever get paid, I wonder, for this? HS: Oh, I'm sure he did, yes. I'm sure he got paid at the time. But unfortunately, what happened was that he died quite early on in his life, and my grandmother carried on the business-- business with having-- and had some people who drove the horses, or drove the carriages. And apparently, they used to take all the money, and she didn't get the money. So she had a very hard life. And then I think it was finished, the business, wasn't it? They cheated her out of her money.  INT: Helga, what is this? HS: This is my father's birth certificate in its original form. And he was born on the 2nd of April, 1888. And this shows the details. It's a-- it's the actual original, so it's not in wonderful condition. But it's wonderful to have it. 
INT: Thank you. HS: And there it shows his name-- Bernhard-- Bernhard Kreiner-- Bernhard-- and all the details where he was born. He was born in Czernowitz, which was Bukovina, which was Romania.  INT: Helga, what is this document? HS: This is my mother's original birth certificate, and that also states that she was born on the 4th of February 1895. And the date at the top is the 11th of February, when it was registered. And there is her full name. Ringhandt was her maiden name. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] And that is Stettin. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] That's a very interesting document. It's wonderful to have these two original documents of my parents'.  INT: Mm. HS: Birth certificates.  INT: Very lucky. Helga, who is this gentleman? HS: That is my father, where he served in the cavalry in the year-- First World War, 1418 War, for Germany. And yes, there he is with all his compatriots, I suppose. Hmm. He's sitting there in the middle-- very good. And this shows the medals that he won in the First World War, medals for Germany. He fought. And that is a document to say that he was in the army, and that gives the details of the-- the medals that he won, that he was awarded in the war. It says there, [NON-ENGLISH] something [NON-ENGLISH], and-- and also the brave-- a medal for bravery-- [NON-ENGLISH] is that's-- and then it gives his name, Bernhard Kreiner, and the-- the section of the army he was in, the cavalry. My mother used to tell me. 
INT: Helga, what is this document? HS: This is from the rabbi in Stettin, to say-- this confirms the marriage of my parents, and giving their name, and the Jewish date, first Nisan. And it was the 18th of March 1923, in Stettin-- Bernhard Kreiner and my mother's name, Margarete, where they were at, according to the laws of Moses. It is all in German. It's very interesting. And that is signed by the rabbi in Stettin. And it's from the Rabbinate, which is the-- the synagogue.  INT: Helga, who is this photograph? HS: Oh, that's a photograph of me, apparently, when I was a-- well, not my actual birth certificate, but by my having been registered as having been born by the authorities. And that's really lovely. And this was the 16th of June 1931. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] So it was a little bit later, because-- but then it gives the 11th of September-- 9th-- 1927. I was born in Stettin. And my name, and even giving the name-- [NON-ENGLISH]. That's where we lived, number 42. And I was-- my-- my legal documents says [NON-ENGLISH]. Preussen, Prussia. You know it was part of Germany. I mean, Stettin was-- been Preussen, Prussia. And that's signed by the police president. [LAUGHS]  INT: Can you describe these documents for me, Helga? HS: Yes. I thought these are very interesting, that I found amongst my mother's papers. And they are from the Alliance and Stuttgarter Life Insurance Company. And one was written in 1935 to my father, as you can see from the date. But the amazing thing is that these-- when it was signed at the bottom, they say with [NON-ENGLISH], which means, yours sincerely, or with German greetings. And the next one, which was the next document, is exactly the same, written in 1938, as you all see from the date. And you had to now sign it heil Hitler. In three years, it just shows you how you had to sign your letters. This was an order. And that was in 1938. 
INT: Thank you. Helga, can you explain this for me? HS: Yes. This is a document from the secret police, on the 11th of November, 1938. And it is addressed to the commandant of the concentration camp Buchenwald. And it says that these-- the Jews are going to be sent to Buchenwald. And the-- all the-- the list that you will see in a moment, on the following list are the names of those Jews, 150 Jews, who are by order, on the-- on-- of the 10th of the 11th, '38, are going to be sent to Buchenwald. And there is my father's name. It's number 146-- Kreiner, Bernhard, born-- there. It's marked with a little-- I marked it with a cross-- born on the 2nd of April 1979.  INT: 1879. HS: 18-- 1879. [LAUGHS] And Büreleiter. That means he was a financial controller. He was in charge of the accounts department. So that's about it. And all the other people that he was-- that-- yes. They were taken from the police station, and they were sent, all from Leipzig, sent to Buchenwald that-- on that day. And this the a person who actually sent him there, this man-- signed by this, from the secret police.  INT: Helga, can you explain this for me? HS: Yes. This is a card that my father sent to my mother when he was in Buchenwald concentration camp, the original, giving his name and his number, and where he was in the barrack. And it says there concentration camp Buchenwald, where it was-- Buchenwald, addressed to my mother when we had moved to Leipzig-- Grassistrasse. CREW: OK. 
INT: And this? HS: This is the other side of the card, which is addressed to my mother-- my darling wife and children. And I am OK, and I am quite well. Please send me immediately a large backpack and some very strong mountain boots, [NON-ENGLISH], in the size 42, and long, warm socks, because it is very cold, and some handkerchiefs, and underwear. Please do not put in any food. Or no letters are we allowed, because there is no-- you cannot write to me as a [NON-ENGLISH]. And also, I hope that you're all right. And don't send any money. And this is from your daddy to my two darling dolls, and in [NON-ENGLISH]. You know, longing-- in longing, your-- your [? poppi, ?] your daddy.  INT: This document? HS: And this is the Jewish identity card which had the large J on it, and the fingerprints, and when it was taken. And also, this is showing the left ear. And I have, actually, a picture of myself with-- taken for my passport or for my identity card. And that also shows the picture with my left ear showing. This was a-- a ruling. And it shows you with his fingerprints. And that was the 8th of February, 1939.  INT: And what is this document, Helga? HS: Well, this is the note my mother left for my father in case he would be released on the night that we went to Berlin to join the Kindertransport to come to England. And it says, my darling husband, in case you should arrive in the flat, and so God-- God willing, and please phone immediately to these friends of ours. Because then you will hear everything. Because you will come to an empty flat. 1,000 greetings and kisses, your wife. And I've written on it. And my darling gold Papa-- [INAUDIBLE] Papa. 
INT: Can you describe this photograph for me, Helga? HS: Yes, this is my-- my father's family, my father's parents, my grandparents, in the middle. And my father is standing by my grandfather's-- the-- the little boy to the-- to the right of the picture standing by his-- by his father. The others are-- they-- they were-- my father was the youngest in the family. And these are his older sisters and a brother. And here to the left is the-- is Tante Susie, as I knew her as a young girl. And Susie-- Tante Susie was the one that lived in Berlin, that where we used to stay in-- when she was much older, of course. We stayed in Berlin with her many, many holidays. It was wonderful. She was a-- a gorgeous, love-- very loving lady. Unfortunately, I didn't know my grandparents.  INT: And this photograph? HS: And this is my mother's family. That is my grandmother and mother. Grandmother is holding my mother. She was the youngest. She had two older sisters and an older brother who actually served in the-- who served in the First World War but was killed, unfortunately. And that is my mother, the baby. And that was an aunt, Tante Frieda and Tante Hedwig, my two aunts, that I did know, and I used to see quite a lot. They were still alive. But of course, they died.  INT: Helga? HS: This is a lovely photograph of my father when he was really-- looks like a man about town. [LAUGHS] It's taken at his-- at the [NON-ENGLISH], where he worked. And it looks like he was very jaunty with his hat on and his gold chain. And he looks a very happy man there, actually. I don't know when that was taken, but I suppose it's about in the 1930s? 
INT: Yes, it must be. HS: Early '30s or-- or late 1920s, I think. Taken in Stettin, in [? Buda. ?]  INT: Helga? HS: This is a picture of my mother as a-- as a young girl-- woman. And I think I suppose she must have been about in her 20s. And she looks absolutely gorgeous. I love the hairstyle. And she's got such a lovely face. She was lovely.  INT: This photograph? HS: This is a photograph of my parents and my sister and myself, as the baby there, the very happy family picture. And I think I must have been about a year or just about 18 months. And look at how-- it's a lovely-- I-- I treasure this picture. They look such a happy family.  INT: --photograph? HS: And this is a photograph of my sister and myself. And I think we are both wearing the same dress as my-- and we have the same necklaces, and-- and the same bangles, except different hairstyles. And she was very dark, and I was blonde, and had sort of cockscomb on my hair, which was the fashion in those days. It's also a lovely picture of when we were really very happy children. I think I must have been about six, seven? I think so. And that was taken in Stettin by a famous photographer, actually. It gives his name at the bottom-- [NON-ENGLISH].  INT: Helga, what is this? HS: That is my first day of going to school-- my first day at school. And as I said before, the German custom is to have a large bag filled with sweets and all goodies-- lovely goodies-- and to make your first day at school, a schultüte. And everybody brought to school on the first day. So I must have been five years or five or six-- five, I should think. I think it's the same in Germany, a lovely picture-- and my satchel on my back, and also a little handbag. [LAUGHS] 
INT: Helga? HS: Well, this is a photograph of me also showing my left ear, showing my left ear showing, which had to be done on the identity document that we had and you saw before, the same picture of my father on his identity card, where it was the left ear showing. This was supposed to show that you were Jewish.  INT: Can you describe this photograph for me, Helga? HS: Yes. This is the photograph that was taken on board ship at Harwich, when we arrived, on the 1st of December. And there I am on the right hand side, the little girl with the straight hair. And my sister is the one, the tall girl, second from the left. And the girl in the middle, actually, we met up with again. We lost touch completely. I don't know what happened to her. But we met up with her again at the Kindertransport reunion, which Bertha Leverton arranged, the-- the 50th anniversary. That was in 1988. And we-- we came and saw our pictures on-- on the wall. It was an amazing thing.  INT: And this photograph? HS: These are my- these are my lovely, lovely foster parents, as they were when I came to them in 1938, in November or December 1938, auntie Kitt, as I knew her, and Uncle Harry. They were both in their 40s then. And that was-- that was taken on a holiday in Devon, just lovely, lovely people-- very kind. 
INT: And this photograph? HS: And this is a photograph of my foster sister, my-- and-- and my foster brother, also taken in 19-- well, after I'd been with them for about three months. I think we went on holiday to Bournemouth. And there I'm in the middle. And they were-- they're absolutely wonderful. And-- and she's still my very loving sister. She's-- sadly, he died a few years ago. But they-- I-- they are-- they were my family.  INT: What are their names? HS: That's Evelyn on the right, and David on the left. Really lovely, lovely children.  INT: And this photograph? HS: And this was taken on our-- our wedding day, at-- in Ealing, outside the synagogue, the Ealing Orthodox Synagogue. And we both look very happy. And it was-- it was lovely. It was in 1950. We were married on the 28th of May, 1950. So we've been married now 47 years. That's a lovely picture.  INT: And this photograph? HS: And that is a picture in our house, in [INAUDIBLE] Crescent, in London, when I were-- with my husband and my two sons, David, the older one sitting on Jack's lap, and Philip, as a baby. He must have been about a year old, a very happy group, a young couple with their children. [LAUGHS]  INT: And this photograph, Helga? HS: That is a photograph taken, I think about four years ago or so, of my whole family. There I am standing at the back, to the left of the picture, with my daughter-in-law Elizabeth-- Liz as we know her. And she is-- that is her son, Richard. And oh, if we go along-- and that's my husband behind Richard. And that's my other daughter-in-law, Cheryl, who comes from Australia. And that is Racheal, who's closing eyes, which is sad. And that's little Edward, who belongs to Elizabeth, to Liz, and Philip, who is down in the-- on the right of the picture. And my other son is at the back, next to Cheryl, at the top, at the back of Oliver. And that's Oliver and Racheal, who belong to this couple. That-- David is the older son, and Philip the younger one. It's a lovely family group. 
INT: And Helga, this one? HS: Well, that is my-- that is me with my adorable grandchildren, my four adorable grandchildren-- a granddaughter Racheal, who's standing behind me; Richard to the left; Oliver to the right; and little Edward, just sort of on my-- almost on my lap but standing with me. And the ages?  INT: Hmm. HS: Racheal there was, I think-- she is now 12. And I think that was taken a couple of years ago. So she must have been about 10. And Richard was about five, and Oliver seven. And little Edward was about three, two. Yes, about three, two and 1/2 to three. A lovely picture, and I really treasure that-- my four adorable grandchildren.  INT: Thank you.