INT: My name is Lesley Nathan. The date is November 5, 1997. I'm conducting an interview with Inge Hack. The location is Maidstone, England. Can you tell me your name and the spelling? IH: I-N-G-E. New name, L-O-R-E. New name, Hack. H-A-C-K.  INT: Thank you. And can you tell me your name at birth? IH: Wertheimer.  INT: And can you spell it? IH: W-E-R-T-H-E-I-M-E-R.  INT: And the city and country of your birth? IH: Nuremberg, in Germany.  INT: And the date of your birth? IH: 28th of April, 1926.  INT: And your age now? IH: I'm 71.  INT: Thank you. Can we begin by you telling me about your family at home in Germany? IH: Yes. My father was a lawyer. And we lived in a very nice part of Nuremberg, called the [NON-ENGLISH]. And we had a very enjoyable life, up until the time of Hitler. I went to school, in the ordinary state school. And when we-- when I was 11, I took a type of examination, and went to the Fürth Realschule.  INT: What is that? IH: It's a-- a grammar school, a Jewish grammar school in Fürth.  INT: Can you tell me more about your parents? Can you tell me your-- your father's name? IH: Yes. My father's name was Fritz [? Moritz ?] Wertheimer. He studied in Heidelberg to become a lawyer. And my mother's name was Rosa Ullman, and she was born in Kempen. And the-- the family moved to Fürth, which is a town very near Nuremberg. What else would you like to know about my parents? [LAUGHS] 
INT: Did your grandparents live locally? IH: They lived in Fürth. Well, my mother's grandparents lived in Fürth. My-- my-- my grandfather was dead already, unfortunately. He died when my mother was quite young. He fell off a horse. A horse threw him. He borrowed somebody else's horse. And my paternal grandparents lived in Bruchsal, which is in Baden, which is quite a long way away.  INT: And did you have any brothers or sisters? IH: No.  INT: Can you describe life in your home? IH: Yes. We had a maid. My mother did a lot of entertaining. She played tennis. My father, I saw mainly at the weekend, but in the evening, he sometimes used to bring work home. And they seemed to live a very comfortable life.  INT: What was-- IH: I had a lovely time. I had a wonderful childhood.  INT: What was your house like? Can you describe it? IH: We had a flat. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] It had a dining room, it had a lounge. It had one, two-- two-- three bedrooms, and then it had a small quarter for the maid.  INT: And what-- IH: And a bathroom, and toilet, and kitchen, obviously.  INT: Do you remember any particular room, the sort of furnishings that you had? IH: Yes. We had, I think-- in the lounge, there was a huge ebony bookcase, a big round table, a leather suite, I think it was, and a-- and what they called a smoking table, a little, round table. My father used to sit in a particular armchair. And then there were connecting doors to the dining room. There was a piano, a settee, dining table and chairs, and I think a small nest of tables or something. And then-- I can't remember if that connected to the-- to my parents' bedroom, but it was the usual, double bed, and-- and dressing table, and so on. 
INT: And what was your room like? IH: I can't remember that, except I was told that I threw spinach on the curtains. [LAUGHS] So I think-- [LAUGHS] I think they were sort of white and pink. [LAUGHS] But I don't remember very much else, except I think, it had two single beds in it and I presume the-- the usual children's furniture.  INT: You said it was a-- a good area. And-- IH: Yes. It was the [NON-ENGLISH]. It was a very good part of Nuremberg.  INT: Were there any other Jewish families there? IH: Oh, yes. It was very much a Jewish area. Yes.  INT: Do you know how many Jewish people lived in Nuremberg? IH: No. I have no idea, no idea at all.  INT: And in your particular block of flats? IH: No. Now, I don't know if there were any Jewish people in our particular block of flats, but in the area, sort of, you know, around the corner and so on, there certainly were. Yes.  INT: And you said you had a maid. Can you tell me about her? IH: Well, we had several, but the one I-- I last remember was a wonderful person. She was Catholic. She was very fond of my mother. They became very great friends. In fact, she stayed with-- with my mother even after I-- I left. And she kept some of the things that my mother entrusted to her. And my husband and I, on our honeymoon, collected them. So you know, and we were friendly, obviously, until her death. 
INT: What was her name? IH: Tina. Tina Drütschel. She was a lovely person.  INT: Can you tell me what sort of things you did together as a family? IH: Well, we went on holiday together as a family. We went out at the weekend as a family. They had a little car. I used to go out. Even after we couldn't go, you know, into restaurants and so on anymore, we used to have picnics in the country.  INT: And what sort of places would you go on holiday? IH: Mainly to Switzerland, mainly to Switzerland. Yes.  INT: And what would you do there? IH: Swim, walk, stay in a hotel, and you know, the usual things.  INT: Can you tell me more about your parents? What sort of people were they? IH: Unfortunately, not very much. When you say what sort of people were they, my mother-- [LAUGHS] it's a German expression, [GERMAN]. It means she was a very loving, a very generous, a very gentle person. And she used to make quince jam, which I still do today because we've got a quince tree in the garden. And she used to give it to all the children. And she used to collect all the poor children and-- and, you know, bring them in and feed them. She-- she was a very kind person. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] And my father, well, it's very difficult, you know? You-- you really, at that age, you really don't know your parents terribly well. I saw my father mainly on a Saturday afternoon. It used to be my treat to go into his office. He had a law office in the Karolinenstrasse in Nuremberg. And his secretary, or he sometimes, if he had the time, used to take me out into a pastry shop. And then I used to play. I think-- there, again, I'm not sure-- but I think he specialized in road accidents. I only say that because I used to play with his little cars, and trees, and all the little things you would have if you-- you know, if people had road accidents. So-- and-- well, he seemed a very nice person. He liked his beer. I remember I used to get a sip. [LAUGHS] But, you know, what-- what they were really like between themselves, I really don't know. I really don't know what their relationship was like, if that's what you mean. I really don't know. My mother adored him. 
INT: What sort of little girl were you? IH: Very spoiled, extremely spoiled. Yes, yes. I wasn't very nice at all. [LAUGHS] I used to scratch other children, apparently. [LAUGHS] When my mother had one of her bridge parties, all the complaints used to come in of what I'd done. [LAUGHS] Because I was an only one, I suppose. [LAUGHS] So there you are. [LAUGHS] A dreadful character. [LAUGHS]  INT: How old were you when you started school? IH: Well, I think we probably were six, I think, in a German school. Yes.  INT: So you were born in 1926? So-- IH: '26. So it would be '32, wouldn't it? Yes, yes.  INT: Right. Were you aware of politics at all? IH: No, not at all. Not at all. No. No. No at-- not in 1932.  INT: Can you describe going to school, the first school? IH: Yes. Well, in Germany-- I don't know whether it's on the continent as a whole, but in Germany, it's the custom on the very first day, I suppose, to entice the children to school. And you get a very big bag of sweets. It's called a [GERMAN]. It's got a sort of-- what would you describe this shape?  INT: Cone shape? IH: Cone shape. That's the word I wanted. Cone shape, full of sweets. And that's how you go to school. It's lovely. [LAUGHS] Don't remember the--  INT: What sort of school was it? IH: It was an ordinary state school. Yes. 
INT: Who took you to school? IH: Do you know, I can't remember. I imagine it was my mother, but I can't remember.  INT: What do you recall of-- of that first school? IH: Very little, to be honest, except the photographs that I have. And we had a photograph taken with dolls. But I don't really-- the only thing I do recall is that big-- being Jewish, and there were quite a few Jewish children, because you know, it was a Jewish area, that we-- we had our own religious classes. And therefore, that was usually in the singing class. And to this day, I can't-- I can't read music. [LAUGHS] So we always had our religious classes when the others have their singing class. But--  INT: How were you treated at school, by the-- by the teachers at-- IH: Very well, as far as I remember. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] In fact, it's quite interesting. I was very, very friendly-- and you see it in the photograph-- with a German girl who lived around the corner from us. I didn't know at the time that her father was an Obersturm trooper, you know, of the SS. And we were very friendly. We used to play together. And one day, the mother came to me. And she said, you know, I'm terribly sorry, you two girls, but your friendship will have to cease. If-- I cannot remember what her-- what the girl's name is. If her father finds out, he'd kill her. 
INT: The mother came to you? IH: Yes, yes. Well, we were playing.  INT: How old were you then? IH: Well, I must have been-- that was in the second-- so that must have been in the upper school. You know, in-- in the older part of the school. I must have been about, I suppose, 10, something like that.  INT: What did you make of that? IH: Well, our friendship just stopped, you know? I mean, I wasn't going to risk her getting into trouble with her father.  INT: But I wonder what you felt as a child, being forbidden to play with someone else. IH: Well, I think by then, the Nazis had already had a grip. And we were already no longer able to go swimming and so on.  INT: So we're jumping forward a bit now. This is sort of-- IH: Yes, we are. But--  INT: Going back-- IH: No. 10, that's already '36, you see.  INT: '36. IH: Yes.  INT: So they came in '33. So by then-- IH: Oh, yes. And we couldn't go into restaurants, and we couldn't go into--  INT: Going back to-- you say you had-- IH: But I've never actually had any antisemitism against myself all the time. I've never experienced any, as a child.  INT: Going back to your home life, what happened Jewishly in your home? IH: Hm. Very little. We went to synagogue once a year.  INT: Which synagogue was that? IH: That was the main synagogue in Nuremberg. 
INT: Did you observe any festivals at home? IH: I don't think so. No. No.  INT: I wonder where you got your Jewish identity? IH: From England.  INT: So when you were in Germany-- IH: Well, the Jewish school, of course.  INT: But your first school wasn't. IH: Don't forget, I was in a Jewish school. No. But we already-- I-- I-- we never-- you know, we always had our Jewish identity. But we just didn't keep anything. But as I say--  INT: When you say you had your Jewish identity, I wonder how you obtained it without festivals and things at home? IH: Well, we had Jewish religious classes by the-- in-- in-- in the school.  INT: Right. Yes. IH: As I-- as I said before. And of course, there were a lot of Jewish people living around us, and we were friendly. My parents were very friendly with other Jewish couples.  INT: What about food at home? Did you have favorite foods? IH: We weren't kosher. We weren't kosher, no.  INT: Were their special things that you liked to eat? IH: Well, I-- yes. Ham, and bacon, and pork. [LAUGHS] Yes. I'm afraid, we weren't kosher. We weren't in-- in any way religious. No. No.  INT: Were there any special things your mother used to cook for you? IH: Hm. Sauerbraten, which I think is possibly veal done with cream and sort of sour cream. [NON-ENGLISH], [NON-ENGLISH], [NON-ENGLISH]. That's very much a Bavarian dish. Spaetzle. She was extremely good-- do you know what spaetzle are? 
INT: No. IH: No? Well, that is again from-- from Schwaben, from the Kempen side. Well, it's a sort of-- it's a special dish anyway, a little sort of-- made with dough.  INT: Did you ever go to your grandparents? IH: Yes. My maternal-- as I told-- said before, my-- my maternal grandfather was already dead. But I did go to the house of my maternal grandmother. I remember her usually dressed in black. In fact, I don't think she ever was dressed in anything else, a very tall, very good-looking woman, to me, rather austere as a little girl. She probably told me to behave myself. [LAUGHS] And I only remember going to my paternal grandparents at their golden wedding. And apparently, I made a speech and said, prosit, you know, for them all to drink their wine. I was told afterwards. I really don't remember very much at all. No. No, I don't.  INT: What hobbies did you have as a little girl? IH: I skated. I swam. I did athletics. And I roller skated. I think that's about all.  INT: Going forward a bit to when Hitler came to power in 1933, when you would have been, what, nine? IH: Seven.  INT: Seven? IH: Seven  INT: Seven IH: Hm.  INT: Did you hear him on the radio? Did your parents talk about what was going on? IH: God, yes. No. They really did protect me very much. But I have to say, Nuremberg, of course, was the [INAUDIBLE] of [NON-ENGLISH], you know? It was the big thing. And I was out there with them, you know, watching what was going on. 
INT: What did you see? IH: Because it was all in the [NON-ENGLISH], you see? It was very near. Well, I saw all the-- the Hitler, and-- and-- and all that, the whole paraphernalia, you know? All the-- the-- well, it wasn't Gestapo so much as-- as the-- the BDM, the Bund Deutscher Madels and the Hitler Youth and the soldiers all parading, all the parades, and-- and so on and so forth, and Hitler in his car.  INT: What did you-- you saw him? IH: Yes.  INT: Can you tell me more about that? IH: I also saw something which perhaps is not chronological here, but I saw the Duke of Windsor--  INT: Can you tell us about that? IH: --with Hitler. I don't remember very much, but in one of the things-- and it must have been in Nuremberg, because I wasn't anywhere else-- the Duke of Windsor came.  INT: And where did you see him? IH: In Nuremberg?  INT: Whereabouts? IH: I cannot remember whereabouts. I'm sorry. Whether it was at one of these rallies or whether it was, you know, somewhere in the streets, I-- I can't remember.  INT: Do you know when it would have been, roughly? IH: No. No. Before--  INT: How did you know it was the Duke of Windsor? IH: Well, everybody said so. [LAUGHS]  INT: What was he doing-- IH: It was during--  INT: --with Hitler? IH: Well, he was just talking to him at the time. So that must have been, what, '37, possibly '37? I don't know. I don't remember when it was. 
INT: So you would have been about nine then? IH: Yes, yes, yes.  INT: What else-- IH: Might even be '38. No. Couldn't have been '38.  INT: What else did you see on the streets in those years? IH: Nothing very much, otherwise.  INT: You said you saw the BDM rallies. IH: Well, Bund Deutscher Madel is like-- a bit like our Guides, I suppose, you know? Yes.  INT: And what would take place? IH: In their-- in their Hitler-- in their uniforms.  INT: What would they be doing? IH: Just-- just parading.  INT: And did your parents explain what was going on to you? IH: Well, we couldn't go to the cinema anymore. So obviously, you know, it's Jews not wanted here. Yes. Obviously, they must have explained that. But my father, you see, had been an officer in the First World War. He had been established as a lawyer in 1933. And therefore, at that time, he was allowed to carry on, which in retrospect, was very, very sad. Because if they hadn't been allowed to carry on as a lawyer, he would have had to leave the country and he would have survived. And I can under-- but he didn't think, you see? And you must-- you must have heard this from so many survivors, that his German-- and I mean, they were German through and through, there's no doubt about it-- would ever do anything to him. He just could not believe it. 
INT: Did he say that? Did you hear him saying that? IH: Possibly. Possibly. But I wouldn't be 100% sure on that.  INT: You talked about-- IH: But obviously, I must have then, because otherwise, how would I have known?  INT: You talked about your friend at school and her mother saying you couldn't play together anymore. IH: Mhm. I have a photo of that girl actually, in-- in my school photograph.  INT: Did any other things like that happen? I mean, how did the people around you behave? IH: No. I don't think so. The only thing is, obviously, you know, people who were friendly with my parents, non-Jewish people, if you walked down the street, they would look the other way. They didn't acknowledge you anymore. Because you know, their businesses, and so on.  INT: And when you went to shops? Did you go shopping with your mother? IH: I did go shopping, but there weren't any Jewish shops, as far as I know, around us.  INT: Did it effect-- IH: Sort of butcher, baker. Don't forget, it-- it was only a-- you know, it-- it wasn't in the middle of town, you see? And our friends were beginning to leave gradually, our Jewish friends.  INT: Where did they go? IH: They saw the light-- many to America.  INT: Do you remember discussions at home about what would happen? IH: Not at all. No.  INT: Going back a bit, you talked about going to your first state school-- IH: Yes. 
INT: --in 1932. How long were you there? IH: Well, I must have been there three or four years, I imagine, as you normally are. Because then I got a-- you know, an examination. I don't think it was a scholarship, but I wouldn't be sure, to the Realschule in Fürth to the grammar school, as I would, presumably, under normal circumstances, have gone to grammar school in Nuremberg. But you know, as we weren't allowed to go to non-Jewish schools anymore, we went to the grammar school in Fürth, which had a very good standard. And--  INT: What were your feelings as a child about having to go to a Jewish school? IH: I didn't mind at all, because some of my friends went.  INT: And how far away was this from your home IH: About 3/4 of an hour by tram. So we were able to do our homework on the way-- on the way very often, a part of our homework anyway.  INT: So what were the differences, would you say, at this school from the first school? IH: Well, we were older. You know, different subjects, as you have in a grammar school. It was just an ordinary grammar school.  INT: Did you and your Jewish girlfriends talk about what had-- what had happened and that you weren't going to be mixing so much? IH: You know, I don't think we did. I really-- you know, it's-- it's so long ago. I can't remember. 
INT: I mean, it sounds as if the effects of-- IH: But they gradually left.  INT: --what was happening weren't really impinging on you very much. IH: Not-- not terribly. No, I don't think so. Because as I say, my parents protected me from a lot of what was going on. And as I-- I was never personally, in any way, you know, bullied, or-- or-- or kicked, or are in any way molested.  INT: What about your teachers in your first school, the German teachers? Did-- did they change towards you after '33? IH: No, I don't think so. I-- I have no recollection of them doing so.  INT: Were there any other things that changed for you? IH: Well, only that we couldn't go to the pictures. There was one incident, which fortunately ended up all right. My friend, Erica-- and that's another story-- and I went to Streicher, Julius Streicher. I don't know whether you've heard of him, the man from Nuremberg.  INT: Yes. IH: And we asked-- we knocked at the door, and Mrs. Streicher answered, fortunately. And we were only two little girls of about-- oh, I don't know, eight, nine years old. And we asked, could we see Mr. Streicher, please, because we'd like to go swimming. And why can't we go swimming? We are Jewish. But you know, we're only children. And why can't we go swimming? And can we have permission to go swimming? And she said she would give him the message, which was just as well he wasn't there. [LAUGHS] 
INT: What led you to do that? IH: Because we wanted to go swimming, like children would.  INT: Yes. And how did you know who to go to? IH: Well because he was the boss man, as it were, you know?  INT: Did your parents know that you did that? IH: I don't think they did at the time. I think we told them afterwards. But--  INT: And you just knew that he could make these decisions? IH: Yes. Well, we'd hoped he-- you know, he would allow it.  INT: Where did you go? IH: But obviously, we never heard again.  INT: You went to his home? IH: We went to his home.  INT: Can you tell me what it was like? IH: No. Because I think we only got as far as the front door anyway. But no, I don't remember-- remember.  INT: How does his-- his wife receive you? IH: She was very nice. She said, well, you know, I'll-- I'll-- I'll tell him. He's not in now, but I'll give him the message.  INT: And? IH: Nothing. Nothing ever happened.  INT: Did you leave your address with them? IH: That I can't remember.  INT: That's quite a risk. IH: But must have done, I suppose, a Phone number or something. Well, yes. I suppose it was, in retrospect. But you do these rash things, don't you, when you can't understand it?  INT: Yes. IH: You know, why should we be singled out, you know? We're no different. So you know, standard child's mentality. 
INT: You said just now your friend, that's another story. Can you tell me? IH: Erica. Yes. Well, we're still friendly to this day. Our parents were very friendly. I think my mother was friendly with Erica's mother even before she was married because I think she might have come from Fürth. And they came to-- they left Germany in about 19-- hm, possibly '36. I couldn't be sure. And first, they went to Italy, and then they came to England. And they settled in Cardiff, where there was a small estate, an-- what we now would call an industrial estate. And if-- if they were-- if the-- the Jewish employees, and they were mainly refugees and a lot from Nuremberg, started their factories again and employed so many English people, they were allowed-- they were given permission. Whether they got a grant as well, I wouldn't be sure. But they were given permission to start their factories. And my-- Erica's father had a small factory. They made little comb cases. You know, those comb and mirror cases? You know, that sort of thing. And when things got bad after-- after Crystal Night, Erica's mother with Erica went around the Jewish community in Cardiff and asked if they-- anybody would be prepared to take a little girl of 12 [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] until the parents could come out and-- and collect her. And this lady, Mrs. Gordon, Edith Gordon, who was 60 at the time, and I was a dreadfully spoiled child, she said, yes, she would. So when I did come with a Kindertransport a few months later, I already had someone to go to. So in a way, she saved my life. Because if I hadn't had a sponsor, I might not have got on the Kindertransport. And of course, we're friendly. She lives in-- in Australia now. She came with us on holiday last year. We are, you know, in correspondence all the time. And we were friends when we were children. 
INT: I think that's a good place to stop and [INAUDIBLE] and start [INAUDIBLE].  INT: This is tape two. I'm conducting an interview with Inga Hack. The date is November 5, 1997. Can you tell me what you saw on the streets at this time in Nuremberg? IH: I don't-- I mean, you saw people in Hitler uniform, but I didn't see anything of any frightening nature. Let me-- let me put it like that. On a personal basis I didn't.  INT: Did you see any incidents against other people? IH: No. Not at that time.  INT: Did you hear-- when you were a little older, did you hear Hitler on the radio? IH: Oh, yes. Lots of times. Lots of times.  INT: Can you remember the sort of things you heard? IH: Well, yes. He was always talking against the Jewish people and enticing people against them.  INT: Can-- can you remember any particular-- IH: No. No, I can't. You mean any particular speech?  INT: Yes, any-- anything that particularly affected you. IH: No. No, I don't think so. No. No, I can't--  INT: What did it-- what did it make you feel hearing that sort of thing? IH: Well, I suppose one wondered, you know, when it was all going to end. But at the time, [PAUSES FOR 5 SECONDS] just, you know, why-- why is he-- you know, what-- why is he sort of targeting the Jewish people so much? We didn't [INAUDIBLE]. 
INT: Did you go back to your parents with questions about that? IH: Well I suppose I must have done, but I-- I cannot remember what their answer was. As I say, they were very, very protective, very protective. In fact, thinking back on it now I would say I was very immature for my age. Because they tried to shield me, you know, from what was happening.  INT: Well, children were more protected in those days, anyway, weren't they? IH: Yes, yes, absolutely. Yes, yes.  INT: And at your Jewish school, was there any talk there? Did the teachers explain what was going on to-- to you children? IH: Do you know, I do not remember this. I couldn't answer that question. Not-- I mean, it's not in my memory now in any way. I think we were too busy doing-- studying, and doing our homework, and-- and carrying on, you know, as best we could. Things didn't really get bad until sort of 1938, and then things started.  INT: Can you tell me about that, about how things changed then? IH: Yes. I think the schools were closed-- the Jewish schools were closed then. Because I went to Frankfurt to-- to an aunt who lived there at the time. So again, I came away from Nuremberg altogether. And I didn't return until a little before Crystal Night. And of course, then, you know, we did realize that things were bad when they came into our house. I still think they were drugged. 
INT: Who came into your house? IH: The-- the-- the-- the Brownshirts with hammers. And--  INT: How many of them were there? IH: You know, I can't remember.  INT: They came in with hammers? IH: They came in with hammers. We could hear the-- the smashing in-- in-- in flats below. By then we were in the [NON-ENGLISH], and there must have been some more Jewish people living there. The woman underneath-- in the flat underneath-- was very, very clever. And I wish my mother had been, but you don't think of these things. She told them the child has got diphtheria and they never went in. But we could hear the smashing that was going on all around, and my mother hid me in the maid's bedroom. Tina said--  INT: Where was your maid at this time? IH: Tina was still with us. And Tina said I was her daughter, and they believed her. So Tina's room wasn't touched. But they came in and they smashed the furniture, they smashed the silver, they smashed the cut glass. They took all the money that there was, but they did not hurt my mother.  INT: Do you know why that was? IH: Well, that was Crystal Night. No-- yes, it was, wasn't it? There was somebody killed.  INT: So when you say why, you say they didn't hurt her. IH: They didn't, you know, bodily hurt her. They smashed all the things in the house, but they didn't-- [INAUDIBLE] her. 
INT: What did they say while they were doing it? IH: I didn't know, because I was in the maid's-- maid's room.  INT: What did you hear? And my mother was crying after they left.  INT: What did you hear? IH: And-- well, I heard the smashing, and then the glass breaking, and mirrors breaking. And-- but, I-- I-- I mean, I don't think normal people would do that. I'm sure they were drugged. They'd all been somewhere, been given something, and then went into all the Jewish houses. But we were lucky. I mean, as I say, we were not bodily affected. But in some cases, people were killed, children were thrown from banisters, babies were thrown out of windows. It was dreadful. Dreadful. So the following night, we hid.  INT: Can I-- can I just ask you? IH: Yes?  INT: During that night, what happened to Tina, your maid? You say you hid in her bed. Was she with you in-- in her room? IH: I think she was with my mother. Possibly she-- because she was there, they didn't touch her. Protected her, as it were.  INT: And your father? IH: Because she was there. My father was already out of the house by then.  INT: And what did you think when you came back into the rest of your flat and saw it? IH: Well, we were all very upset. And then we-- we realized, of course, that things had really-- you know, were get-- were get-- were bad. But my mother couldn't leave because, you know, you were in a quota system. And she wasn't lucky enough to be high on the quota, and we hadn't got any sponsors. So-- 
INT: Had they made any attempts before that to leave? Any plans? IH: No, because my father didn't think, you know, that his German people could possibly do him any damage. But he went-- he went on a-- he went to Holland and foolishly went back into Germany again. And then they got him. If he'd stayed in Holland, he would have survived-- possibly survived. Depends. If they had moved to Holland, then he probably wouldn't have survived either.  INT: What happened after that night when your home was smashed? IH: Well, we stayed in the home, and-- [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] and-- well, that was, what, in November?  INT: November, yes, of-- IH: And in December--  INT: About the 9th. IH: Yeah, and then December I came to England, end of December.  INT: When they smashed up your flat, did they do anything in your room-- a child's room? IH: I don't think so. I didn't think so. I don't think there was anything of value in it, you know.  INT: But did they destroy anything? IH: I don't remember that, no. Mainly in the dining room, the lounge, and the bedroom, you know.  INT: Did they take anything? I think you said they took money. IH: They took money. I don't think so. In fact, it's-- you know, if they had taken the goods instead of smashed them up, you could see some sense in that. But to smash it all up-- lovely vases, and [? Werner ?] glasses, and, you know, cut glass, of which I have a little bit-- whatever was saved-- and silver, all, you know, knocked in. It was so senseless, utterly senseless. And as I say, the second night, we felt this was going to be repeated. So we hid in somebody's garage. But they didn't come back. 
INT: Who-- whose garage was that? I-- IH: I-- I couldn't tell you. I really couldn't.  INT: What happened? IH: They didn't come back.  INT: How did you from your home to this garage? IH: I think we must have walked, so it couldn't have been too far away.  INT: Who was that? Who was with you? IH: Tina, my mother, and I.  INT: And where was your father then? IH: Well, I didn't know where my father was, but presumably he was-- he'd either been arrested coming back from-- from Holland, or he was in Holland at the time. Again, it was-- I was all protected from this part of it.  INT: But by now, the fear must have been-- IH: I knew, yes, yes.  INT: Well, what did you think? IH: What did I think at the time? Well, there was talk about, you know, coming to England, and I think I was probably quite looking forward to that, thinking this would be just an episode. And my parents would come back-- you know, I would see them again at some stage.  INT: So you-- IH: And we didn't-- of course, you know, the Final Solution hadn't actually started then.  INT: When you went from your home to the garage, what did you see on the streets? IH: Well, it was at night. I don't think I saw anything very much. It was only--  INT: And you stayed there how long? IH: The whole night. 
INT: And then what did you do? IH: Go back to the flat and found that nothing had happened. They didn't repeat. It was just the one night. But they-- they burned the synagogues, of course, on that night, as well.  INT: Did you see any of that? IH: No, because we lived a long way away from there, so what went on.  INT: And what about your neighbors, and-- when you went back? IH: Well, Erika had left, and-- and quite a lot of the others had left. And I don't think I ever knew the people underneath us at all. I-- I don't remember them at all.  INT: So what-- what did you do then after that night in the garage? IH: I think I just stayed at home because we couldn't go to school anymore until, you know, I-- I-- as I say, it was only for two months. Because then, you know, I came to England in-- in--  INT: So you-- you were 12 then? IH: I was 12 then, yes.  INT: What happened in those two months leading up to you leaving? IH: Possibly did a bit of shopping to buy a few things-- clothes and things, [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] and live a fairly normal life within the constraints of what we could do. I don't remember anything very much untoward at that time.  INT: Did-- did the atmosphere on the streets get any worse after Kristallnacht? IH: No, I-- I-- I-- I don't-- I cannot honestly say that I remember anything of that. 
INT: I wonder what Tina-- was she still with you then? IH: Yes.  INT: What did-- I mean, she was a German woman. IH: Yes, yes.  INT: What did she say to you about what was going on? IH: She was Catholic, so she was a deeply religious woman. [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] Well she-- she probably just regretted it. But as she was with us, I-- I don't really remember her actually, you know, saying very much. It doesn't stick in my memory at all.  INT: Can you tell me-- IH: She was probably briefed by my mother not to say too much, I suspect.  INT: What were the preparations? IH: [INAUDIBLE].  INT: How were the preparations made for you to leave? IH: I think my mother bought a big suitcase, [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] which she sent on afterwards, which you still could do at that time. And she presumably bought me some clothes. I think I had name tapes put into linen and that sort of thing. Because I didn't know when I was going. I just know that-- that I was going.  INT: Did you speak any English? IH: Not a word. Not a word.  INT: How did your mother explain to you the necessity for you to leave? IH: Well, she-- she said she didn't know-- she was going to stay to find out, you you know, try and find out what happened to my father. She wasn't going-- you know. But if anything, you know, that I should-- at least that I should have a new life where I'd be able to skate, and swim, and do all the things, you know, that I was used to doing. And that hopefully, you know, they would come on afterwards. 
INT: And what was your vision of-- of what England would be like? IH: To be honest, I haven't got a clue. My parents spoke fluent French. My mother spoke some English because she was in a finishing school in Switzerland, but my father didn't. And-- and we did French in school, so I never learned any English.  INT: So you were saying you-- there was shopping nametags, you bought a suitcase. What-- what happened after that? IH: Well, my-- my mother packed. Obviously on the actual journey, we could only take a small case. But afterwards, she was able to send quite a few things in-- in very large-- very large-- these heavy wooden suitcases-- trunks, really, we would call them. And she sent quite a few things, yes.  INT: What happened to your grandparents-- sorry. IH: Particularly as presents to the people.  INT: What happened to your grandparents during Kristallnacht? IH: They were dead already. They were already dead on normal circumstances. So they didn't-- 1933, I think, my paternal grandmother. My paternal grandfather was dead already because my father took a photograph of his grave. And my maternal grandmother, [? Erika, ?] was still there because I spent the night in their house when she came to [? us. ?] She died of cancer of the colon, I think. She-- they were already dead. So, you know, they didn't live through it.  INT: Was there any resistance on your part about leaving? IH: None at all, I'm ashamed to say. [LAUGHS] No, there wasn't. I was looking forward to an adventure, as it were. And don't forget, I was going to see [? Erika. ?] So, you know. 
INT: So what happened next? IH: You mean in the Kinder-- Kindertransport?  INT: Well, yes. I mean, how was-- how was your journey arranged that you would-- where did you leave from? IH: We left from Nuremberg. We went through Holland.  INT: Can you tell me about the journey to the station in-- in Nuremberg? How did you get there? IH: You know, it's complete blank. As my mother didn't drive, possibly my aunt drove, because she drove. And she lived with us-- with my mother at that time, as well. Or we took a taxi. I cannot-- I-- it's no good. I cannot remember how we got to the station at all.  INT: What-- what are your memories of the station? IH: Very, very faint. Just we went in an ordinary carriage, and there were already some children in there. And there were some children I knew, one or two from my-- from the-- the Fürth school. I think we were frightened. We were frightened that we might be examined by the Nazis, or they might stop us going, or-- or anything. But the journey was very uneventful.  INT: Can you remember more about your farewells with your mother at the station? IH: Well, I-- we said goodbye. We kissed. Possibly we cried. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] And that was it. It-- it-- I don't think the train stopped for very long, because I think the-- the train came possibly from Austria. I don't know. 
INT: Did you know particularly the advice as she left you? IH: To be good. To write. [PAUSES FOR 6 SECONDS] Yes, to-- to-- to-- I know my father-- you know, early days, my-- my father did say that, you know, it'll never be the same as when you are with your parents, obviously, when you're with strangers. But, you know, try and-- and be helpful to them, and-- and be useful, and behave yourself as you would to a 12-year-old.  INT: So was that-- were those the last things your mother said to you? IH: Possibly. Possibly, yes. Yes.  INT: And then-- IH: And then we were off on our journey to England. And when we were in Holland the people waved to us, [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] if I remember rightly. I cannot remember whether there were any-- I-- I think possibly German police, but I don't think there were any actual Nazis around, no.  INT: Were there any incidents on that journey? IH: No, none at all, only other children joining us.  INT: Did you meet anyone? Any other children? IH: I think other children joined us, yes. Yes. But as I say, I knew quite a few of them already from Nuremberg. You know, they were-- they were my-- my friends at school. So--  INT: And then when you arrived-- IH: Well, yes, we-- we arrived. I was sick as a dog in the-- in-- in-- in the boat because we weren't allowed to go up on top. We were kept underneath. Then we had a medical inspection, and then we arrived in-- in Harwich Dovercourt and went into a camp. 
INT: What was that like? IH: I think I've got it somewhere, because I can't remember it offhand but at the time I made a note of it. They were chalets. They were chalets. And-- and-- and we were-- we had a-- a concert, and we were taken to the cinema. Not that we could understand a word, but I saw Dorothy Lamour eaten by a crocodile or something like that. And we were treated very well. The food was excellent. And I knew I wasn't going to be there very long because I was waiting for the family to collect me. What I didn't know was that there was a hitch-up because unfortunately, the youngest daughter was very-- had a very bad confinement. And the mother-- her mother, who was the lady who was taking me, was in London, you know, looking after her. So I was there a few more days. But we learned a little bit of English. We had English lessons, and we did any evening, any day, you know, the Lambeth walk. And yeah, they treated the children very well.  INT: What were your first impressions of England? What were your first impressions? IH: My first impressions of England. Well, the people were very kind, and I presume I liked it. Obviously, we had to learn the language. Mrs. Gordon spoke German. She-- her-- her-- her father was Russian. She came from Russia. She spoke French, she-- she spoke German, she spoke English. She was a very well-educated woman. 
INT: So she collected you? IH: So-- no. I think it was a friend of hers, a non-Jewish lady, who collected me, brought me to London. Because she tried to explain to me why they were late. And of course, I didn't understand a word. So I was in that house where the young lady had had the baby who is now a psychiatrist. And then we-- we went back to Cardiff. And I went to the ordinary state school until I was-- my English was good enough to go to grammar school.  INT: So here you were, a 12-year-old girl from Germany with no English, living in Wales. IH: Yes.  INT: How did you cope? IH: I seemed to cope. Children, you know, learn a language very, very quickly. And in six months' time, my English was good enough to go to grammar school. So--  INT: When you arrived, first of all, did you try to contact your parents? IH: I think-- I think-- yes, I have letters of my mother's. Yes, we did correspond.  INT: Can you remember the sort of things she said in her letters? IH: Well, she sent me various-- she kept sending things, and-- and smuggling a bit of jewelry into it. She-- she would bake a cake, and then she would say the nuts are very hard, so I knew there'd be a pair of earrings in it, you know.  INT: So did things get through that way? IH: Oh yes, oh, yes, they got through, except the watch. We had to go and collect that from the customs. The cake must have broken. But-- and-- and oh, she did various things. I would have to go through the letters and translate them, which I want to do one day. And just to tell me a little bit, you know. But she never told me about the-- the situation as it was. 
INT: Not about the conditions and how things had changed? IH: No, no, no. Only the people she had seen, and this one was going, and she was going to see them. And she was given them-- giving them something, which I knew that'd be-- she sent a lot of money through. It's a very sad story. Unfortunately, when war broke out the money was, of course, of no use anymore-- the German money. So we gave it to a couple-- Jewish couple who came and were going to America, and asked them to put it in a bank account for me. Never did. Never heard any more. So that was that. But it was no use to me in England anyway.  INT: Did your mother give you any news of your father? IH: My-- well, I think he was in a local-- he was-- he was local. He wasn't free, but he-- but he was fairly local. So I think she knew where he was, yes. But--  INT: How were you feeling about all this? IH: Well, this is the sad part of it, I think. And-- and it's terrible to admit to it, but as a child I suppose I-- it was-- coming to England was a great adventure. And I was very much on with the new life, and I did not write sufficiently and often enough to my mother as I should have done.  INT: But you didn't know what was going to happen. IH: I didn't know. No, of course not. No, no, no, I didn't. 
INT: Can you tell me about this family that you'd come to, Mrs. Gordon? Who else was in the family? IH: She had an elder daughter who was a teacher. She had-- there was Dolly, [? Wish, ?] and two-- two other-- three other daughters besides. So she had four-- four daughters and two sons. The two sons were doctors. Two daughters were married to doctors. One was married to a jeweler, and one, as I say, was single and was a teacher. Yes.  INT: And was there a Mr. Gordon? IH: No. He was already dead, as well, yeah.  INT: So did she live alone? IH: She was a widow, yes.  INT: What was-- IH: With her-- with her eldest-- with her-- one of her-- her daughters.  INT: What was she like? IH: Well, she was very-- she was very nice, but I was dreadfully spoiled. And you can imagine, I mean, it's a wonderful thing for a woman of 60 to take a-- a child of 12, you know. I-- I managed to bring my bicycle with me. Somehow my mother must have sent it. And I know that I used to come cycling, you know, you know, hello, Grandma, you know, and the bathroom mat would be turned over. And of course, she had been used to a quiet life. But--  INT: Who decided you should call her grandma? IH: I think she must have done. Yes, yes.  INT: Was there a-- IH: As I had no more grandparents, there was no problem. She was 60 and I was 12, you know. There was no-- 
INT: Was there any Jewish home life? IH: Oh, very much so. They were very orthodox, yes. Yes.  INT: How was that for you? IH: I adapted. One of my--  INT: So the dietary laws were observed? IH: Yes, very much so. Yes, and I went to cheder. I was taught by Rabbi Unterman, who was-- he was a-- you know, he's one of the rabbis in London. I-- I think he's retired now-- yeah, very much so. Pesach was kept. We had-- we had a lot of people we entertained the [INAUDIBLE] for Pesach. All festivals were kept-- very much an orthodox Jewish household, yes.  INT: How did the children at your new school behave towards you, a refugee with a-- an accent? IH: Well, all I remember is they were reading when I got there, and I couldn't, of course, understand a word. But the only thing they did at the grammar school, they put pins in my tires of my bicycle because the tires were bigger than the English ones. You know, they were-- but otherwise, I think they accepted me. I-- I don't remember any-- any problems.  INT: And the teachers? IH: Extremely nice. Extremely nice.  INT: Did anyone ask you about where you'd come from? IH: Well, I-- I must have-- well, obviously I couldn't tell them because I-- I couldn't speak the language to start with. I think they knew-- I imagine the teachers would have told them all about me beforehand and say, be nice to this-- you know, you could imagine they could [INAUDIBLE]. Be nice to the little girl. 
INT: So when war broke out, how did that affect you? IH: I was in the house of my friend [? Erika ?] when war broke out.  INT: Also in-- in Cardiff? IH: In Cardiff, yes. And then, well, we just wondered, you know, what was going to happen. So--  INT: When was the last time you heard from your mother? IH: That must've been presumably in 1942 when I had a Red Cross letter to say she was in [NON-ENGLISH]. And I think that was the last letter we had.  INT: Thank you.  INT: This is tape three. I'm conducting an interview with Inge Hack. The date is November 5, 1997. Can I ask you how things changed in Cardiff when war broke out? IH: Yes, you certainly can. We started getting are cellars ready. The houses had cellars. We started to get our cellars ready. We had a-- an Anderson shelter in the garden, where that was put in. And when, you know, we did have some bombs. In fact, we-- fortunately, we had some unexploded landmines. I apparently slept right through it. But we did have incendiary bombs quite a lot. I did some firefighting. And one of them safe-- went right through a book of Dickens in the house where we lived in-- in-- in the loft, and saved the house. It burned itself through. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] Obviously, there were blackouts. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] And-- and we-- we spent quite a lot of time in the cellar when the air raids came. 
INT: Were you aware, with the outbreak of war, of the danger to your parents? IH: No, I don't think personally I was. I really don't think I was. I did realize that the only way that Hitler could be defeated was if-- if England, you know, if there was a war and England won it. But naturally, I just thought my-- my parents would stay in Nuremberg. I mean, you know. There was-- I mean, I don't think any of us knew of what was going on at all.  INT: Did Mrs. Gordon talk to you about it? IH: No. But she did say I should write to my mother more. But I don't think-- well, she didn't know any more either, you know. We could only correspond from the Red Cross, whereas before, she wrote letters. But actually, she also wrote letters through Switzerland, and she wrote letters through Holland, where, at that time still, everything was normal.  INT: So-- IH: And we had relatives in Holland.  INT: And she was receiving your letters? IH: Yes, she was.  INT: So she knew that you were-- IH: Again, through Holland, I think.  INT: --that you were safe and with her. IH: She knew I was safe. She knew I was happy, and she knew I was with a good family. And she kept telling me what presents to give them. A-- a-- you know, she-- she'd send some-- a-- a coat, Persian lamb coat. And I gave that to-- to-- to one of the family, and jewelry to other members of the family, and Persian carpets to another member of the family. 
INT: She got things like that through? IH: In those big cases before-- before, you know, before the war, obviously.  INT: Yes. Yes. IH: Yes. Yes, she did. So-- and of course, I-- I-- as I say, I left school when I-- no. Unfortunately, because of the war, Mrs. Gordon said she-- because she-- she was a property owner, and the property were affected. And they said they couldn't afford to keep me in the grammar school any longer because, of course, in those days, you had to pay for your education. She went to the Jewish Agency. But they couldn't help her. They didn't help her financially. I'm afraid, I'm sorry to say, I didn't get any help at all. And--  INT: How were you doing at school? IH: I was doing extremely well. It was a great shame. However, I left school at 14, and I worked in a shoe shop.  INT: Can I just ask you about those-- IH: Yes.  INT: --days at school when there was a war on, and you were a German child to-- to many of your contemporaries, did that affect the way they behaved towards you-- IH: No.  INT: --when war broke out? IH: Not at all. I say, not at all, but maybe that's why they put pins in my bicycle tires. [LAUGHS] I don't know. No, I had-- actually, I-- I cannot remember the family. But very near us was a very, very nice Welsh family. And I spend a lot of time with them. And they taught me a lot of English. You know, obviously, they can speak. And Grandma, very, very cleverly, would not speak German to me. So I had to learn English if I wanted to get around, you know. And of course, that's the only way to do it. 
INT: You say you didn't want to leave school. What-- what were you most interested in school? IH: No, I didn't want to leave school.  INT: What-- what were the things you were enjoying at school? IH: I was very interested in chemistry. I would have liked to have done medicine. And mathematics was not a good subject of mine. But everything else was.  INT: Did you have plans for your future before you knew you had to leave school? Did you have ideas of what you would do? IH: Well, I'd like to have gone to university, you know, and take my matric-- in those days it was matric-- and carry on with my education.  INT: So you-- IH: But I was only 13 at the time, so, you know, I left school at 14. So, you know, you-- your options have very much opened then.  INT: Yes. So if you left at 14, that was, what, 1941? IH: It must have been--  INT: '41, '42? IH: --yes, '38 I came. '39, '40, '41, '42, I suppose--  INT: '41. IH: --yes.  INT: And you say you went to work in a-- IH: In a shoe shop. Yes, a very refined shoe shop. [LAUGHS] Yes. And then eventually, through the good offices of one of the sons who, as I told you, was a doctor and qualified in Cardiff as Welsh National School of Medicine, he got me in in the path lab of the Welsh National School of Medicine, from where I graduated with a diploma in bacteriology. But, of course, I did a working diploma. In other words, you know, it was then in the-- in-- during-- with the work, within the work. 
INT: You worked while you studied. IH: Yes.  INT: Yes. IH: Yes, yes, yes.  INT: What happened then? IH: What then? When I qualified? I took a job with the-- with the Welsh Blood Transfusion Service. I got engaged to Larry, who I met through the same gentleman who got me into the path lab.  INT: What year was that? IH: And-- well, that would be about 1940-- '48, I think.  INT: So we've really-- IH: '40-- yes.  INT: --gone ahead from-- IH: Gone-- yes.  INT: Can you tell me more about what was going on for you during the war in terms of your feelings to-- about what was happening to your parents? IH: Oh, well, obviously, you wondered what was happening. You had no news. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] But you realized it was wartime, and Holland was invaded. So, obviously, it had to stop from Holland. It was only the Red Cross then, which was the only thing, you know, that kept us in-- in contact, until--  INT: Did your mother's letters change then-- IH: --1942.  INT: --when it was only-- IH: Very, very much. They were very, very brief. Well, the Red Cross-- you could only write so many words, yes.  INT: But did the content of your mother's letters change? IH: Yes, we had international stamp. I don't think-- only to-- you mean the very last one? Just, well then she was already no longer in Nuremberg. But when she was still in Nuremberg, only to say this one was leaving, and that one was leaving. But that was already-- before the war, obviously. During the war, I think they-- they-- they were probably much shorter, just saying what she was doing. She was working, also. As I said before, she-- she had been a-- a sister in-- in-- you know, a-- a-- a-- what do you call it-- Red Cross, like a Red Cross sister, in the First World War. And she was doing some sort of medical work, helping. All the Jewish people could no longer go to a non-Jewish doctor. So, obviously, there must have been some sort of clinic. And I think she lived in the same house, and helped, you know, with the medical side there. 
INT: I wonder what-- what stage you realized that your mother really was in danger. IH: I think mainly when-- when things were beginning to come through, and that were-- I don't think that was until after the war.  INT: And when did you first hear about concentration camps? IH: I think that was after the war. I don't think we knew much during the war about concentration camps.  INT: You didn't hear in the newspapers or the radio? IH: Don't remember. Do you know, I-- I really don't know. It may be that I've just blocked it. But I-- I just cannot remember exactly when I first knew about it. I really don't.  INT: And-- IH: I know I had a letter from somebody, but that must have been after the war-- who had been in Theresienstadt and had met my father there. But-- but really, I don't know. Until I had, you know, the-- these sort of notification of death from the Kulturgemeinde in Nuremberg, did I really know. And in fact, I'm, at the moment--  INT: When was that? IH: That was after the war. And I'm now in touch with the International Tracing Service to try and find out what really happened to my mother. I know what happened to my father. He was in Theresienstadt. And he was in the laundry. He was working in the laundry, apparently. And then-- well, he was an older man by then. He was 40 when I was born. So he wasn't a youngster. And then he was sent to Auschwitz. So we do know that. But my mother, I do not know. Nobody seems to know. So that's what, I'm at the moment, trying to find out. 
INT: Have you-- have you had any-- IH: Only to say I should be patient, because they've got a lot of people who are making inquiries. But I thought she was in Treblinka, and I think I could be wrong on that. So I have just written to them to say the last letter was from [NON-ENGLISH]. And maybe that would be of some help to them to trace--  INT: Yes. IH: --what happened. So, no, I don't know. I think you've simply got to accept it. And if you were to ask me, how do I feel about the German people today? I have to say, I cannot live with hate. I never could, and I can't. I was guiding at Leeds Castle, and I met a lot of Germans, and also a party from Nuremberg, which was quite an experience. For the younger people, I have no feeling at all. For the older people, yes. You wonder, where were you? Were you in a concentration camp? Were you a warder? Do you know? You have that thing. And the strange thing is when you go back to Germany today-- I was in Garmisch-Partenkirchen some-- a few years ago. And I kept looking for the [GERMAN] sign-- you know, the sign that Jews not wanted here. And of course, everything now is so cozy that you just cannot believe that these same people did all these dreadful things. You just-- it's-- it's incomprehensible. It's mass hysteria, you know? 
INT: Yes. IH: That's what it is.  INT: And so at the end of the war, what did you believe had happened to your parents? You-- IH: By the end of the war, I-- I must-- I'll have to have a look at the date of the notification. By the end of the war, I think we were-- it was gradually beginning to dawn on us what happened, yes.  INT: Was Mrs. Gordon helpful to you then? IH: She was dead by then. Yes, she died.  INT: When did she die? IH: She died during the war.  INT: So where were you then in 1940-- IH: With her daughter, who had been evacuated to Cardiff with her children. So I lived with her. And then she went back to London after the war, and I-- I went back to live with Mrs. Gordon's other daughter until I got married. I got married in Cardiff.  INT: When was that? IH: 1950-- 5th of November. [LAUGHS]  INT: Can you tell me about your husband? IH: Yes. He's a very nice man, [LAUGHS] obviously! He was an engineering student when I met him. He had come back. He'd been to Egypt. And he had come back. And he was taking an external degree in-- in electrical engineering in-- in-- in Plymouth. He had been educated in Plymouth. His parents lived there. It's there where I met him, because my brother, who was the-- the doctor who I mentioned earlier, they settled in Plymouth after the war. And Larry's parents very much befriended them, because obviously, they were quite a young couple, and friendless. And they became very good friends. So I think they decided they've got a-- a young lady, and they've got a-- a young gentleman. Let's get them together. [LAUGHS] I'm pleased to say, it's worked. 
INT: And where were you married? IH: It's been a happy marriage.  INT: What-- where were you married? IH: In Cardiff, Windsor Place Synagogue, which sadly doesn't exist anymore.  INT: Was that an Orthodox synagogue? IH: Yes, yes. It was an Orthodox synagogue. Yes.  INT: So had you retained your-- the-- the Jewish life-- IH: Very much so.  INT: --that Mrs. Gordon had given you of? IH: Very much so. Yes, yes. For many years. And my father-in-law was very-- I think he was the president of the-- of the synagogue in Plymouth. Plymouth, I think, is the third-oldest synagogue in England. It's a beautiful synagogue. And he-- he was very active in the synagogue, yes.  INT: And after your marriage, did you ever go back to Germany? IH: Yes, we went on a honeymoon to collect a few things which my mother had entrusted to Tina. Ah, and that was-- and then we went back--  INT: How did you find Tina again? IH: She wrote. I think she must have done. Yes--  INT: She had your address. IH: She had my address. Yes, my mother must have given-- given the--  INT: Was this after the war she wrote? IH: Yes, after the war. Yes. She had, meanwhile, been employed by a gentleman. She was a housekeeper. The gentleman had died, so she was left comfortably to live in that house. I think he-- he must have owned the flat, or, you know, she was-- And we went to see her. We went to see her several times. Also, my father's secretary was in a home-- in an old age home. And we went to see her as well. And-- 
INT: But what was it like going back that first time? Your honeymoon as well? IH: Very strange. Very, very strange. Yes. Very strange. There, again, everything had gone. The people didn't want to know. The Nazis had been forgotten. And they carried on as they did long, long before the Nazis came to power.  INT: When you arrived there, did you try to find your old home? IH: Yes, I did. And I think, yes, if I remember, it was still standing.  INT: Did you go in? IH: Yes. Was it standing, or wasn't it standing? No, we didn't go in. Because Nuremberg had been very, very badly bombed. But I think our house was still standing.  INT: What did that feel like? IH: Feel like. Very strange. Very, very strange. Yes. But we didn't stay very long. I think we stayed outside Nuremberg, and just really-- the-- the only reason we went there, really, is to see Tina. And that-- and we did that some years later with the children.  INT: Can I just ask you. On that first-- IH: Yes.  INT: --visit back, when you went to see Tina, did you talk about the war with her? IH: I think we must done. I mean, Larry was with me then. We must have done. We must have done. But exactly, you know, how the conversation went-- well, I mean-- mean, I knew how good Tina was, so I didn't have to ask her. She lost a nephew in-- in Russia, you know, on the Russian front. And she had no love for the Nazis. So I knew how her feelings were. She didn't tell me very much about the day that my mother was taken away, as far as I know. No, she didn't. She didn't. 
INT: You say not very much. Did she tell you anything? IH: Do you know? I don't really think she did. And I only found out where they-- where they were taken from when I went to the first reunion in America. And they had a lot of stuff about it-- about it, obviously, from Nuremberg. And that was-- no, I don't-- I don't think Tina did talk about it very much, no.  INT: How did that return visit affect you? IH: Well, very strangely, I suppose. My German improved tremendously. And I had a sort of sense of belonging, which immediately went when we left Germany again. So it-- it does sort of-- where you're born, in some way, does give you a sense of belonging--  INT: And you'd had a happy childhood there. IH: --whether you like it or not. I had a happy childhood there, yes. I was one of the lucky ones. I've been lucky right through.  INT: So then back to England, then. IH: Yes.  INT: What happened then? IH: Well, we went back some years ago, again to see Tina. And it was rather amusing, because we went back. We were on our way to Yugoslavia with the children, by car, and something went wrong with the car in the middle of Nuremberg. And Nuremberg was-- was by then a one-way-- a lot of one-way streets. Tina got us terribly lost. But anyway, we left Tina, and we went back to do a little bit of sightseeing in Nuremberg. And something went wrong with the car. We couldn't reverse anymore. And so it was a Saturday. So, of course, the garages weren't so interested. And Larry always takes his boiler suit with him just in case when we go on a foreign trip, in case something goes wrong, that he can fix. So he asked them if he could just use their equipment while he fixed it. And we arrived at Tina's flat with Larry in his boiler suit. And Tina was absolutely horrified. She said, what does your husband do for a living? And I realized what a snob she was. [LAUGHS] So anyway, I assured her that he didn't normally walk around in a boiler suit. [LAUGHS] And you know, we spent the afternoon with her, but mainly talking, I think, about her and her family, and the old days when, as children, we used to go-- her sister, her niece with whom I'm still very friendly-- we correspond. They had a-- they-- they-- they lived outside in the country. And Easter time, the brother-- her-- her nephew who was killed in Russia-- he used to blow eggs for us and decorate them. And my friend [? Erika ?] used to come and spend the weekend there. So, you know, we were reminiscing more of my childhood, rather than of what happened during the war. 
INT: So then after that trip back at-- back to England again? IH: I think that was the last-- no. Back to England again.  INT: And then? IH: Normal life. And then the only other time we went to Germany was to meet my-- my son in Garmisch-Partenkirchen. And that is a story which I don't know whether we have time, and I don't know whether you want to listen to it. But it was very, very strange. Garmisch is not very far from Bruchsal. And I wanted to see my grandparents' grave. And so we went to the-- the Burg in Bruchsal the-- the-- the-- oh, the castle in Bruchsal, which had been bombed, but had been, you know, restored. And I asked where the Jewish cemetery was. And they told me I wouldn't be able to take the car. It's a long way away. It's a long walk. It's in the country somewhere. So it was a very hot day, and we decided we'd have an ice cream and a coffee. And I said to Larry-- I let Larry stand-- stay and sit down, and have his ice cream and coffee. And I say, would he mind if I did a bit of wandering around, just to get in the atmosphere? Because I knew my grandparents lived there. Actually, the place that-- that the-- the house where my grandfather-- grandparents lived was-- was absolutely opposite the cafe, only we didn't know that at the time. And it-- it's going to be a restaurant now. It's all been bombed. Bruchsal that was very badly bombed. Anyway, I walked around, and I saw a sister-- a nun. And I asked her if she had any-- how long she'd been living there, and did she know a family-- Wertheimer. Now, they had a shoe shop. And she said, no, but I think somebody else might. So she took me to that other lady, and she wasn't in, because her husband was in hospital, and she'd been visiting. And then a gentleman came towards us. And she said, I think this gentleman might know. And she-- she-- she said, you know, this is looking for a-- a Wertheimer, a family Wertheimer. And that man just looked at me, and he said, shoe Wertheimer? And I said, yes. And they had the shop next door. It's unbelievable, isn't it? 
INT: Strange. And did he remember your grandparents? IH: Oh, very much so. Yes.  INT: What did he say to you? IH: Yes. Yes. So I said, I want to go and see the cemetery. And that's not the end of the story. And I said, but I believe, you know, my husband is-- is in the cafe, and we'll get the car, and we'll-- oh, he said, you don't need the car-- that we can walk to the cemetery.  INT: And yet you'd been told-- IH: So-- just a minute. So I said, well, I was told, you know, that it's at-- ah, he said. That's the old cemetery-- the very old one. But your grandparents are in the new one. And he said, I'm going to there, because my wife is buried there. And it is the Jewish part, like it is here. It's part of the non-Jewish part. You know, it's at the back. And so we went. He came with us. And Larry went to one side, and he and I went to the other side, and we found it. And I gave him a big kiss, I was so emotional. And it's very well-preserved. The town of Bruchsal--  INT: How did he respond to you-- IH: --has preserved it.  INT: --this man? IH: Well, we both cried, and you know, and he was absolutely delighted. So that was wonderful.  INT: Mm. IH: And when we-- and then we went on to Kempten, where my mother comes from. And something strange happened there too. It-- it was such a strange, strange time. I knew that my-- my uncle-- my great uncle, had been a councilor in the city of Kempten. He'd done a lot of good. He was a retired banker, and he helped a lot of people. So I went to the city hall and asked, you know, did they know about Sigmund Ullman. And they said, oh, yes. You have to go to the archivist. So we went to the archivist, and they were closed. And they're going to open, let's say, at 2 o'clock. So I went into-- in the pastry shop. And I wanted a [NON-ENGLISH], which is something, a [NON-ENGLISH], which I remembered as child. It's a particular type of pastry. And she went-- she-- she-- she went all around to try and find it. But she couldn't find it. She was terribly sorry. Anyway, we went back to the archivist, and there was a painter going in. And although the archivist was closed, the painter had to open the door to get in. And so a man came out from the top window, and I shouted and told him what I wanted. And he-- and he let us in. And he was Jewish, as it so happens, from-- from-- from Poland. He was a Jewish fellow. I can't remember his name. And he was just looking at the papers belonging to our family. And so I've got all the-- the-- the-- you know, my-- my great-grandfather and all that. 
INT: What a coincidence. IH: It-- wasn't it strange? It was as though somebody above was guiding me. It was very, very strange.  INT: Yes. IH: So that was quite an experience.  INT: It is. IH: You know, a personal experience.  INT: Yes.  INT: This is tape four. I'm conducting an interview with Inge Hack. The date is November 5, 1997. Can you tell me about your married life in England? IH: Yes, we started our married life in Birmingham, in a flat-- in-- in a-- in rooms, actually-- had a terrible landlady who used to do the cooking in a pressure cooker, cause she-- she wouldn't allow me to use much gas or electricity. But that's beside the point. And from-- from Birmingham, we went to Larry-- Larry went with Atomic Energy, and we went to Culcheth in Warrington. And we had us-- well, that was a strange thing in-- in Culcheth. They had taken over. It was the early days of Atomic Energy, and they had taken over what used to be a teacher's training college. So it wasn't really a flat. They were-- it was more like a prefab, really. And eventually, we bought a house in Manchester. And then, from Manchester, we moved to-- to Letchworth. Larry then joined-- from-- from Atomic Energy, he joined ICI. So we moved to Letchworth, in Hertfordshire. And my-- my-- my daughter, actually, was born when we were still in Culcheth, which is with the Atomic Energy, near Warrington. And my son was born in Manchester, when we-- we lived in Manchester. 
INT: And your-- your children's names? IH: Rosalyn [? Hannah, ?] and-- no, I beg your pardon, that's-- that's not-- that's my daughter-in-law. Rosalyn Judith, because Mrs. Gordon, you know, grandma Gordon, her name was Judith. And Michael Gordon. So I kept, you know, with the family. And of course, I'm still friendly with the family today, the Gordon family. And I'm now the oldest, because unfortunately, all the real children have died. So it's just the-- the grandchildren now, you know.  INT: And did-- did your-- did you bring your children up in a-- a Jewish home? IH: Yes, very much so, in-- in Manchester-- not in-- in Culcheth, in Warrington. I think we were the only Jewish people there. Engineering wasn't particularly a Jewish profession in those days. But in Manchester, very much so, yes. I was strictly kosher. I was secretary of the Daughters of Zion. And most of our friends were Jewish. I mean, obviously, there were some non-Jewish friends, too, from work-- you know, the work. But we had a lot of Jewish friends. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] And from Manchester, where did we move from Manchester? From Manchester, we moved to-- from Manchester, I think we-- we moved to-- that's right, Manchester was Atomic Energy. Blackpool was ICI-- I'm sorry. I got this wrong. We-- we moved to Blackpool. And there, again, there was a-- a very big Jewish community in [? Sail, ?] we lived near [? Sail. ?] And we were very, very much involved, yes, with it. I was very much involved-- Daughters of Zion, I used to-- Michael was a baby, and I used to take him in his carrycot to coffee mornings, and things, yes. 
INT: And then, after that? IH: From Manchester, we moved to Letchworth, in Hertfordshire, also with ICI. And then, from Letchworth, we moved to-- to Maidstone. And then, that was with Blue Circle-- he changed to Blue Circle. And from Blue-- from Maidstone, we moved to Mexico, [LAUGHS]. And from Mexico-- no, we moved to Hollingbourne-- we had this bungalow for about nine month, I think, before we were sent to Mexico. And then from Mexico, we came back here.  INT: And-- IH: So it's been quite an interesting life.  INT: And what's happened to your children as they've grown up? IH: Yes, my children have grown up. My daughter, strangely enough, got married, and lived back in the Manchester area. And she now lives back in Blackpool, where she was brought up. And my son went to Carmel College, and he was-- as-- as a-- and then he went to Cambridge.  INT: And what did he do there? IH: He did the electrical sciences tripos in Cambridge. He's got a PhD, his doctorate. And from--  INT: And your daughter? IH: And my daughter is a pharmacist. She went to Chelsea, and became a, you know, Chelsea College, to her B Pharm. So she's back in Blackpool, and he's in California.  INT: And do you have grandchildren? IH: I do-- I have two by my daughter, a-- a-- a girl of, well, nearly 15, and a boy of nearly 10. And now, I've got a-- a baby in America-- a little boy. 
INT: And do you see them often, your-- IH: Well, I've only seen the baby once. And the others, not as often as I would like-- about every three month. We hope to go over there in the Christmas holiday.  INT: I wonder-- could you tell me how you think that leaving Germany and having to start a-- a new life here, has affected the way your life has been since then? IH: Well, in some way, I'm very grateful to my foster sister, if you like. She was very strict with me. But having been a very, very spoiled child, I soon became unspoiled. And I think I've become a much better person. I think, if I had stayed in Germany, if there hadn't been a Hitler-- I'm not talking about Hitler-- if there hadn't been a Hitler, I think I would have been very spoiled, possibly snobbish. You never know if I'd gone to university. And not as compassionate and as understanding as I am today. So, you know, that is, I think, how it might have affected me.  INT: Have you been able to talk to your children about-- IH: Yes, I've even given a talk in my granddaughter's school, and told them about what it was like to live under the Nazis, which was apparently very well-received. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] My grandson probably not, because he was only-- I did it about two years ago. He was only eight at the time. Now whether they want-- they did want me to come back and do it to the older class again. 
INT: Do you think it's affected the way you've brought up your children? IH: Well, I brought my children Orthodox. I'm sorry to say they're not today. Michael is a complete atheist. And [? Rosy, ?] I think it was the Vietnam War that affected her. I mean, I've got their Hebrew books, I've got the-- the prizes they won at cheder, but they haven't kept up their religion at all. But they were-- they were brought up in an Orthodox Jewish home. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] But somehow, I couldn't give them the faith that I've got, which is, you know, very sad. Well, Michael was very Orthodox until he was at the very last year at Carmel, and they did psychology or something. And they were warned-- they either come out extremely religious, or extremely-- or atheist. And he was one of the atheists. Some came out very religious. So there you are-- Carmel College-- a Jewish school.  INT: When you think about the past now, when you think about what happened in Germany, how-- how does it affect the way you feel about Germany? I mean, you've talked about how you feel about the people-- IH: Yes.  INT: --that you've met here. IH: How do I feel about Germany as a whole? Well, you know, Hitler only came to power-- I mean, I did the Anne Frank guiding when it was here-- Hitler only came to power because there was such abject poverty in Germany. [PAUSES FOR 5 SECONDS] And-- and you know, because of what happened at Versailles-- that's why this time, obviously, we made sure it didn't happen again. So how do I feel about Germany as a country? Well, I do feel that people knew a lot more about what's going on than they-- they pretend they do. I run a-- we-- we keep up our German. I didn't teach my children any German, so that will show you how I felt. I am sorry now, in retrospect, because it's a living language, which would have been quite useful in later life, but they don't know a word. [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] And I do feel a lot of the German people-- you know, Germany-- were responsible-- I mean, they did know what was happening. But as a country-- you ask me how I feel about Germany as a country-- would I live there again? No. Would I go there again, like some other people have who have been invited? No. Yes, I want to go back. I want to show the children-- I want to go back with my children, and possibly my grandchildren, and show them where I was born, and show them the graves of-- of their-- their grandparents-- great-grandparents, and that sort of thing. But not with an invitation, no, I wouldn't. No, and I would never, ever live there again. So I think that will answer your question. But as I say, the people, the older people are now dying out. I mean, anybody of my own age, I have no [? grums ?] against. Because we were children, and if I had been non-Jewish as they, I'm sure I would have been, as a-- as I became a guide as soon as I came to England-- because I loved uniforms-- I'm sure I would have been part of the BDM, if I had been non-Jewish. So you know-- but anybody older than myself, that's a different story. 
INT: When you see films, or hear programs about the Shoah-- IH: I don't. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] I don't.  INT: Why is that? IH: I just-- I mean, I know, you know, what's happened now. And I don't just-- just don't want to be upset. I did hear one program about-- not [? Streicher, ?] but who was-- the one they had in Israel.  INT: Eichmann. IH: Eichmann, yeah, that was enough. Yes. That really opened my eyes of what went on, and what they did to people. I don't think before that I really knew enough. No, I haven't seen the film from the Spielberg foundation. And I don't watch any programs.  INT: Do you ever have dreams about it? IH: Only after that Eichmann program, about Eichmann. But I think about it. But I don't think I have dreams about it, no. No.  INT: You say you think about it. Can you tell me more? IH: Well, I just think of the dreadful things that they did to people. The sad thing is, of course, that it's still going on today in other countries.  INT: If you were going to leave a message for future generations about what happened, what would you say? IH: If I wanted a-- a-- a message for future generations of what-- what happened? I think I would say, never think that it couldn't happen here. And get out while you can. If-- if-- if that is the-- what you mean. If you see that things are going-- you know, or-- or you're being made a scapegoat, or your race, or your religion is being made a scapegoat, don't think it couldn't get any worse, like my father did. And he was German through and through, and they couldn't, they wouldn't do anything to him. But-- but get out. And you can always do something in another country. 
INT: Yes, I mean, I-- I understand what you're saying. IH: You know.  INT: And that's on a-- on a practical level. IH: Yes.  INT: But on an emotional level? IH: On an emotional level? [PAUSES FOR 5 SECONDS] Oh dear, that's a very difficult question. What I would leave to-- to future generations on an emotional level? Can you be a bit more specific on that one?  INT: Well, how you feel about-- you've explained, yes, we should listen-- IH: Yes.  INT: --and be-- IH: Be prepared to get out, yes, yes.  INT: --be aware of-- of danger. IH: Yes, yes.  INT: But really, in terms of what happened, what-- what would you say to people for the future about-- about that? IH: Never forget what happened in the Shoah. And-- and do to others as you would do yourself, which is really part of my religion.  INT: Thank you. Can you tell me about this photograph? IH: Yes, it is a photograph of my mother, from 1915, when she was a sort of auxiliary nurse in the last-- in the First World War.  INT: And your mother's name? IH: My mother's name was Rosa Ullman at the time.  INT: And where was it taken? IH: It was taken somewhere on-- behind the front lines, I imagine. Yes.  INT: Thank you. IH: Right. That was my--  INT: And who is this? IH: --my mother's mother, my grandmother, Paulina Ullman, taken in the 1930s. 
INT: And do you know where? IH: In Nuremberg. My father took it.  INT: Thank-- IH: My grandparents on my father's side, Julius and Mathilde Wertheimer. Taken on-- on the time of their golden wedding.  INT: And where was it taken? IH: In Bruchsal.  INT: Thank you. IH: Right. My mother is the lady in the background, on the right, and my aunt, her sister, is the lady in the background-- no, my-- sorry. Can you-- can you take this back, Steve? CREW: Yeah, OK. IH: It's the left, isn't it, looking at it-- CREW: Yeah. IH: --this way. I did the wrong way around.  INT: So would you like to tell me again? Who is-- IH: Yes. My mother is the lady in the background, on the left, and my Aunt Irma, her sister, is-- and the lady in the background, on the right. And that was taken at my Hollekreisch, which was a-- a baby naming ceremony, obviously in 1926, in-- in the end of April, 1926, or beginning of May, 1926, just after I was born.  INT: Thank you. IH: This was taken in 1927, and this of my father and myself.  INT: And your father's name? IH: Oh, Fritz [? Morris ?] Wertheimer.  INT: Thank you. IH: Yes. That was our-- our-- our former maid, and-- and great friend, Tina Drütschel, who I talked about earlier in the interview.  INT: And when was it taken? IH: In the '30s. 
INT: Thank you. IH: This was taken at a birthday party in a little resort, just outside Nuremberg-Fürth. My mother is the lady on the left, in the background, and my aunt is the lady on the right. And I am next to my mother at the-- at the back, in the back row.  INT: And when was it taken? IH: And my friend, [? Erika. ?] And that was taken in the '30s. This is a photograph, again, taken by my father, who won a competition with it. And I got a great big Easter rabbit made of chocolate. My mother made a chocolate cake out of it.  INT: And-- IH: Again, in the 19-- ooh, I don't know, '26-- '31? Something like that, I imagine.  INT: And who is in the photograph? IH: Oh, that's me. [LAUGHS] Sorry. I think of that one teacher-- A school photograph of the-- on the state school. I think it was the [NON-ENGLISH]. We all had to take our dollies with us. It was an end of term photograph. And I'm the girl to the left of the-- in the front row, to the left of the girl in the dress with the squares.  INT: The checked dress? IH: Check dress, yes, was it-- checks.  INT: And what year was that? IH: I would say that was 1932--  INT: Thank you. IH: --roughly. And when we say the-- I-- I have to explain. The hole is where my parents stood, because it was one of these self-take photograph. But I took that out to put them in a locket. So it's a-- a family photograph, mainly of my mother's family, and her uncle, whose 80th birthday it was. And I was eight at the time, so it would be 1934. 
INT: And what was his name? Your uncle? IH: Sigmund-- Sigmund Ullman.  INT: And what happened to him? IH: Oh, yes, he lived in Kempton. He was an Alderman of the city. He'd-- he was a retired banker. He was a very generous man, and very kind man, according to the newspaper that I have read since. And he was taken at the age of 84 to Theresienstadt, and he died earlier the following year, in Theresienstadt. This-- a school photograph, I think of the last class in school. And I'm-- the girl who I was talking about, who I wasn't allowed to play with anymore, is the girl who had a headband around her head, in the back row.  INT: And which one is you? IH: You probably recognize me. I-- I am two-- two girls to the right of her. And by that time, I had plaits. Now, my mother, Rosa Wertheimer. This photo was taken in Nuremberg, but I'm not quite sure when-- in the late 1930s.  INT: Thank you. IH: This is Grandma Gordon, the wonderful, kind lady, who took on this little German refugee girl.  INT: And when was it taken? IH: And that would have been taken in, I imagine, '39-- 1939.  INT: And where? IH: In Cardiff, by a professional photographer. 1939 in Girl Guide uniform, and very proud to be a Girl Guide. Right. This is Tini-- Tini-- Tini Jumkuntz, her name was. And she was the niece of our maid, with whom I was very friendly, and who I talked about in the interview. And it was taken in the 1940s. And we're still friendly to this day. Well, I'm photographed here with two of my foster sisters. The one on the left is Rochella Zeitlin, and her husband was a doctor. And she has two sons. One is now a professor of psychiatry, and the other one is a-- a dean at a college in Scotland. And the other one is her sister, Winifona. And they had a jewelry shop in Swansea. And this was taken in Swansea, in the-- oh, dear-- 1950s, I suppose. 
INT: Thank you. IH: Right. The elderly lady is on-- on the left is me. Next to me-- myself is by daughter, and next to my daughter is my husband. In front of my husband is my granddaughter, Clare, who will be 15, almost, and her brother, Jack, who is almost 10. My son, Michael, and his wife, Ros, and their new baby, Tyler.  INT: And where was it taken? IH: And that's taken in Mountain View, California. Right? My husband and myself at my 70th birthday, taken by my son, in Hollingbourne-- or just outside. Right-- how do you do that? Oh, I shouldn't say that.  INT: Can you tell me about this? IH: Oh, that was my first school reports in the-- the Cardiff-- the-- the ordinary state school that I went to-- when-- when I couldn't speak very much English to start with. But obviously, a child learns very, very quickly. And in six months time, I spoke English.  INT: Can you tell me about this ornament? IH: Yes, this was an ornament which my mother very much treasured. In fact, I remember somebody once broke the tail of it, and she had it invisibly mended. It was in our home, and obviously, she thought it was important enough for-- for me to have it. So that came with some of my belongings. And I have treasured it ever since, and been very careful. Whenever we moved, it's had a special case to go into. 
INT: Thank you. IH: It was bought in Nuremberg.