INT: Today is December the 29th, 1997. The interview is with survivor Ernst Mitchell, whose name at birth was Schampanier. The interviewer is Joanna Buchan. The interview is being conducted in London, in the UK. And the language of this interview will be English. My name is Joanna Buchan, B-U-C-H-A-N. And today is the 29th of December, 1997. I'm interviewing Mr. Ernst Mitchell, who was born Schampanier. And the interview is taking place in London. And this is the first tape of the interview with Mr. Ernst Mitchell. Could you say your name on tape for me, please, sir? EM: My name is now Ernst Mitchell. It was before Ernst Schampanier.  INT: Could you spell both those names for me please? EM: M-I-T-C-H-E-L-L is one one. The other is a-- is a very awkward spelling. It was S-C-H-A-M-P-A-N-I-E-R. Now, you make something out of that. [LAUGHS] Very odd.  INT: And when were you born? EM: 24, 10, '09.  INT: 24th of October, 1909? EM: Yeah. Some years back.  INT: And where were you born? EM: That place was then called Breslau, in Silesia, and it was German. And it's now called Wrozlaw, and it's now in Poland.  INT: And could you spell those names for me as well, the town? EM: Breslau is B-R-E-S-L-A-U. And Wrozlaw, well, I don't speak Polish. W-R-O-Z-L-A-W, but the L has a stroke straight through, so I don't know how they pronounce it. Anyhow, I think they call it Wrozlaw. 
INT: Thank you. EM: It's also Silesia, in, in Poland now. Yeah.  INT: Let's start with family life, with when you were a little boy. What was it like, your parents? How you [INAUDIBLE]? EM: Well, I-- the first thing, I guess, I was what the Austrians call a [NON-ENGLISH]. That means somebody who can't live or die. I was a 3 or 3 and 1/2 pound, eight month baby who, who went to school only at the age of, of 7 and 1/2. And I was so weak, I couldn't hold the pen. And for years, I had to support my right hand with the left hand, like that. So you can imagine what a specimen I was and was more out of school with illness. And interesting, this, in some way, put me apart from the crowd, which is a threat to my life. First of all, as a weakling, I couldn't take part in, in the usual boys' amusements. And secondly, also, as a Jew, I was limited through my religion, always, what you will call it. So that made me a bit unwillingly isolated. But at school, we, we were-- we had a wonderful [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] headmaster, who was really, really ideal man for democracy. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] Anglophile and probably philosemitic as well. And there was an extremely wide range of freedom, liberty, and democracy in that school. Always where to my mind, only two in the whole country.  INT: What about your parents? Tell me, what were their names? EM: My father, the name of Julius or, or-- in, in German, was-- came from Poland. And he was [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] a functionary. He did several things. But when later he became a functionary of the Jewish rights by what was called the presenter or precantor. And who was emergency reserve in the main-- at the-- at the main holidays. But during the day, during the weekdays, there were also daily, three times daily praying in, in the smaller type of synagogue, where he was then the, the acting cantor. My mother, Rose-- 
INT: What was her name, sorry? EM: Rose.  INT: Rose. EM: And was born in Pomerania, and her mother died at her birth. And then her father died then, the, the mother's sister. And he was a non-academic rabbi, what you will call a preacher. And he-- they both died at the age about 72. I don't know when he-- when he retired. And I still have a pair of candlesticks from, from the time when one of his congregation, which when he left them, then gave as a-- as a present. So my, my background was lower middle class. And with the rigid-- what shall we say-- structure of German life, and our family, it came into a category which had practically no social connections, because for one, he wasn't high enough, and for the other, he was too low or so on. So we, we didn't have-- also because my father had to attend a daily-- early in the morning and in the afternoon, the services which he had to conduct, that limited very much also our-- as well our social contact. And anyhow, I, I didn't have a room. I slept in the sitting room with a great grandfather clock chiming every half an hour. So I could never bring anybody home and make friends. And also I saw the limitations I mentioned before. I was anyhow, additionally limited. So I, I, I was a bit of an odd fish. And I only caught up in my mid-teens, when I joined the school's rowing club. The situation was there in Germany, after they lost, luckily, the First World War. And the authorities supported any type of sport in order to build up a, a youth instead of the army, which they were forbidden to build up. So we had a, a school rowing club with several boats. And after several years of saving up penny by penny, I also got a canoe, which, which I drove up. I was really like-- I was like a monkey on that-- on-- in that canoe, because it was built for somebody who was enormous. And so I was sitting there, as I said, like a monkey. At one time, we, we brought four or five people and a bike across the river, so you can imagine. It had also the nice name of hippopotamus. And by the time people tried to spell it, I was passed. So that was a great way of catching up the weakness of my original birth. And-- 
INT: Would you say that it was a very religious household that you grew up in, that you were very aware of being Jewish? EM: Well, we were. [LAUGHS] I still remember. And one of my first school days, a, a little other boy called me a Jew, and I threw myself in it. We were fighting in the-- in the-- in the gutter. And when I felt myself pulled upwards by the scruff of my neck by my teacher. She said, aren't you ashamed? Here it was in the main road. And to, to lie here in the gutter fighting? I said, you called me a Jew! And that was quite enough. And she said, but that is an honor. And I couldn't understand how it should be an honor if it was meant to be detrimental. But what I didn't know was she was a Jewess and a Zionist as well. So that is-- as, as a child, you realized there was something different. But it was so that also, if you wanted to join youth clubs, you were also limited. Because first of all, most youth clubs were affiliated to political parties with which I didn't want to have anything to do with any, any political party. And secondly, to a Jew, we are only open the left strata, communist or social democrats. And the democrats, they are squeezed out. So you had a very limited choice, which didn't appeal to me. And as for there were Jewish organizations, there was one of the assimilated Jews, but there the, the sons and, and daughters of the more upper strata, they are entering those, which was financially beyond me. The others who were financially all right were the Zionists, and with whom I didn't want to have anything to do because of their nationalism. [LAUGHS] So all my life I fell between two chairs as an oddity, which wasn't always comfortable, but I, I had to learn to stand. I remember when we were very young boys, we came up with a cigarette, and we were smoking on a school outing around a teacher, who was clever enough not to prohibit it. And as you imagine, have a cigarette. I said, no, thank you. Oh, you must. I said, why I must? Then you are not a man. 10 years, 11 years old man. So I said, all right. I'm not a man. And there I learned to take my stand. And do you know, when I left school, the other boys were sorry. They wanted to stop and couldn't stop anymore. So it's a good thing to learn to take a stand at an early age, because you can't always please everybody through in your life. 
INT: What about home life? Who was the bigger influence on you, your father or your mother? EM: My mother. My mother had-- my mother was a teacher, pardon, a highly qualified teacher. She married my father, who-- she was the second wife of my father's. And she married my father out of pity for the youngest daughter, which was left without a mother. So she-- then when her stepchildren married, she became the old Mistress Schampanier, Frau Schampanier, at the age of 40 or 42.  INT: Was your father much older than your mother? EM: My-- yeah. My-- it was a second marriage. My father was about 15 years or something, roughly 15 years older. Roughly, yes. Perhaps 20. I must work it out. And it was-- then came the, the inflation. And where I remember-- I'll give you an example. My mother wanted to buy a pair of stockings and went to the market. She was a few hundred thousand marks short. Went back. And for-- within a very short time, particularly the next block, she could just get a box of matches for-- instead of a pair of stockings. Now, that is the spotlight which drives home to you the speed at which this upheaval. And of course, the marriage got on the rocks, because my father was paid postdated, and I don't know how they managed. I was too-- I, I know there were difficulties, but I didn't know how deeply they went. But then his oldest daughter tried to break up the marriage by, by a trick. She brought food which she thought she got cheaper, paid a few pence extra, or 100,000 marks extra, and showed my mother up as a bad housekeeper, which my father, like most men, are, are very naive, and fell for that. And so the marriage got nearly on the rocks. And when it was really broken, rock bottom, my mother found a philosophy which carried her through to take up-- not only take up her cause, but managed to transform all her disagreeable type of stepchildren into very constructive, helpful people. And I'll give you, in a second, an example, if it doesn't delay you, but it is quite typical. And at that time, the Jews were not allowed then later to have gold watch, gold, anything of gold. And my father very much valued a gold watch he had from his father-in-law. And he got it silvered, so that he was allowed silver. Silver watches, we were allowed. And we were caught. So his stepson, who, who-- his older son, sorry. His oldest son was then cited and my father. And my mother managed to get the policeman to tell him that she was the guilty part and not my father. So they, they were accused under the Nazis, of course, already. And these two, the stepson, or the stepson of my mother, argued in the-- in the dock. And each was going to take the whole blame on himself or herself and let the other free. From that you can see, the stepson who was not a nice man, was so transformed that he really risked also the safety of his wife and son. So that gives you an example of how my mother, with her very great loving philosophy managed to transform the family. The same, you know, later, this disagreeable stepdaughter also felt sorry. And anyhow, that goes too far now. But the philosophy-- 
INT: But were they punished, though? EM: I beg your pardon?  INT: Were they punished in the end for, for-- EM: Who? Yes. Oh, they got only-- they got only a, a fine instead of prison. And the judge was cited to the ministry to get-- to get his rebuff. Yeah. And this philosophy was, or is, Rudolf Steiner's philosophy. And that carried my mother through. And also later, my father, [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] who later died in-- it's also interesting. They concentrated the Jews in a monastery, where they threw out the monks and pressed them into the labor service, concentrated the Jews there on their way to Theresienstadt, and so [INAUDIBLE]. And my father died there in his sleep on Easter. This was then also the Jewish Passover, 1942. So it just gives you a glimpse. So our social life was practically non-existent. And it was-- anyhow, but it was a happy-- it was then a happy home. And we had there--  INT: Was it very strictly Jewish? Did you keep all the holidays? EM: Yes, yes. It was. It was not fanatical, but it was real religious with attendance at the synagogue regularly and a kosher household. And we had there the classical literature of nearly half the world. And, and huge encyclopedia, which of course, compensated me for the lack of outdoor possibilities or social contact.  INT: Did you have non-Jewish friends? EM: As a matter of fact, as a boy, I had only for a short time a friend in the top class. And, and he, he was an interesting man. He, he was very gifted in drawing, and also he wrote plays and so on. But-- and he was-- he got a privileged position in the class. But he misused it or didn't do any homework, so he was not put up to the top class but had to repeat the top-- the one below. But with that, he was too, too good for that, so he, he didn't qualify as-- with us or nor for school leaving or university entry. And so we were friends for a short time. But otherwise [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] I made my first friends at-- as a student in a-- in a circle of study groups, which we are busy, first of all, with [? good, ?] this color theory and Steiner, Steiner books. 
INT: This was at university? EM: Now, yes.  INT: So before we-- before we get to university, I was just interested, you went to a, a non-Jewish school then, to an ordinary German-- EM: No. It was called a [NON-ENGLISH], because other schools were either RC or Lutheran, but this school was non-bound to religion. The teachers were-- the religion of the teachers wasn't the percentage to the-- to the religion of the pupils. So it was called the Jewish school. [LAUGHS] And they-- this spirit of democracy, liberty, and freedom was so strong that they had-- when the Nazis came, they had not completely to dissolved the school and, and dissolved the pupils over different schools in order to break the spirit. And even those who were Nazis in our, our fellow pupils who were Nazis, there were, were Nazis, but none of them were antisemitic, because we, we mixed very happily at that time.  INT: You were a little boy when the First World War began, the Kaiser's War. EM: Yes, I remember it.  INT: What do you remember about it? EM: Oh, that was also funny. In Breslau, there was the Kaiser's own regiment, the [NON-ENGLISH]. So it's like the lifeguard. The same type of uniform, you know, with the braid and breast plates and fluttering lances and so on. And then there were all the sons of the high nobility. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] But when it-- pardon me. When it started, the war started, they were all killed in the first days by the new secret weapon of the French, the machine gun. And then they had just to draft people. And my brother-in-law was drafted, a little Jew who kept falling from his horse. And [LAUGHS] so he came on one day to us in that uniform. I still remember, you know, with the high gauntlets and all the-- as you would say, one of the lifeguards on foot. So but I remember because we were near the barracks and where the recruits were trained. And I know I was annoyed when I got older, because my milk ration got smaller and smaller and then disappeared. I-- the other thing was the men were in the war, and we had no education, because there weren't enough teachers. And when they came back after the war, they had to get their positions. But it was a rapid change which prevented a solid base for education, because every few months, another teacher came. 
INT: Did you father be-- was, was he a soldier? EM: No, my father was too old already to be called up.  INT: But Jews were called into the German Army at that time? EM: Oh, yes. That was-- yeah.  INT: Were there any restrictions on you as a Jew in the Kaiser's Germany before the Nazis came? EM: Not, not openly. I mean, not in any-- no. Because I would-- you know, I was also too young to join any youth or other activity. But when playing in the street and so on, I, I could join in with the other boys without any discrimination.  INT: Did you ever feel threatened at that time, before Hitler came to power, because you were a Jew in Germany? EM: No, not that I can think of. [PAUSES FOR 5 SECONDS] I mean, I realized more than other people might have that-- what was coming. But of course, the degree which was coming was unthinkable to us. But there was-- the assimilated Jews had an organization, where, like everywhere else, where they tried to change people from antisemitism to a better use by lectures and, and literature, which of course, was on the other wavelength. They didn't understand that by, by literature or lectures, they would-- could not reach the population. The other thing was, as, as I said, the-- the inflation was devastating. And like in, in basic-- pardon-- everywhere, Jews were the small capitalists who had the shops, and the, [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] the, the stores. And to them, they presented to capitalism. Now, of course, we are anti-capitalists. 
INT: I think we-- we've just come to the end of the first tape there. EM: Yeah.  INT: And this is the second tape of the interview with Ernst Mitchell. We were talking there about what happened to Germany after they lost the First World War, The Great War, as it was called then, and the dreadful hyperinflation that basically wiped out everyone's money, didn't it? Money didn't mean anything anymore. And then you found that there was, you know, the growth of some sort of antisemitism, generally? EM: Well, the antisemitism wasn't of-- was, of course, always there. But it was originally more on a religious base. And it became then-- it turned then into-- I don't know, what shall I call it-- racial or-- yeah.  INT: Economic? EM: And economic antisemitism, yeah.  INT: By-- by then, in the-- in the war, after the war years, you're at school. You're learning. What sort of things did you want to do? What did you think you wanted to be when you grew up? EM: Metal art worker.  INT: What-- how-- what sort of things does that involve? EM: Making brooches, rings, candelabras, anything of art.  INT: Like a jeweler, a fine-- fine jeweler? EM: Yes, but, yes, but, yes, something who could do anything of jewelry, which involves five different crafts, which was impossible.  INT: Why was it impossible? EM: First of all, they wanted a boy of 14, whom they can send for the sausage and sweep the floor. And secondly, there were, let's say, five whole crafts involved, which don't exist anymore. And it would have been at least 10 years training. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] And of course, also, for a Jew, there was no way of an indentured apprenticeship. So I-- I thought, perhaps, the academy. But the academy only educated to a type of [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] people who didn't have a proper base in their craft, more art [NON-ENGLISH], as we called it, you know, not-- not properly based in craft. So that was out. 
INT: So what did you, in fact, do as you-- EM: I started dental surgery, because there you have the handicraft and the science and the medical side.  INT: Did you go to university? EM: Yes, the dental school in Germany-- every school is part of the university. You have the central university and the schools are part of it. So the-- the dental school was an institute of the university.  INT: And were there any restrictions on you as a Jewish student? Or you could study like all the others? EM: Not-- no, no, it was not, although the professor-- we started, of course, with preclinical training. The professor was a Nazi, but he didn't make any difference in his treatment between Jews and non-Jews. And he was a wonderful man. And I-- I still remember him with affection. He-- he had lost his eye in the war. And his-- his-- he was shelled. His hands were trembling. And-- but he had to-- to demonstrate all that fine work. And at the moment when it's necessary, the hands stood still. And then they started trembling again-- what a wonderful man.  INT: What year was it? EM: Yeah, from him, I learned to work with conscientiously.  INT: What year did you go to the dental college? EM: It started '31.  INT: So when this-- you say this man who taught you was a Nazi, he was a member of an illegal party then in 1931. The Nazis weren't in power then. EM: Yeah, well, I wasn't concerned with that. 
INT: Had you noticed the development of the Nazi party during the '20s and-- and the '30s? EM: Oh, yes, oh, yes, well, we-- I lived with it.  INT: What sort of Nazi activities were there in Breslau? EM: Like in every other place, there were marches and the torch-- torch processions, straight-- street fights, murders, [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] and what have you. And many of the population wanted to be sure. They didn't know know whether Communists or the Nazis get the upper hand. So many people, business people, had the party cards also arranged in their pockets, so they see which would suit them if it cames to the crunch. But there was--  INT: Do you think many people were-- sorry-- were convicted Nazis-- convinced, not convicted-- EM: Well, it is--  INT: --convinced about it? EM: --you see, the Allies also made a mistake by inflicting very harsh war-- I mean peace conditions in Versailles. That this was the outcome also of the German brutal peace conditions to the Russians in Brest-Litovsk, that they didn't want to know. But they only knew the really brutal peace conditions of Versailles. And they-- they felt dishonored. The other thing was, you see, these young men, officers, had stood their part in the war, led men and really had to stand with their men. There were-- afterwards, there was no training place. Also, having led men, they were incapable of-- of accepting orders, let's say, trying to get the training where they had to take orders. They couldn't do that. So it was a mixture of their not finding any work and, secondly, of being unable to accept orders themselves. So that drove them into-- into the opposition. In fact, the whole thing was the opposition. You see, the other thing was the Catholics in-- in the Kaiser's regime had no representation. But in the Republic, they did. And there, they were then there-- what is it, [NON-ENGLISH], the-- the-- the little-- the party, which, by joining right or left, gave them, those otherwise insecure governments, stability. So there could never be either a straight right or a straight left policy be carried through, because the [NON-ENGLISH] what the-- the party called, then came with their conditions and went over to the opposite party. That was part of it. The other thing was, of course, they were not mature for-- the Germans were not mature for any democratic-- in my opinion, any democratic constitution. The constitution, which was torn up, was so idealistic that you will have to be of a high level to follow that great liberal and freedom constitution. 
INT: You said, earlier, that you had an idea that things were going to get worse for the Jews. EM: Oh, yes.  INT: Did you think-- I mean, you're in Breslau. You're a young man studying at college. And you're a Jew, which marks-- you were marked out as that. Did you worry then that the Nazis might take power, form a government? EM: Oh, that was to me-- that-- that was very likely. I could see that was very likely. But I-- I was on very, very friendly terms with my fellow Nazi students. I tried to argue with them [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] on the base of-- of a, let's say, on the German, on base of the Germans, a political base. But of course, they couldn't accept that because came from a Jew. And I had two-- two clashes, when you will-- can say so, with-- with them. But it took a lot of energy for me to-- to walk that narrow plank between being or not being a cheeky Jew, or, on the other hand, as [? some ?] [? Jew, ?] a little meek, a meeker Jew. So these people were very touchy in-- in-- in their approach. And I remember one of my student fellows, when I asked him something, he turned around. [GERMAN]. For you, I haven't got any surgery hour. And I had to accept that. And a long time later, I quoted him, to him, when he asked me. And he was a charge, a chargé of a-- of a student fighting corporation. And of course, he couldn't be-- let a Jew offend him. But it was the floor of the alma mater. You couldn't fight. But I, I wondered if he would crush me on the wall. But you see, when he came back later, next term, when the Nazis were in power, I was the first he came and shook hand. So you see, you had to show courage. But it was difficult not to be too cheeky. And another one where-- where a son of a very reputable old family asked me if I would get some cigarettes for them. There was nothing wrong, normally. But in the position as-- as a Jew, who was excluded from their community, it was a insult. So I said to him, oh, I thought your father was a cigarette Jew. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] So that was a bit thick. But you see, that-- that took a lot of my energy, too. And the same was as another one commented on my nose. But his nose was also not very good. And I quoted on that. And I said to him, if I would be a racist like you are, I could tell you my ancestors had already a law and a constitution while your ancestors went around the jungle of Germany with-- with-- with the furs on their shoulder. And you know, in-- in that way, you could, with a humor, you could do that. But when the Nazis came, that went, bang. And one of them came out, all out to have the-- his hoisting of the flag. And they all meekly, all these, whether they were Communists, Liberals, whatever they are, they meekly filed out, except me. I was the only one who didn't go. Now, one said, didn't you hear? They are hoisting the flag. I said, yes, I hear quite well. If they want me, they have to carry me out. That could have gone wrong, you know? I-- they could have beat me up, perhaps, as they did with other people. But there, you know, I took my stand. But of course, I was thrown out as a Jew. 
INT: Did you ever feel like saying you weren't a Jew? EM: Sorry?  INT: Did you ever feel like denying the fact that you were a Jew? EM: No, no, no reason.  INT: Wouldn't it have made things easier for you when the Nazis took power? EM: With my face, I couldn't have anyhow, [LAUGHS] even if I wanted to. You see, before the Nazis came to power, I heard a lecture, by one of the Steiner people, about the background of the-- of the [? Nazidom. ?] And that was that they tried to promote a Wotan, Valhalla religion, which was diluvial and, in a certain way, anti-Christian. And then I felt I make my stand.  INT: Rudolf Steiner was a teacher, a philosopher, in Germany, in the early years of the century. Is that a good way to describe him? He set up the Steiner schools? EM: Yes, well, here this-- this aspect of Steiner is known. In fact, there were very many aspects. He was a architect. He built a building without a single nail in it, which the architects said can't be done. And you know, he was a pioneer in many things, in many fields, but here, because the McDonald's-- McDonald? No, Mac-- what was that pioneer in education, a pioneer, Mac-- now what was it?  INT: MacKenzie? EM: MacKenzie, yes, she promoted Steiner education. And so it became reputable or known. But there were very many aspects of it also, the cumulative education and-- and agriculture and so on. 
INT: I should ask you if-- if you were aware, before the-- before 1933, of Adolf Hitler and his book, Were you aware of Hitler and what he had written? EM: I have-- I never read it, but you just had to hear him or see him. I saw him twice. And the impression you got was good enough.  INT: You saw him in person twice? EM: Yeah, twice.  INT: Tell me about them. When did you first see him? EM: One was when they were still banned. And he came in a big Mercedes or Rolls-Royce or Mercedes, where-- with the German policemen filling the-- the runner boards to protect him. No, it was a joke, because he tried to over-- overthrow the country. And-- but they were still protecting him. And then I saw him on other occasion, where he drove, in the middle of the road, in a-- in a-- in a car which was obviously protected, you know, with the plate, an--  INT: An armored car. EM: Armored, yes. And people were forbidden to open the windows. And the SS was standing with the faces to the public. And on the crossings or rail-- rail crossings and so on, there were lots of armed people, SS and Brownshirts. And there, he came and looked like a very strong impression of, well, let's call it death, really a-- a-- a really mighty impression. He stood there, yeah, you can say like death corporate, you know? But-- 
INT: This was in Breslau, or-- EM: Yeah, yeah.  INT: Did you deliberately go to see him, to be part of the crowd to see what he was like? EM: I can't remember-- probably. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] Probably, I don't know. Yeah, I should think so, not the first time but the second time. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] So--  INT: So you knew he'd-- he'd written this book-- EM: Oh, yeah, yes, yes.  INT: and that it was very antisemitic? You knew that already? EM: Yes, I felt, and I said so, also, to the Russians who asked me, I felt his fight was not so much against the Jews as against Christianity. I felt that was at the bottom of it. It was a fight-- and that is still my opinion-- was a fight against Christianity.  INT: What difference does it make to your life, in 1933, when the Nazis took power? EM: I was thrown out, and I had to think what to do. I was-- didn't have enough money to emigrate. I was also still weak. I had no training.  INT: So immediately, in 1933, you were thrown out of dental school? EM: Yes, at the end of '33.  INT: And what did you do then? EM: I tried to, first of all, I-- I got ill for some time. And then I tried to get a training place in dental mechanics. And that was very difficult, very difficult. And I couldn't get one, of course, a proper-- proper training place. You see, the academic, preclinical technician, or technical work is so you can't salt in the soup. You have a-- a week for the work, which a technician takes half an hour. 
INT: You-- you were already thinking though about leaving Germany, were you, emigrating? EM: I had no-- I had no possibility. I-- we got finally some distant friends or relatives in America who finally gave an affidavit. But with practically working at the long, long list, it never materialized.  INT: So where did you go? What did you do-- EM: Nothing.  INT: --in the end? EM: I-- I-- at the end, I got a training place, although I was a lousy-- I was a lousy, lousy technician. You can't imagine. I was useless as a technician. But I got a job in a laboratory from-- because watchmakers, as-- as I will tell you, and dental mechanics were-- were directed to their own-- their own work, whereas people in other occupations were put on unskilled hard labor. But because they didn't have enough watchmakers and technicians, I was sent to a dental laboratory as a-- as a dental mechanic.  INT: And where was that laboratory? EM: In Berlin.  INT: In Berlin? EM: Yeah, yeah, it was all there, uh-huh.  INT: When-- when-- what year was it you arrived in Berlin then? EM: September '37-- when Hitler met Mussolini on the Tempelhofer Feld, so the-- the town was empty, because all had been ordered out to welcome him.  INT: Did you go? EM: [LAUGHS] You bet.  INT: And by 1937, how many restrictions were there on your life as a Jew? What-- were there already things you couldn't do? EM: So we-- that was done very, very cleverly. It came only very gently. On the German Jews, this came gently. On the Hungarian, this came like-- like a hammer hit out of the blue, because they got then the whole range. And for the Germans, it was, it came slowly, you know, one restrictions after the other. 
INT: What sort of things were the restrictions? What couldn't you do? What weren't you allowed to do? EM: I couldn't look-- if I had a balcony on my flat, I couldn't go in the balcony. I couldn't use public transport unless the work-- the place of work was some miles away. And then you had to stand even if there was empty seats, seating opportunity. You couldn't go to a [? barber. ?] You had to buy your food at a designed restricted greengrocer's and so on. Your ration was limited for-- for certain items. You couldn't do this and the other. You couldn't go to places of public entertainment, like cinema or theater. You couldn't, in fact, not anymore use the public transport, as I said, unless to and from work, provided it was a very long distance to walk. And there were restrictions regarding [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] clothing, clothing coupons or food or ration, you know? There were limitations on-- on the more better items, like eggs or meat. I-- I forgot the details.  INT: Was there any violent intimidation of Jews at that time? Were you frightened on the streets? EM: I personally was not. But of course, that was a common thing, [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] that a load of Brownshirts came and just jumped down and killed a man who-- whose face they didn't like or people who turned away and wouldn't give the Hitler salute or whatever.  INT: Did you see this sort of intimidation? EM: No, but-- but people who I spoke to saw it. 
INT: Did you go to a synagogue in Berlin? Were you allowed to go to synagogue? EM: At that time, yes, there was a synagogue. But when I left home, I went perhaps once or twice. But I then didn't attend any more-- any-- any-- [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] what shall we say-- religious activities.  INT: Did you have to wear the yellow star? EM: Oh, yes, of course. And I had to--  INT: That came in, in 1938, didn't it? EM: Yeah. Yeah, I remember a close friend of mine. I went on the underground for the first day. And I had that thing. And the people were aghast. And I had to stand there, you know, in the space between seats, a platform or between the doors, you know? And next to me stood an SS man who worked at the same house where I worked as a dental mechanic. And opposite me was-- well, I wouldn't call her a girlfriend but very closely to a girlfriend. She went straight up to me. And I-- and I said, no, no. She ignored it. She-- she and her sister stood with me till I was sent off. They spent weekends with me. They spent-- they spent lots of their free time with me. And at the risk of their liberty, if-- if nothing more, they brought food and clothing to me at that collecting point from which I was sent off.  INT: At that point-- EM: They were-- they were-- their courage kept my belief in the camp on your-- of humanity. 
INT: They were putting themselves-- EM: They--  INT: --at risk even then-- EM: Yeah.  INT: --before the war broke out, just by-- EM: Yes, they were--  INT: --showing friendliness to a Jew? EM: --they were-- they were former Waldorf school girls. And I spent Christmas Eve with them, this Christmas Eve.  INT: Had you ever celebrated Christmas before with your-- EM: Oh, yes, to me, that is a religious-- a religious festival.  INT: Did your father celebrate Christmas in any way? EM: No, but at the end, he-- he felt in the agreement with a Steiner philosophy. That includes Christianity--  INT: We've just come to-- EM: --a different type of Christianity, I mean, not church, probably.  INT: We've just come to the end of the second tape then. EM: Yes, I realize.  INT: And this is the third tape of the interview with Mr. Mitchell. You were in Berlin working as a dental technician. It's the late 1930s. And then there was the event in November of 1938, Kristallnacht. What do you remember of that? EM: I remember it very closely. I lived-- I-- as I said, I tried to-- I worked in a dental laboratory as a trainee, in, in the north part of town called Gesundbrunnen, which was-- you know, there, there's a big circle, let's say, at the top of the large circle. And I, I had-- I was in [? digs ?] with a Jewish family. And I asked that lady-- I had the front room. You know, they had to, to let a room. But they also had a back exit-- I-- next to the kitchen. And I asked that lady just if there is a famous knock at the door to give me time to get out of the room and down by the back. Well, I was ready. I didn't-- I was already dressed, completely dressed and ready. And it must have been 6 o'clock in the morning. There was a usual knock at the door. And that woman was so bewildered, she raised and opened the door-- you know, instead of giving me time to hop it. Who was it? The postman [LAUGHS] with an express letter. And-- 
INT: And you, you were convinced it was the SS coming to pick you up. EM: No, police or whatever. So I stayed in, of course, and I didn't see-- I didn't see anything myself. But by that time I knew already, more or less, if people were not at home, that was it. It was all right. They didn't come back later-- at least in that circumstances. So I didn't experience anything directly myself-- not at all.  INT: Had the people you knew already been picked up by the authorities? EM: You, you see, that went more in the quiet way all the time. And also by that time, especially the Polish Jews who lived in Berlin, or even those who had been then later naturalized, were sent out, or a few was [INAUDIBLE] domicile and were sent back to Poland. And I-- again, all I did try then, at that time, to learn English in, in town. But then there was nothing. And after this, also, this laboratory was owned by a man in mixed marriage. Those were later also closed. So a cousin of my mother's took me in into his own room, and it was a bit of a difficult time. Then I, I did black work, where it means I wasn't allowed to have-- to do any work. My one work I did was distributing the Jewish news feed, which was, believe it or not, that they let me do it-- a sign of great trust, because if it were to have got into the hand of the population, they would have known what was going on. That was already directed by the-- with the notices by the gestapo. And that was-- 
INT: Who produced-- EM: --kept--  INT: --this Jewish-- EM: The Jewish community under, under the observation and pressure and dictate of the Nazis. And so--  INT: The, the-- EM: So--  INT: --sorry. Just to clear up the, the-- who produced this Jewish news sheet. EM: Just the Jewish-- the, the--  INT: But they had to do it because the Nazis wanted them to, or was this done clandestinely without the Nazis knowing? EM: No, no. It wasn't clandestine. It was all official.  INT: So this was a way the Nazis had of making sure the Jews knew-- EM: Yes, to some degree.  INT: --the new laws and-- EM: Yeah.  INT: --restrictions. EM: What, what they wished them to know, by-- in writing. Lots of them was went only by mouth. And so for some time, I went distributing this paper. And then came also that regulation that Jewish dental mechanics-- we had to work as dental mechanics. And so as labor and housing was directed-- everything was directed-- I was directed to work as a dental mechanic in a-- in an otherwise, you know-- in a laboratory, which was for a-- for a-- for a nothing, you know, taken away from a Jew or a [INAUDIBLE] as they called it, and taken over by a-- by a German-- not necessarily by a Nazi, but by a German dental mechanic. And there were the separation of rooms and so on.  INT: So Jews only-- EM: I was a first-- 
INT: --worked in one area. EM: I was a first. There they made two rooms-- one for the Jews and one for the rest. And I worked there for a long time. But again, they soon find out I wasn't a dental mechanic at all. So they used me for-- I don't know-- you, you wouldn't know anything about the details of dental mechanics. It was the most primitive work-- just casting models. [INAUDIBLE].  INT: How did they, they treat you, the non-Jews-- you were working with? EM: There were two masters. One was for metal. One was for plastic-- whoever came only up then. The, the metal foreman was a Nazi, but he gave the-- he treated the Jews decently and gave them all the tips which every dentist gave for the work done, and he forwarded it. The other one was not a Nazi, but he kept the money for himself. Oh, well, you-- oh, you're quiet. So I was there till I was-- till I was collected. That means I wasn't collected. I got an order to report to gestapo office or headquarters.  INT: During this time you were in your-- in Berlin, and your family was still in Breslau in the east, could you communicate with them? Did you know how they were? EM: Oh, yes. Once a week I had the money. I scrapped-- scraped together for one postcard. And I had to get a letter on a postcard.  INT: And how were they faring in the east? Were they allowed-- were they under the same restrictions as you were in Berlin? EM: Oh, yes. But my father was no longer retired. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] I don't know even-- they were very restricted conditions. But physically, they didn't suffer violence. 
INT: Were they allowed to stay in their home? EM: Yeah.  INT: So what happened when war broke out in September 1939? What difference did that make? EM: First, not much. It came only slowly. [PAUSES FOR 5 SECONDS] I was then visiting Catholic friends in the country who first tried to hide me. I soon realized it was impossible. And also, I wanted to be with my family, so that didn't work out. And--  INT: When you say they were hiding you, were they-- EM: They tried to--  INT: --physically-- EM: --to--  INT: --in the house to, to conceal you? EM: Yeah, wherever in the house or wherever it would be. He was an employee of an estate as a-- as a gardener and forester.  INT: And where did you go after you-- EM: Home.  INT: --left them. To Breslau? EM: Yeah. Because then one thought the Poles would have a more military power behind them. There would be bombing and so on.  INT: Were you allowed to work in Breslau? EM: Oh, no, no. I only came for a short time for a visit, and then I went back to Berlin.  INT: And did you go on working in Berlin? EM: I, I had, of course, to where to do what they called black, because of-- at the beginning, I wasn't allowed to do any. I tried to work-- cleaning windows or cleaning. Then I got a job as a [INAUDIBLE] doing, doing a flat daily and-- 
INT: As a daily cleaner. EM: Cleaner, yeah. And at one time as a shoveling snow, clear-- snow clearing, and whatever came along. And then-- and a distant relative of my mother's, who was [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] somehow connected with the stock exchange-- I don't know what he was there doing-- he emigrated and had to leave his money behind. And the money was fixed. They couldn't dispose of it. And from that money he then directed for me some, some monthly subsidy from which I, I lived on. And then-- [PAUSES FOR 5 SECONDS] you know, I tried first to learn English, a bit of-- learned-- tried to learn cooking. But then came the direction to work in a dental laboratory. Now, remember, there was a separate labor exchange for Jews. And the new [INAUDIBLE] asked me what I am doing. I said, I'm an unskilled laborer. He said-- [LAUGHS] so he want to know if I had a, a [INAUDIBLE]. I said, yes. [INAUDIBLE] certainly I'm not an unskilled laborer. I, I, I described you as a dental mechanic. And so I was officially declared a dental mechanic. And that saved my life in many occasions, because it was what you would call a restricted occupation. And it was the same in the concentration camp. That saved my life.  INT: When did you first hear about the concentration camps? Do you remember? EM: No, I can't. I can't pinpoint a time. But one knew-- feel it they are true, because at the beginning, people could still arrive from [? Litzmannstadt ?] or Warsaw. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] And-- [PAUSES FOR 5 SECONDS] but the people still-- it was not in that way a concentration camp. It was just that the Jews were concentrated and-- what do you call it-- centralized in towns. The, the proper camp did not exist then. 
INT: Did they-- but they were building the ghettos in the various-- EM: Yes. There--  INT: --cities. EM: --there, there were ghettos.  INT: And you knew. You heard about these ghettos. EM: Oh, yeah. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] Yeah. That was-- then, as I said, I, I got a job in the-- in the dental laboratory. And that carried on till, till I blew up or was blown up. And that was by a letter of-- now, I have to interrupt myself. There was a exhibition by the Nazis, the Soviet Paradise-- Ed [? Witson. ?] I forgot the year. It must have been '42. And some Communist Jews set fire to it, and so there, there was a great action against the Jews. And lots of them were shot, and many sent to concentration camps. And so I took the opportunity of sending a letter of farewell and thanks to my parents, because I wouldn't know when my number was up. And this letter was stolen by a German employer of, of a friend of mine, by the name of [? Cohen, ?] who was a Christian-- or so-called-- with-- I sent it with her permission to her, because I thought post to Jews would be stolen, opened, or whatever. And this letter was sent to the gestapo. And that was how my number blew up. Because this letter, you know, was a little farewell and saying, I don't know when my number will up, and so on. And so they asked me, [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] August, I think, to report to gestapo office. And they kept me there. And-- 
INT: Which gestapo office did you have to report to? EM: Don't remember [INAUDIBLE]-- in Berlin, of course-- were many offices. And they kept me there. And then from there they sent me to Riga-- first a month in prison.  INT: How were you treated in prison? EM: [LAUGHS] Well, that was a pop-up police-- it was a police prison, or it was meant by police, not by SS. But it was good enough, even as a-- [LAUGHS] well, the, the one man say we were perhaps 20 men in there. I don't forgot how many. We soon got lice and hunger and so on. And we always saw they was filling up. One of them was a Jewish informer. And I still remember the German policeman called the senior cell, cell-- prisoner to the gate and said, why don't you kill that swine? They were, of course, Social Democrats. But that was-- in the later stories, there were [INAUDIBLE] killed and you know, [INAUDIBLE] and all those people.  INT: What was it called, the prison? EM: [? Rietstrasse. ?] [? In ?] [INAUDIBLE].  INT: So the, the-- but the police didn't treat you any better than the SS. EM: But when the-- when they said, why don't you kill that swine, you know, he was a prisoner. You know what that swine said? I shall report you to the gestapo. And the men ran to the border. The policemen ran when that prisoner said he would report them to the gestapo, which he had no possibility. But that was a mind of the, the, the magic word, gestapo. Then you can see. That is the spotlight. 
INT: During the, the, the-- when the war broke out 1939, did you think it, it would be over quickly? Did you hope-- EM: Oh, no. Well, no. [LAUGHS] No, of course, we knew the war was lost. I mean, we have common sense. I didn't need to be clever.  INT: How do you mean the war was lost? Because Germany was winning everything in the-- in the early months. EM: Yes. Yes. But--  INT: For the Jews the war was lost, do you mean? EM: No, no. The-- basically, for all of them-- and for the Germans. Because that expanding would make the alliance too vulnerable. You know, from-- if they, they tried to get to the oil fields, you know, in Asia, and by that Hitler made a mistake. He, he missed by a month or two the vital time and, and state of concentrating. There were two occasions or three occasions where he lost the war. One was because their panzers were not built for that cold, and they split like glass. The other was that he was trying to get to the oil fields, because that was vital for him. And he waited till the odds got just a [INAUDIBLE]. So that-- then one knew. Even the Germans, the, the officers knew.  INT: How did you feel? Because you would-- you were German. You were born-- EM: Of course.  INT: --German. EM: Of course. [LAUGHS]  INT: Was-- EM: That is the-- 
INT: --was it difficult-- EM: --difference.  INT: --for you, because-- EM: That is the great difference between Polish and German Jews. The Germans were German of Jewish religion. The Poles, they're national Jews.  INT: Did you feel split at all at the thought of Germany losing the war? EM: On contrary. We hoped when we saw every air-wave-- foreign-- I mean, air-- airway-- Allied plane, our heart was with them, of course-- no question.  INT: Was Berlin bombed by the Allies while you were there? EM: Yeah. Yeah. It was terrible-- mostly gas, gas mains which exploded and these air-- they, they came later, these compressed air things. But there were some already. Yeah.  INT: But you didn't mind that? EM: No, well, personally, I, I was not involved in any air raid. They were-- they were still not as frequent, in fact. But they were bad enough.  INT: Were you aware in Berlin, before you were deported, of any Jewish resistance at all? EM: No. You see, that is again. The Germans were Germans. They wouldn't dream they're-- we are educated to click the heels and stand at attention-- proper German, good education. They wouldn't-- they would never think of-- would be capable of, first of all, technically. Secondly, they would know also a terrible reply would can be taken out of the other Jews, you know--  INT: Reprisals. EM: --reprisals. But also, there were, you know, the-- they wouldn't dream.  INT: Do you think German-- EM: So-- 
INT: --Jews were too German in that sense? EM: Yeah, yeah, yeah. Yeah, it was-- imagine. If you have three years called up service, it is in your bones. But of course, there was no call of service in, in the Reich. It was only the time before. It was a generation that was then a professional army of 100,000--  INT: So-- EM: --men.  INT: --before 1933, men would have done national service in the army, in the-- EM: No.  INT: --in the-- EM: No, there was no national service. It was a leader. There was a black-- what's it called-- it's a black, black army, which was trained by the Russians.  INT: Did you ever do any army training at all? EM: No. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] Never [? seen ?] [? an ?] [? army. ?]  INT: How did they deport you, then, from the prison in 1942? You're in-- EM: Well--  INT: --prison in Berlin. Did you know what was going to happen to you? EM: Oh, yes. I mean, with my Christian friends, I know what was going on. I, I knew what we were sent to our death. But I was calm, clear and connected to, to-- I had-- in fact, I, I was an offer to escape and being looked after by gypsies. But I knew it was too early. It was summer '42. And I realized it was too early. I also knew I'd go innocently, but if I am caught then, I have the lives of the people on my-- on my conscience who's-- who hid me. And also, I thought I wouldn't be able to resist the temptation to connect somehow my girlfriend. 
INT: Was she Jewish as well, your girlfriend? EM: Oh, no. [LAUGHS]  INT: She was-- she was a Gentile. EM: She is not. Pardon?  INT: She was a Gentile, your, your-- EM: Yeah. She wasn't a--  INT: --girlfriend. EM: --German either. It was a Baltic, you know, it's a separate type, the Baltic people. I don't know if you know of them.  INT: What, like Latvia, and-- EM: Yeah, right, right, yeah.  INT: --around there, yeah. EM: But so they're not Lats either. This is-- they were a cultured [INAUDIBLE] of high nobility who had their roots in, in Scandinavia and in France, and Germany, and in Russia, at the court of the Tsar. You know, they were-- they were small-- a small crowd of people.  INT: You knew you were being deported east, then. You knew you were going to be sent east. EM: No, we heard it only from the police that we were going east. We didn't-- I mean, the destination. We knew we would go east, but we heard only from a police on the transport we were sent to Riga. That was life. Because further, Poland would have been that. We knew that.  INT: I, I forgot to ask you earlier how you got in touch with the gypsies-- how you knew the gypsies who-- EM: We are in the same cell in prison.  INT: So they were already being rounded up as well as Jews then? EM: Yeah. 
INT: Tell me about the transport. How, how was it arranged? How did you get to Riga? EM: Well, first of all, I didn't want to go like a lamb to the slaughter. I volunteered as a first aider. So I got a white coat, and I was a nurse-- and as assistant to the qualified nurse. So we were marched to the station. And the sick and ill people were allotted a separate compartment, or a rather large-- larger compartment. And there we took-- I was together with a nurse. We were very busy the whole time with the patients. We went three days and nights, but with hardly any food, because the goods were moldy, and practically no water, which was worse. We had one stop, but that was difficult. So we were a trainload of 1,100, 1,200 people. I don't know.  INT: What time of year was this? What was the date? EM: September '42.  INT: And what were the conditions like? Were they proper passenger carriages that you were in? EM: Yeah.  INT: But you didn't have any-- EM: Not myself, because we had to narrow the passenger carriages. We had a larger, more like a goods compartment.  INT: Did you have any drugs or medicines with you? EM: We carried-- we carried chests with it-- whole chests for all eventualities.  INT: And was there a trained doctor with you or just-- EM: Yes.  INT: --the-- yeah. EM: But he traveled separately with their-- with the-- with, with the better people. 
INT: The doctor didn't travel with the sick? EM: No. Quite a common feature.  INT: And were you given food and water for the journey? EM: Originally, when we-- before we left, the Jewish community had prepared sandwiches.  INT: The Jewish community in Berlin had brought food for the train. Did many Gentiles know what was going on? EM: Oh, yes. My God. We marched through the streets through the-- to the train.  INT: Did they say anything to you while you were being-- EM: They couldn't. What could they do?  INT: Who was guarding you on the train? Soldiers or police or SS? EM: I don't know was it police or SS. Of course, I didn't see them. But I believe-- I believe police.  INT: Did the train stop at all? EM: Once to take in water for the engine and coal. Yeah. And after three days and nights, we arrived at the goods station in Riga. And there I saw a tap at the distance, like from here to the pond, on another side, some-- across the road. And I knew I wanted to give out water. I knew if I do it, I get the bullet in the neck for trying to escape. So I went up to the senior SS officer, clicked my heels and shouted for permission to speak. [INAUDIBLE] I laughed my head off, and they liked that. So I got permission. I took a pail and-- pail and ladle and went from one to the other and gave out drinks, as much as they like. They were their last drinks. But we didn't know that. And then came shuttle service of buses to take them away. And I saw them all off. And I was to go the last, you know. So officer said, stay put. He knew. The shuttle service ended at the cemetery where they had to strip and then were shot-- first miracle. 
INT: And we've just come to the end of the tape there.  INT: And this is the fourth tape of the interview with Mr. Mitchell. You were telling us there of how you arrived in Riga. EM: Yeah.  INT: And you'd been caring for the sick on the train. EM: That's right.  INT: Who did not survive even after that. But this German-- one German officer kept you back-- EM: Yeah.  INT: --from being sent. EM: There was also a small group of 40 Jews who were detailed to clean and wash our train. So we were a group, also, after the other, the 1,100 or 1,200 people were sent off to their death. I was ordered to fetch the other 40 people. And we were put into a [? try out, ?] tiny-- you can't call it a camp-- a farm, let's call it. To a small place to see if we earned the right to live. We were work-- working well enough. And we built, in a short time, tennis court for the SS. That was about the month of October, or part of the October. And there, already, we experienced hardship. I-- there was my second miracle, because I was interviewed by an SS man if I would be suitable as a dental mechanic for the SS dental laboratory. And I was found failing, which saved me, because they kept their slave labor very well, fed them and all that, but then they killed them. So that were that. 
INT: So it wasn't just the sick people on the train, that you were traveling on, who were killed? EM: Oh, no. There were only a few.  INT: It was everyone. EM: There were the 1,100, 1,200 beautiful children, girls, women, men, and-- men and women. It was the population.  INT: Everyone from the train were-- EM: They were-- were lovely people between. Yeah. And--  INT: Had you been allowed to take anything with you, suitcases, possessions-- EM: Oh, no.  INT: --things like that? EM: No. Anyhow, I came out of prison with my-- as I stood. And [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] we were working for a half-military pioneer corps called the Organisation Todt, OT. We came-- which came under Speer, you know that architect Speer.  INT: Albert Speer, the architect. EM: And we were-- don't laugh-- building a shunting station on sand with them. They also-- they were also-- that went-- it was October, November, December. And then they abolished it. I don't know what happened. By that time, in December, I was, again, boom, down and sent to the ghetto hospital. But [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] there we were already dying of lice, of hunger. There was one of the men who said, when we meet again, I don't have to be ashamed to look in your eyes. But then other one stole our rations and sent them home. They were Bavarian people. One of them was very rough. He was called the knifer. He-- he always encouraged people to work with a knife. And one of them committed suicide, and then the population knew we were not criminals. 
INT: What was the ghetto-- EM: And--  INT: --like in Riga? EM: Pardon?  INT: You were in the ghetto hospital. EM: No, no. It wasn't a ghetto. We were just the group of us originally 80 men.  INT: Did you know about the-- the-- the-- the ghettos in Riga? EM: No, no. We had no connections.  INT: Were-- were you-- you were outside the town of Riga, then? EM: We were not in Riga but in [? Mitau ?] [? Jelgava. ?] That was a county town. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] There another miracle happened, I thought. I have still some spots here from that time. They are very pale. You can hardly see them. I was again finished. And I thought, rather I end with terror than endless terror. And I decided I go over the fence. Now, our location-- I have a piece of paper here, which showed the location. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] A huge square, in one corner, an entry to the living quarters, and at the other exit to the road on which we were marched to and from work. And the fence I went over was opposite the entry. I was going to beg for food. I came back with some peas, which a little girl gave me, a young girl, and the old [? mamushka ?] gave me a piece of bread. But I lost my way. It was winter, blackout snow. And I finally decided, I go round the block, and I must come back to my place. And I did. But my angel or whoever worked for me over time made me walk on the opposite side of the road. And when I got further, one of the soldiers came out-- I call them soldiers-- and didn't see me. But now how to get back? Because in that square behind the door was a sentry with a-- with a rifle. How to get back? Impossible. But there was nothing left for me but to go through that gate by which we were marched in and out. Good German fashion, the lock was oiled. I carefully opened the gate, very, very carefully, and, there, he was standing, like this post in front of me, but with a back to me. So I crept around along the fence, all over the fence, till I came then in the spotlight, which led to the quarters. And he challenged me, what I'm doing. I said I have been to the-- to the field kitchen, get some water. But he never realized I never ask him for when I walked out. I never walked out by him, and I had nothing in my hands. Anyhow, see, either this man, who didn't see me, came upon two of our boys who had absconded from the marching column back and begged for bread. And they were caught. And my, what were they treated? I wouldn't have survived it. You can't imagine the-- the sadism with which those two boys were treated. And I then swore I wouldn't tempt my-- what now should I call it-- guardian angel or whoever again. And-- but I was completely finished. And when the doctor sent me, probably to save me, to the ghetto hospital. And that is just where-- with two more. That is first time I got into Riga ghetto. 
INT: What did they do to-- EM: We were put-- pardon?  INT: The boys that were caught with the bread. EM: They-- they were terribly-- terribly treated. But they survived their treatment then. Well, we were-- we were deloused by two old ladies, put in a washing up bowl and shaved and cleaned and disinfected and-- and deloused. And then two of us put in one bed, and we were in the seventh heaven. Were clean sheets. And we were there. Now, the patients there, there were two rooms. They were called wards. They were just rooms, one for men and one for women. But you couldn't see a difference. You had to look very intently to see who was a man and who was a woman. The-- the sex differences were so-- [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] we-- we Jews couldn't see any. So that was Christmas.  INT: That was 1943? EM: '42. '42 to '43. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] At Whitsun, I was meant to be able to work and to weed grass between-- between, you know, the inner and outer fence at the ghetto. And in summer, I was-- I was rated as being able to work to-- with others to move a mountain of coal.  INT: Whitsun, that would be a spring holiday, is it? EM: That would be-- so it would be early summer of '43.  INT: What was daily life like in the ghetto, then? EM: I didn't take part, because I-- I was long time in the hospital. The Jews had to walk out and were-- the Gestapo was paid, and they had then to buy their food from the Gestapo. And I was lucky to be ill, because I didn't have to witness any hanging or like that, which, of course, their own policemen had to do, their own-- the Jewish voluntary policemen. And [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] so there was already a communal life with no individual property. And it was very crowded. 
INT: What sort of clothes did you wear? EM: There, you wore any clothes you got, you know? Not yet-- there were not yet uniforms. [PAUSES FOR 5 SECONDS] So on that place where we had to shift coals, that was a hostel for the soldiers to and from the front. I was too weak to lift the axe, but the sergeant did it for me. And there, I found a cellar where food tins were stored, and I still scratched enough out-- out of the empty food tins to get me back on my feet. But there, I had another miraculous escape. There was a deep, deep, deep cellar. Half of that was smooth to put-- to roll down barrels, and the other steps. And there was a big oaken door, and that was going to-- suddenly, that gave me a fourpenny and hurled me down in the abyss. And I had time to think, if they'd throw me on the stones, I would break my-- my-- my bones. If I got down on the smooth part, I would land up and break my neck. And when I got down, I landed on straw, and just got up. [PAUSES FOR 6 SECONDS] Yeah. That was in fact told me by a palmist before. She said, I can't see, is it your head or your feet, you will-- you will come near the grave, but you will survive and get as old as Methuselah. That is what she told me. I never seen her before or after. 
INT: Where was that that she told you? EM: In Riga.  INT: In Riga ghetto? EM: I mean-- no, no. I mean-- I-- that was in Berlin where she told, that palmist. But so I never forget that. That was another save.  INT: What were you given to eat in-- in the ghetto? EM: Can't--  INT: What was the food like? EM: I don't remember. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] I can't remember those details. And then I wasn't very long there. I remember sometime I had to work in town, and there a Latvish woman put food down for us, not-- she couldn't give it to us directly. She put the sandwiches in the next house. I remember that. But that were the end. And then--  INT: Were you making friends with your fellow prisoners? EM: Oh, no.  INT: Was it possible to make friends? EM: No. You couldn't make friends. You were-- very, very, very, very rarely, because you would begin-- well, you had to be careful not to be denounced or betrayed. The next thing was, in summer, I was detailed to go in other job getting reed grass out of the river and dry it out. Our strong men had to stay out in the water and cut it, and we rest had to run to and fro to dry it out or put it together. And so we got there. We had there even a-- entertainment once, which we made ourselves. And I produced myself, and the SS man was our guest of honor, and he threw me a cigarette as-- and-- 
INT: What sort of entertainment was it? EM: Oh, you just make up ditties or whatever you could, or--  INT: Songs-- EM: Yeah.  INT: --poetry, things like that? EM: Yeah. And the corporal in charge of us thanked us, then, for having obeyed him. He had a Jewish girlfriend, [LAUGHS] but before. And also there they had the thing that German Jewish prisoners were put in charge of an armory, where they had-- they kept there Estonian prisoners of war. And they-- they had the choice of being shot or voluntary join the SS legion, so they joined the SS legion. And there were three companies. And my friend, [? Horst, ?] was put as-- as their company office. He was the company office. So when a man came in, he clicked his heels, 'Heil Hitler,' and then he said what he wanted. And when the poor [? Horst ?] had to go to there-- he-- of course he couldn't answer that greeting. When he came back to their barrack, the men on duty called the whole barrack to attention. They stood there, you know, and he couldn't even say mum, because he-- the German-- he-- they didn't know we were also prisoners like them. But the NCOs would have known they were Germans. So he was in the sweat. They would-- and a German come in. He couldn't-- he couldn't say, carry on. He couldn't say-- he-- answer their greetings. He couldn't do a thing. And yes, another Jew or two were looking after the armory of the SS. And they had to make a [NON-ENGLISH] on the Latvish people because-- on the Latvish-- on the Estonian volunteers, because they found they had weapons, which they were not given out by the Nazis. So they had some-- tried some resistance. You wouldn't believe it. Prisoners-- German Jewish prisoners put in charge of the armory. 
INT: Why? Why did they do that? EM: They knew we couldn't do anything else. What could you have done then? What could we have done? So from there, we were sent, in October, early October, to the concentration camp proper, Kaiserwald. That was then-- that-- that was another chapter. You know, as I said, that-- that SS corporal thanked us for having obeyed him. Would you believe it? He was a nice man, but he-- he screamed at us to keep the lieutenant off his and our back. What a nice man. I asked-- I ask him once, what happened to people from upper Silesia? He said be happy here and don't ask any questions. Be happy. Be happy here. [LAUGHS]  INT: You-- you were trying to find out what had happened to your family. EM: Yeah. Anyhow, they-- he knew, of course, they were in Auschwitz. So--  INT: So you were sent to the Kaiserwald? EM: Yeah.  INT: That-- that was a-- just a concentration camp. EM: Yeah.  INT: No labor, no-- EM: That started. That was--  INT: --work. EM: Kaiserwald was a main distributing camp for-- also for the region, where people came and went. And there was-- my number-- we-- we were a small number, 42, 45, or whatever it was. I don't-- And there came a next miracle. They ask for volunteers out to a fishing village, and I was also on the list. And when it came to it, there were-- there-- they were called out, the main body of the-- of our prisoners. And then the other, who were sent out, into a small number of 10 men, to fill up any-- make up any necessary row. And so when it came to it, there came a man and said, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8. Left turn, quick march. And two of us were left standing. And I knew then already that was it. And again, they all died. They were all killed. The last one came back to our sick bay and told us what was going on there. So that was another miracle. 
INT: How were they killed at-- EM: They-- they were--  INT: --Kaiserwald? EM: --had to work in the reed, in the water with-- and in-- in the-- live in the water, without-- without food, without drink, without precautions, with-- you know, they died of pneumonia or of gastroenteritis and what have you. They were not-- you know?  INT: What sort of conditions were you kept in at the camp? EM: Well, it was awful, of course. And was very bad.  INT: Were you all in barracks? EM: We were in barracks, and the barracks were the size of that box. Very long, and they were just boards, boards, boards long, where you just laid like the sardines. If there was no room, you were lying over their feet. And there were three layers, and they looked like the monkeys in a-- or in a zoo. You-- and the shaved heads, you know, just shaved heads, and one head by the other, or like in a chicken farm. And we-- we were then put-- when we got in there, the music started really. Los, los, quick, quick, [GERMAN]. And the registrar was a lovely redhead. She ask me, I have to give a craft. I couldn't say I was-- I must give a craft. Otherwise, I will be killed. So I became a dental mechanic. And that, again, saved my life. But not at once. But then came the Jews of Lwów, I believe. We lost clothing. And their clothing were taken away and disinfected, sent back to Germany. On that occasion, I stole a pair of trousers, because we-- we had nothing really to wear. And the senior prisoner came and said that-- it seemed to have been common, or whether it's true or not I don't know-- if you don't put that back, the Holy Ghost will appear. You know, that was the language. We didn't know what it was. And then he came back and said, the Holy Ghost will come, because things have not been given back. Whether it's true or not, I don't know. You know, the people might have panicked and thrown clothing into the pit. I don't know. Anyhow, it was perhaps just a pretense. And about-- in the small hours, you know, blackout, night, no lamps. With, boom, out and everybody had to-- everything had to be done at the double. And at that narrow exit, there was a stoppage, because people tried to go down and others tried to withdraw. Because behind the door stood people all in the black dark, with-- with sticks or whatever, and were doing merry hitting on the people who came out with their big sticks. Then the panic broke out. People went-- broke the windows. I was trampled on and got a hole in the head. And that-- again, only three times, I thought Hitler was dead, and they will all club us to death. That went three times to and fro. And I don't know how many people were killed. And after three days, I went to the sick bay, to the first aid post, to get a plaster. And there I was caught by-- by the-- by an SS man, sergeant. I still looked too-- too well. And he ordered me to report to the senior prisoner, and I knew they would kill me because I was the one who was caught in front of the whole camp. So I still-- but I still had a night to live, because they didn't have time for me at night. But I felt very sorry for a-- for that murder, for-- for that supposed murderer, because I felt I know of reincarnation by he didn't. And I thought the poor devil will make his own future very, very difficult by killing me. And I don't like to say so, because it sounds I blow my own trumpet, but it's the honest truth, I prayed for him. I-- and I forgave him my murder. And I-- I hoped God or Christ or whatsoever will also forgive him his murder. And [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] as it happened, next morning, the whole camp overslept. The whole camp and the SS-- there were-- they all overslept. And I hope it is not arrogance, but it is quite, I think, [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] quite in-- what should I say? Now what is the word? [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] Now I can't get the word. You know, I felt it was a reaction to-- to the way that I could say, not I but Christ in me. And so I was saved from-- from that-- from that-- from that experience. 
INT: If the camp-- EM: But--  INT: --had got up as usual, you would have been shot? EM: Not shot, clubbed to death or hit to death or stamped to death or whatever. And they were-- they wouldn't spend a bullet on you. And-- but I felt calm and collected. I remember no-- no [? rays ?] of the pious. Quiet, calm. I-- I still emptied my pockets to what I gave other people so that-- and I went first to the lavatory, so that when they were killing me I shan't dirty my trousers, you know? And so it is amazing, the quiet, calm, and collected, and look-- looked to the fact that, in half an hour, an hour, or whatever, you-- you will be killed. It's interesting. I had that experience, again, later, the quiet-- quiet calm, where I counted my steps and thought, I have still so many steps to live, and then we'll be finished. When-- again, when also the war had parted, and I shall tell that later. But it's very interesting. So that was-- that was another of those murders. And then, my next step was-- I-- I was very, very weak, to the lowest, lowest state of my life, where I tried for-- to find food in the dustbin, which was also punishable. Everything was practically punishable by death. But I just got a fourpenny one. And then, two days later, when I was so low, or a day after that, to the dental hospital. And there this man was out-- this man was at least four Schindlers. If I tell you what he did for us, that is a man from whom I have that candlestick. I made friends with him afterwards. He went out of his way to help us any way. 
INT: What was his name? EM: Dr. Fritz Lamprecht. [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] He asked-- first of all, he got a-- us to be marched into work on Sundays, but there was no work. He gave us a free day. The soldiers didn't work, so he said you don't work. So he let us come in any time to let us free. He got our commandant not to let us work when we come back heavy labor, because we have to keep nimble heads. He got us food from the soldiers' kitchen every day. He got us the privilege of individual bunks, which only another SS group had. And he got us the privilege that we had not our hair cut. But we had a certificate, with a cuckoo and a stamp and the signature and the lot, that we are allowed to have our hair long, which we had to kept on us. And in that unit-- [LAUGHS] you'll laugh your head off-- in that unit, there was a order of the day, like in every military organization. Officer on duty, sergeant on duty, corporal on duty, technician on duty. And you know what was the last? Jew on duty. And the Jew on duty was a prisoner [LAUGHS] in the Nazi camp. And under the cuckoo of the army, on the army heading, on the army official paper, there was a Jew on duty. Now, you-- you wouldn't believe that. So--  INT: We've just come to the end-- EM: Yeah. 
INT: --of the tape there.  INT: This is the first tape of the interview with Mr. Mitchell. You were explaining there about the, the good German, if you like. EM: Yeah, sure.  INT: The man who took care of his workers. EM: Yeah.  INT: How long were you with him at Kaiserwald? EM: Over a year. That saved my life. You know, because you know, in the daily soups. Even the food, and Christmas, we had the whole lot. You know, with meat, and all the-- all the trimmings for Christmas. It was incredible. I'll tell you something else. The local-- the other technicians were local Jews. They had money deposited with the boilerman. They had butter. They had fried fish. They have-- they had chickens, they had everything. And Dr. Lamprecht, I was there. I was the only one, because I was the only one who didn't have any. He came and looked and shook his head, couldn't believe. And again, he came back three times and couldn't believe his eyes. What they had there, these prisoners, better food than he had. And you know what he did? He asked the, the sergeant to tell the foreman to hide it better. They don't want to be forced to have to see it. And at that time, he came. And I heard him still say, he said [GERMAN], they have a later edition of the paper than I. They were criminal-- they were criminal offenses. And at the end, the foreman escaped from work. And then, we were transferred to the camp, for its laboratory-- it's-- the laboratory was transferred to the camp. And there the next happened. 
INT: His name, but you-- the man, the doctor whose-- EM: Yeah, Lamprecht, Dr. Lamprecht.  INT: Lamprecht. Can you spell that for me, Lamprecht? EM: L-A-M-P-R-E-C-H-T.  INT: And he survived the war, did he? EM: No, he's dead. Yes, he survived the war. But he's dead. He, he died since.  INT: What sort of work were you doing for him in this place? EM: [LAUGHS] I was so unqualified. I, I, I did-- I think I was put on repairs or plaster work. And the odd man-- the odd man with another man. So now, I forgot. But it was generous that they didn't send me back. But you know, after that-- before that, that incident, I caught some skin-- some-- [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] I don't know, trouble, some ex--  INT: Eczema. EM: Eczema.  INT: Skin, skin rashes. EM: And I got then-- I got really desperate. And what happened? I put it very short. For one night only, a highly-qualified skin consultant passed through our camp. I didn't know him. I'd never seen him before or since. I had bread, he didn't. I paid him with bread and he cured me. That was another lifesaver, yeah. Now I tell you the opposite. We were allowed to carry soup and black bread into the camp. There was-- and random-- you know, when you came in-- checks. One of our men said, today you can have my canteen as well. So I was very glad. I carried it through. After I carried it through, he said, just a moment. There was so much of the soup, the thing was stuffed with meat. He used my head to carry the black market meat in, on my head. Now, that-- 
INT: So if you'd been caught, you would have been-- EM: I didn't know. Of course, if I was caught by, by-- what, check, it was my head, not his. That, that is the other side which you also have to mention. A fellow from the same type of work. A kind of a [? camp baron, ?] Yeah.  INT: He was also Jewish? EM: Of course. We were all Jews. Didn't make a difference.  INT: How long were you in Kaiserwald camp for? EM: I think it must-- I, I can't really tell you, over a year. Now, that was one thing. Then when the camp was dissolved, I was sent back with some other men to get material back to work, inside the camp. One of my fellows asked me if I could break to-- could bring back to him a gold coin, an illegal gold crown, which I don't know, with that black market, what they did. Perhaps from a patient, taken off, I don't know.  INT: From a tooth? EM: Yeah,  INT: That kind of gold crown? EM: Yeah, yeah. When I got to the-- to the-- to town, the, the bread now has shriveled, and there lies the gold crown. And I took it. That-- I mean, I hadn't opened it. God Almighty, I don't know. Anyhow, I came back, just put it down. Slammed down from the low, and just put it down. I had hardly done so when another prisoner-- or let me-- that's a double to the senior camp prisoner, who searched me from top to bottom and let me go. This other fellow was on the earlier lorry. And then he jumped down. And a bundle of money fell out of his pocket. So that was his [? case. ?] And do you know, the split second where I put down the crown, that was again, my life. Now, the miracles you experience. If, if that can't turn you, I don't know what can. 
INT: Give you faith, you mean? EM: Yeah. You'll feel secure whatever happens. And then you, you-- yes, it gives you trust, hope, and absolutely, peace.  INT: Do you think it-- did it make you feel more Jewish? Or just-- EM: No. Nothing to do with that. Now I tell you-- yes?  INT: I was just going to ask where you were sent after the camp was dissolved? EM: I have still another interval of the camp. At Whitsun, I found in a old soldier's paper, a cross-- not crossword, but-- not-- similar. No, make up out of pieces. Which do we call it? Riddle. [BACKGROUND NOISE]  INT: Or acrostic? EM: That's it, so-- so what do we do? Off?  INT: That's-- that's your-- EM: Yeah, that is my--  INT: --meal arriving. So we'll-- EM: So what do we do now?  INT: We'll stop the tape at this point. And we stopped the tape there, Ernst, because-- EM: Yes, I'm sorry about that.  INT: No. No, I just should explain that the tape stopped there because you get your lunch delivered-- EM: Yeah.  INT: --to the house every day. EM: Yeah.  INT: And that was your lunch arriving-- EM: That's right.  INT: --when we stopped the tape there. EM: That's right, I'm sorry.  INT: So just to pick up again, you were telling us about the last days. EM: They were-- well, the-- well, the laboratory was still in the camp. Yes, and that man fell you know, with that bunch of money, out of his pocket. Yeah-- so I have to try to pick up. [LAUGHS] 
INT: Let me ask you a question, just before we go back to that. EM: Yes, dear?  INT: How much did you know of what-- how well or badly the war was going? How much did you hear in the camp? EM: Well, that is interesting. Because at the end, some people had, somewhere, an illegal-- either an illegal radio, or outside contact. You see, we, we worked outside the camp enclosure. And so did many others. So you knew. You also had, sometimes, the fact that-- well, sometimes-- I-- one night I especially remember an attack by air. By, you know, air attack. And so one knew. And one was even prepared. I remember where we thought the Partisans would liberate us. It would cost many lives. But we didn't mind how many of us died, if the others were freed. But of course, it was with no reason. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] So another-- at one time, later in summer, they relaxed. And we got, even officially in the camp, radio music. Of course, German music. And at one time, on Sundays, the men were allowed into the women's block. So--  INT: Which year was this, 1944? EM: Now we are in '44. Yes, must be. So-- [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] indeed we are now still late summer, '44. And then more and more of the soldiers of that, that unit was then dissolved, and the technicians sent on the front. So the other, other instance was before. Now, let me try to collect my thought. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] The food got even a bit better. Because we got, then, rejected army food. Which was with maggots in. But we didn't mind the maggots, was additional vitamins. But that is how the situation developed. I also like to say Kaiserwald was not a destruction camp. There was no gallows. And no punishment-- and no punishment block. And no block-- I mean, wooden block on which people were beaten up, or so. There was never any violence. 
INT: There was no crematoria or anything of that nature? EM: No, there was-- the people who were sent were then collected. That was, of course, going all the time. The weak ones were collected so often, every three or four weeks, and then sent out. Probably to Stutthof to be cremated or whatever. We don't know. But in our own camp, there was never any violence. And I remember when the Hungarian women came, the commandant, who was a Sturmbannführer Sauer, worked next to me. We had to dig emergency lavatories for the hundreds of women who came. They used those big petrol barrels. And they had to be sunk into the ground. And he took off his jacket, took a spade and worked next to me. You know? I was a bit clumsy. I'd got a slight [INAUDIBLE] anyone. But that was the time. And I remember another time, he, he went into one of the working barracks of some mechanics. And they were cooking something, which was, of course, illegal. And lifted the lid and said, no, you don't live here too badly. Well, they walked out. In other camps, that would have been a death sentence. Or at least, the food would have been thrown through the window.  INT: What was his name? EM: Sturmbannführer Sauer.  INT: Sauer? EM: Yeah.  INT: S-A-U-E-R? EM: Yeah. You know, and so he was probably quite qualified building worker, something. Now, another thing I like to tell, when it came nearer to the end. I don't know why, but I went into the first aid post and fainted. And so I don't know how long I lay there, half conscious or unconscious. I have no idea about the time. But they tried. They were-- I remember five doctors bending over me, personally, our own prison, fellow prisoner doctors. And also SS. They couldn't find what was wrong with me. So I was a candidate for death because of the danger I was-- I was being to the camp. And I came so far that they're going to give me the lethal injection to kill me. And another miracle, like the distance from here to the door, a child-- 
INT: A few feet. EM: Pardon?  INT: Just a few feet? EM: Yeah. A child of perhaps seven or eight pointed his finger at me and said, he got jaundice. And then the camp doctors generously confirmed that child's diagnosis. And I was allowed to live. That is the honest truth. You wouldn't believe it.  INT: How long did you stay in the hospital? EM: And then, I can't tell you. I was half, half conscious, half unconscious. I had no idea. And then I asked-- there was a rumor that we are being consumed to Stutthof, evacuated. And I asked the doctor to discharge me. He said, we can't discharge you. You can't stand on your feet. I said, I don't want to be killed. He said, all right. I don't want you to be killed. Because normally, at that stage, the sick and ill people were not left behind, but shot first. So I didn't-- so I got out. I couldn't hardly stand. And the next day, we were evacuated to Danzig. And there, again, that was camps within the camp. And must have been many, many tens of thousands, perhaps hundreds of thousands, we don't know. And there, two more miracles happened. One was we-- I could hardly stand on my feet. But you don't-- you don't argue. You were sent to go there, and you went there. Never mind the consequences. So I queued up with the others to unload a goods wagon. And then I knew it was far beyond my strength. I would collapse and be killed. It was automatic. And I had time to step, oh, still seven steps to live. Six, five, four, three, two, one. Now, finish. I offered my back, for to be loaded up. The wagon was empty. The men in front of me had the last load. I was again allowed to live. 
INT: So they weren't loading any more people? EM: No, there were goods to be-- and that goods wagon to be emptied. The men in front had the last load. Now, I tell you, it hits you behind the ears-- or eyes. In other words, there was-- the [INAUDIBLE] details. And the-- on a field of commando. Commando was a detail. And there was the worst of all in the forest, where we had to move tree trunks of all sizes. And the man in front and in charge was a prisoner who was deranged, who perhaps 10 years of prison, I don't know. He was as bad, if not worse, than the SS. And he specialized in electing two weak people or sick people or old people and ask, put them on one trunk, which they couldn't lift, never mind carry. And then he half off-- killed them or half killed them. Was incredible. And I knew I wouldn't come back out of that. And what happened? This man who had been already so long in ask-- asked the crowd if they knew of a man, xy, you know. And he obviously must have been a very close friend or relative. In all those years, he didn't get an answer. What happened? I gave him the answer. He was on our transport. So he didn't elect-- select or elect--  INT: Choose you. EM: Treat me. He give me right, a little hit with a branch, it was nothing. It was encouragement. It was a coincidence that twice I had to go to him. And twice I was allowed to come back. Now, that was the worst of all these things. So-- 
INT: Do you remember his name, that prisoner? EM: No, you didn't know names. So you see, [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] if you had that experience, you can't help noticing it. [LAUGHS]  INT: You're in, in the city of Danzig, the-- EM: No, we were--  INT: Or just outside? EM: The camp was outside, far. We had an hour's march to Danzig.  INT: Were you made to work in Danzig itself? EM: Some people were. I was only there once, for a short time. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] You know.  INT: What-- what's the date? Do you remember the date now, when you're in-- EM: Oh, it's--  INT: --Danzig? EM: No, I don't.  INT: 1944? EM: Oh yes, it was all '44. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] I think I told you, at Whitsun-- or did I start it-- that I found there that puzzle of this friend of mine. And it was a extraordinary experience. The thousands of miles were wiped out. And there she was. You know, it was-- it was only a piece of paper. But it was as if she was there herself.  INT: She had done this puzzle in a newspaper? EM: Yeah.  INT: And you recognized-- EM: She's an artist. She did all those works as well. She is. And I can tell you another story. There I found Breslau has a shibboleth word, which is called [GERMAN]. It is just Breslau. And once I collected soup with my [INAUDIBLE]. Soldiers passed by to collect food for their ward. And one used this word to a comrade. So I knew he was from Breslau. The next time he passed, I said to him, [GERMAN], the same word. Which of course, it was senseless to him, but that man understood. And of course, it was-- he wasn't allowed, and I wasn't allowed to contact each other. But one day I met him. And then they gave out wine, which they had stolen from the French, of course. And he said he's going back on recovery leave to Breslau, before he was sent back to the front. I said, would you take a letter for me? He said, yes. That was capital punishment, a crime. So I composed a letter, a long letter, described my whole life in details. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] I had to-- you know, gave it to him open, and he delivered it. And I tell you, I started to write the letter. You know, in a war you were not allowed to name places. But so I had-- I wrote, 'I'm working here in [NON-ENGLISH] birthplace, which was Riga. And I go every-- 
INT: In whose birthplace, sorry? EM: Riga.  INT: And who was born there? [POINTS] Ah, your girlfriend. EM: [NON-ENGLISH].  INT: Yeah. EM: I had an hour's little walk to work. And I work on my occupation, with other friends. You know, that--  INT: Was this to your family, that you wrote the letter? Who did you write the letter to? EM: Well, wait a minute. And described, in detail, my life. This letter I addressed to a lady I didn't know. She was a relative of a relative of a friend of a friend. I knew her name, never seen her for before. She worked in Breslau, at police headquarters, residence register. You know in Germany, you had to register at police. And there she worked. So I addressed it to Frau so-and-so, police headquarter, Breslau. [LAUGHS] And he delivered it. So my friends knew I was still alive. So you can imagine that man, of course, risked his head. My head wasn't worth anything. [LAUGHS] And you know, these things should be recorded because they are so extraordinary of courage, to a complete stranger, fellow-- I mean, a prisoner. Perhaps you can say, despised you forever. So now, yes, that was the other. Yes, I-- the wagon was, and I told you about this. And I told you about-- yeah. Now-- [PAUSES FOR 6 SECONDS] Of course, I went down physically again. When we worked-- we worked outside Danzig, in a shipbuilding yard called [GERMAN]. This is-- later it was called the Lenin-- Lenin shipbuilding yard. And then had-- you know, I don't know what it's now. They later started the uprising. And-- 
INT: Well, the uprising, but that was after the war, wasn't it? EM: Yeah.  INT: That was Lech Walesa and Solidarity-- EM: Yeah, yeah.  INT: --started that. EM: And there I was again. I collapsed. That was Christmas, '44. Practically collapsed. I had dysentery, gastroenteritis, and pneumonia, and what have you. And the foreman for whom we worked was a German civilian, who had to meet a deadline. Whom he had were people incapable. And so he hit-- he hit them and-- he was terribly brutal to them. I could understand, he was desperate. But he was extraordinary brutal. And then I collapsed, what did he do? He wrote out three chips to give me three days rest. Because he said I always worked. Well, the others stood on their spade when he-- to hand this back. I didn't, because A, I didn't want to catch a cold. I didn't know I had it already. Well, that was pneumonia. Secondly, also, for respect for the work. If I think, millions of people have their whole life to earn their living that way. And for the sake of the work, I wanted to do-- whatever work it was, I wanted to do any work properly. I want to learn how to do it properly. So he was not an idiot. I mean, a foreman is never an idiot. So he gives me three days. And so I was allowed, officially, to be ill. It was extraordinary. Because only very few people were allowed. You see, the SS didn't allow many people to be ill. They're sent off to their deaths. So of course, I didn't-- I remember it was Christmas. And I didn't have to get up at 6 o'clock in the morning for my [GERMAN]. And I was in the 7th heaven. I was very ill, but I was in heaven. 
INT: So you were in the barracks where you were put in? EM: I was in-- I was in our barrack, but in the-- in the sick bay. And as I-- as I must have told you, [GERMAN].  INT: That was the name of the camp you were staying in? [GERMAN]? EM: Yeah. Yes. There-- before us were Italians. They, they left it that way, because they caught typhus there.  INT: So they died? EM: And-- yes. So we inherited it.  INT: What work did you have to do in the shipyard? What was your job? EM: First I was put on mechanical engineering. And then to sweep the huge barrack. There was still work going on. It was all-- the Russians were practically there. They, they were still working on building up submarines. And there I had another narrow escape. I was sweeping this huge, huge hall. And nobody else inside. And the foremen came through from their offices to the workplace. And one put down a packet. I knew it was his lunch, a wonderful lunch. I hadn't-- I had to go to the loo to have it, the only quiet place. And safe, safe place, where you wouldn't be caught. When I came back, a fellow prisoner accused me of he's stolen his bread. Well, of course, at the end-- he was a decent fellow. And at the end, he believed me. But then he said, can I search you? I said, of course. And there he found the wrapping paper. And his own bread was also, funnily enough, also wrapped in the same type of paper. Rough-- rough [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] [? cartage ?] paper, you know? And I said-- men came and gave it to me. Oh, well, the Germans couldn't do that. They were themselves rushing. But if they were-- if you were a good worker, you might get half a cigarette. But if you work well for them. But not a foreman's lunch, a beautiful lunch. So that was unbelievable a German would give it to a complete stranger, his own lunch. So he said, all right. Bring that man. I said, I don't know him. He said now, come on. You don't believe it yourself. I said, I don't blame you. So he said, all right. I'll let you off. You just replace the bread you have stolen. I had to agree. Because if he had reported me, what they would have done, they would have put me on to a post, put water over me, and let me freeze overnight in the open. I would have been finished. So I had to destroy my own reputation. When he came to fetch-- to get his bread, my mates nearly killed him. I had to protect him against my mate. I had to-- I had to destroy my reputation. They swore I hadn't done it. And I didn't, of course. 
INT: And we've just come to the end of the tape there. EM: Yeah.  INT: And it's tape six? CREW: Yeah.  INT: And this is tape number six of the interview with Mr. Mitchell. It's Christmas 1944, and you're working in the shipyard in Danzig. Is that right? EM: Schichau, yes. Schichau--  INT: Schichau. EM: --Danzig.  INT: Did you know how badly the war was going then for the Germans? EM: Oh, yes. You realized. My ears were cocked to hear if any airplane would come, because we would know it was an Allied one. We were--  INT: How would you know that? EM: You knew the Germans were too far gone. They wouldn't-- they couldn't have an airplanes flying over our area.  INT: Did you ever think about who was going to liberate you-- whether it would be the-- EM: Oh, yes.  INT: --Russians or the Americans or the British? EM: Well, there's-- again, very strange-- I had a cousin who went out with a kindertransport and wanted to become a nurse. That was the last I heard. So I was already remembering. I was already lying there, half, half dead. So my, my awareness was mixed up. And in my fantasy, I thought this girl came back as a nurse with the Allies from-- with the Americans or English-- probably with the English-- to liberate us and nurse us back. Because at the same time, I saw a special train of severely wounded German soldiers, from, from the place where I worked. And this mixture of seeing these soldiers in their white beds, tended by nurses, together with the other picture and hearing the planes, that got in my mind a mixture. Also, suddenly a very young couple burst into our, our block, and the girl resembled-- this girl there resembled this cousin of mine. So you can imagine I got a mixture. It took me long-- it took me the whole night, step by step, to work out what is dream, what is reality, where is reality. And the foreman in, in that block encouraged me. He said, I promise you, if you sit up, you'll get the first-- the first-- the vest of the first corpse straightaway. I was very privileged. Well, so I worked out-- and, and that shock pushed me back to life. I was already half out of the body. And soon after that, I don't know. I can't tell you how long. But the SS forgot to shoot us. Normally, as you know, they killed the sick and ill before they were forced on their-- on, on the run, on the forced marches. And so I was allowed to experience the first Russian liberators. It was extraordinary. 
INT: So you'd been in the hospital all this time-- not working anymore? EM: No. I was-- [LAUGHS] I was-- I wasn't capable. I was-- I was full of lice. And when I got in there, of course, I threw the blanket away. I was quite naked and got just one blanket, which I wrapped around me. And in order that it lasted longer, I took up a embryo position to have more, more blanket around me.  INT: You curled up in-- EM: Yeah.  INT: --in on yourself. EM: So it took me half a year to learn to walk again-- when the Russians. And then the Russians came in. And--  INT: Do you know what date that was the Russians came in? EM: No, we had no-- it must have been Easter-- Easter '45, about March or April. I don't know.  INT: So who had been giving you food all the time you were so ill? Where did you get food from? EM: I don't know if I got any, because as I said, I, I might have occasionally been given half a potato or potato-- I don't know-- by the farmers. I remember I didn't get any drink, because they couldn't-- there was no water in that camp. The camp came by tanker from-- from the-- from the shipbuilding yard. And to the-- as we didn't work anymore, they didn't deliver water anymore. So I don't know. I only remember we didn't have water for a long time. And anyhow, I, I lie still there. I mean, there was no-- what shall I say? No need for much food, because I didn't move. And I was already one of these typical skeletons which you saw in the-- in the paper-- so the books before. So I-- the first Russians came in. And I thought-- with the first Russian I thought he was a fake, because he wasn't in uniform. He was a-- to spy out if the camp was still occupied by the Germans-- and shot off on his-- his [? very-- ?] pistol to show the camp was free. And then from the camp they shot into Danzig. And then I, I called in to another block where there was some food. Now remember, the first soldiers came in. And they looked at us with so much pity, these hard fighting soldiers, that the coin dropped. And I realized the position of us and of myself in a foreign country, the language of which we didn't speak-- half dead, no clothing, no money, no, no knowledge of the language, no people, nobody in the world to talk to or to-- and, and practically nearly middle-aged without the training. And I felt very sorry for myself. [LAUGHS] But when the Russians-- first, they were wonderful, the Russian medical staff. They worked really the whole night. It was amazing. And then we were-- you see, I was an enemy alien as a German Jew. They still then collected us. And while I-- really, I should have been put up with the German POWs in a-- in a hospital there. They took me to their own hospital and nursed me back to life. 
INT: Why did they do that, do you think? EM: Well, I don't know. There was not a question of reasoning. I was with two or three others who were Russians, and I just went with them. I didn't go individually. And so I was in a Russian army hospital as a patient. And that was of immense value as an experience. This-- the Russians had 12, 12 schemes, or 12 grades, rather, that grade 12 was convicted prisoners. We were 11. There were ex-forced laborers and ex-forced PW-- WPs-- POWs, who were not yet convicted for having worked with the enemy, which was Siberia. And I was the only one going west. The others went east-- Siberia. So I couldn't live. I couldn't die there. I-- there was only one rubber cushion on the ward, and I was given it. Now, of course, there was a good Cossack-- a good tradition of antisemitism and anti-German feelings. And he went on and on that I, you know-- he couldn't say the Jew, because Stalin then had to prevent and [PAUSES FOR 5 SECONDS] forbid discrimination, because he needed the people for the war. So for that time, antisemitism was suppressed. But of course, it was there all the time. So he said the German, you know, is treated better than the Russians, and so on. And I had a hard time with them. I couldn't do anything. But--  INT: Were they your fellow patients? EM: Yeah. But of course, I won them over-- very embarrassing so. He had a spittoon in there, and I had-- I don't know-- 20 times at the night to go to the pot or whatever, where it was-- box. And when his spittoon was full, I emptied it. Now I could-- not for pleasure for him, or sympathy with him, but I could distinguish the objective need and my personal feelings. So I acted out of reasonable acting request. There was a need. And months later, I met him. And he was full of praise to me. He, he, he praised me to a huge ward and was terribly embarrassed. So I cured his antisemitism. [LAUGHS] 
INT: Did-- was the war over by then? EM: Yeah.  INT: Do you remember when you heard that the war was over and-- EM: Oh, we were in it. I mean, when the shooting stopped and the men came in, and the soldiers came to liberate us, we knew. If--  INT: Did you know that Hitler was dead? EM: Not then, no. He wasn't dead yet, was he?  INT: April 1945. EM: Oh, yes. I don't-- I don't remember that detail. It was of no significance to us whether he was dead or not. We--  INT: Had anyone that you had known from the beginning of your deportation east-- had anyone else survived alongside you? EM: One man who was in prison with me and before. He didn't learn the lesson. He tried to grab money quickly and started a shop. I was the only one, I believe. Oh, I must tell you. My-- now I forgot what I was going to tell you-- another interesting story. [PAUSES FOR 5 SECONDS] It might come back again. Yes, he was with-- he survived, because he was a store man with tools. So he didn't have to go out to work. Yeah, I think I was the only one, as far as I remember.  INT: When did you hear what had happened to the rest of the family? EM: Well, I knew. The last time my mother wrote to me, she wrote already of the death of my father-- April '42. And I-- ah. I had a friend-- what's it called-- a German friend, married to a Jew, who went and helped them, got food to them, and visited them. And she knew and told-- knew what would happen and what happened. Because she, she was a-- what do you call it-- a Aryan. And so she wasn't concerned-- I mean, affected. And she was shot an arrow at the end of it. 
INT: She was what-- sorry? EM: Shot-- an arrow-- by a Russian.  INT: She was killed by-- EM: Killed.  INT: --by a Russian. EM: Yeah. She-- I thought she would be the only one who would survive. And there she was. When I--  INT: What happened-- EM: --came back--  INT: Sorry. What happened to your mother and to your-- EM: My mother died--  INT: --half brothers? EM: --in Theresienstadt. [PAUSES FOR 5 SECONDS] She knew. Sure, she was quite, quite with the-- not even-- not surprised.  INT: What about your half brothers and sisters? Do you know what happened to them? EM: Yes, they went to Poland, you know, before-- when it was still ghetto. So they all perished, except that half sister who came to England-- so whom I came here. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] Funny. There was still another story. I forgot.  INT: See if it comes back to you. EM: But I mean--  INT: How long were you with the Russians? EM: Oh, that was an interesting story. I, I started-- I mean, they took me to the hospital, it must have been April '45. And they checked me out on the 3rd of December-- 1st of December. Because unwittingly and unwillingly and naively I put my foot in-- into their Achilles [INAUDIBLE]. I was asked by a soldier, what about Hitler? And I said, fight against Christianity. What is that? Well, people who believe in Christ. What is that? Well, the people who have-- believe in the New Testament. What is that? I said the sequence of the Old Testament. What is that? Thirdly, I, I say to you-- I say this-- in other words, the Bible. What is that? There I was finished. I couldn't get with my-- with my-- in the meantime, acquired Russian. I couldn't go into a more detailed explanation. But one of them, a elderly man, or middle-aged man, who was also very hostile against me as a Jew in German, seemingly on my behalf explained to them. And he offered me bread. I didn't want it from that nasty man. And then a coin dropped. I was making a friend, because he realized I had a Christian approach. I've tried to explain Christianity. That-- and then I asked the-- I mean, two days later, I was healed and sent back to the Reich. Before-- otherwise, they would have to sent me to Siberia, and they didn't want that. So they're very nice and kind. Instead of sending me to Siberia, they sent me back to Germany. And the captain, a lady, gave me her own chapka. And it was-- it was a very, very nice. But the way back was full of danger, because we were in Poland. And the Poles had suffered incredibly at the hands of the Germans. And they took their revenge. They would have shot me first, questions after. I got a release paper from the hospital by just stating my health, not saying I was a-- concentration camp prisoner. And they all marched all down back to Berlin. And it came train control, the-- you know, rifle and boo-- first came the Russians. They were satisfied with my Russian papers. Then came the Poles who couldn't understand that Russian paper. And they tried me to admit I was German. [NON-ENGLISH]. I couldn't understand. I knew if I say yes, they take me out and shoot me. So at the end, they went away and came back with an other boy-- or man-- who is-- whose school French was as good as mine. [FRENCH]? I said Ernst Schampanier. [FRENCH]? I said, en Luxembourg. [FRENCH]? [FRENCH]. I said, you can have the number. You can have what you like. I gave him the number once I knew his school French was as good as mine. And he knew Luxembourg as well as I do. And at the end, they talked together. I couldn't understand Polish. And he said, where are you going? I said, to Stettin. If I said Berlin, the game was up. And they couldn't read that it was written Berlin. Ah! You want to go to the French consul for repatriation. I said, of course. Are you a Jew? I said, of course. Ah, then they left me in peace. But I can tell you, I was touch and go. I thought they-- you know, after, after all of that-- they put me up in the next department. 
INT: You thought the Poles would shoot you after surviving the Germans. EM: Oh, of course.  INT: What sort of train were you on? Was it a Russian train or a-- EM: There were no trains. There where the-- it was all shot to pieces. There were only a shuttle service, perhaps a one wagon or two wagons, any old engine. And I took me three days and nights-- just a short distance, because there was no, no fare table-- train table or the--  INT: Time valuable. EM: --it didn't-- time table. It didn't exist. So--  INT: Who was traveling with you? Who else was on this train? EM: Ex-police.  INT: Germans? EM: German ex-police.  INT: Not Jews? EM: No, no.  INT: What was their attitude towards you? EM: They first thought I was a Russian with a shapka and a Russian army, army coat. And they though I came there to pilfer. I say, I'm [? now ?] [? heading ?] [? then ?] before-- and Rome.  INT: So they thought you were going to steal everything 'cause you were Russian. EM: Yeah, yeah, mm-hmm. [PAUSES FOR 5 SECONDS] It was a nightmare-- but quite dangerous. But in one place where we had to wait again, the station shot to-- shot to pieces. And there was only a hole where they left women and children in. And I said, I'm not standing out here. I'm, I'm not of those. I-- and they let me in. And I saw these people between themselves had a good comradeship. So I said, all right. Forget the past. I will also if you see in that situation you help each other. All right. I help you as well. I gave sugar or bread to the children. And then they gave me some money that I could buy some so-called coffee, which was water. But anyhow. And some-- 
INT: These were German women and children? EM: Yeah, yeah. But established then a, a human relationship. And-- [LAUGHS] at one time, there came Russian soldiers who plundered and robbed the, the passengers. But OK. They went to the station commandant to complain-- I mean, after all of that. He said, all right. I shall punish them very severely. Bring them to me. [LAUGHS] So--  INT: How long did it take you to get back to Germany? EM: Three, three days and nights. And when I came back, [? I ?] [? never-- ?] how cold it got-- winter night, the houses full of holes from the guns-- no windows. I said, all right. I'd-- I wasn't guilty, but I play the game with you. And I got there, and, and a-- the police-- I asked the police where to go. He said go to the old people's home opposite the Jewish hospital. All right. And there the people were sitting-- you can imagine-- all refugees, with a long face and quiet. And in comes a young man in a blue suit. He said to me-- [NON-ENGLISH]. What are you doing here? I look. He said, ah, block two. I said, yes. So he was a survivor from the same camp. I don't know-- a Jew. He said I have no room. I put you for one night in a-- in a-- he said-- in the [INAUDIBLE]. Tomorrow you can go in the hospital. They're opening a knew ward. And I go in, and there in the corner sits my old friend, [? Hano ?] [? Cohen, ?] the volunteer from the First World War, with his whole family. I was a close friend to-- very closely friends. And he said, Maria-- that was the woman I thought would be the only I would know. He said, she is dead. But [? Luba ?] came to see the other day, my wife, a sister of [? Nanushka. ?] And there I knew there were some people in this world I still knew. And then life started again. Oh, it was incredible. So I went straight across from north end to the south end of the town in my still Russian half [? self-- ?] half Russian half German out-- military outfit. And I saw them, one of them, looked blown up with hunger in them. The other looked like-- what do you call it? Death on leave. And they looked terrible. 
INT: Who were they? EM: This, this-- as I call them, the girls-- the six friends.  INT: Those friends of yours. EM: Yes. And I spent this Christmas with them. [LAUGHS] And--  INT: What did you feel being back in Berlin? How did it feel to be back? EM: Odd-- very odd. But I-- the first I was still three months in the hospital to recover. And then I had to go in the-- in the UNRRA displaced person camp, because although I was top, top, top priority as returned Jew, you couldn't get a spoon, a shirt, to-- or vest to-- to change. There was absolutely nothing. So I had to go into the UNRRA camp to have a roof over my head and a bed to sleep in.  INT: That was the United Nations-- EM: Yeah.  INT: --displaced persons camp. EM: Yeah.  INT: Whereabouts was that? EM: In a-- in Berlin-- a suburb of Berlin. We were all Polish Jews and some ex-- ex-Red Army Russian Jews. Yeah.  INT: How long did you have to stay there? EM: Till the 3rd of December-- no. 1st of-- no-- 1st of May '40-- [PAUSES FOR 5 SECONDS] huh-- '47? Wait a-- [? no-- ?] '45-- yeah, '47; '45 was the liberation, 4-- yeah. May, end, end of April, '47, till I got here, you know, and the labor permits for the ILO.  INT: Did you do anything in the camp at all? Did you have a job or anything? EM: Yes. First I wanted to finish my studies as a dental surgeon-- no luck. Then I wanted to get a training as a dentured-- dental mechanic apprentice. I couldn't care less academic or not-- no luck-- couldn't get it. So I went in the internal administration with my languages, and can say [LAUGHS] what they called languages. I [? see ?] number two of the camp police. [LAUGHS] And in charge-- 
INT: So it was your job to check up on everyone, was it? EM: It was rather also organizing a, a labor office, because residents had to support the so-called policemen in their central duty. Yes. And I-- and they couldn't get-- they needed my-- I mean, I, I made the plan for them and checked if they were on duty, and then had to certify that they were there, so they could get their food ration. Otherwise they wouldn't get their food. So I did that for a long time, and you know, in other ways could help-- ameliorate tensions and whatever-- see that other people didn't get in prison again.  INT: At that time, did you want to stay in Germany? Did you want to remain in Germany? EM: Oh, no. Good god-- anywhere-- anywhere but that. Because-- I tell you why. I found people whom I knew before, who were very friendly. Ah, they're glad to see you back, blah, blah, blah. And then I turned my back and they thought the [INAUDIBLE], [NON-ENGLISH].  INT: What does that mean? EM: They're swearing at me.  INT: They're swearing at you-- EM: And that--  INT: --for being a Jew. EM: --took the ground from under my feet, because I found it inhuman to approach strangers with a reservation. And I couldn't approach them anymore without a reservation. And that is a terrible feeling. Look, you can't imagine.  INT: We've just come to the end of the tape there. EM: Yeah. 
INT: And this is tape seven of the interview with Mr. Mitchell. You were saying that-- that you didn't want to stay in Germany, is that right? EM: Correct.  INT: After the war? How did you go about then making a new life for yourself? EM: Well, [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] my-- I put a bit-- first of all, I was very naive and stupid. I thought being in a-- in a camp, in an UNRRA camp, an organization of the United Nations, I would get a training in any university, which would also qualify me to work in any of the countries of which they are signatories. But when I inquired, I learned that the so-called UNRRA universities, they were only those who had faculties-- excuse me-- for the humanities. So then as I-- as I said, I first tried to get the proper training, either finishing my dental surgery studies, which failed. And secondly, my [NON-ENGLISH], I-- I attempted to get a dental mechanics training, which failed, because I couldn't get an indentured apprenticeship. And also, I had to be in the camp to receive, personally, lunch. So I couldn't-- I had obligations to stay in the camp, there, personally, also for changing and for changing laundry and all those pieces. So I couldn't attempt any organized, proper, working-- working day. And-- and-- and anyhow, I couldn't get a training. But then I-- I found out that I had a half-sister still living in England. And I wrote to her from the hospital, from the-- from the Red Army Hospital, via Geneva, which took half a year to reach her. And so then was a situation as Britain wanted to start the National Health scheme. And they didn't know, would or would not the professionals join it? And being in a-- what you call a free country, they couldn't force them to participate. So they had to bribe them by conditions, which, in Germany, they wouldn't have to do. There any-- any practitioner has to accept the patient and finish being paid for that treatment. And when their treatment was finished, it was all right. He was paid. And if he didn't do it to satisfactor-- satisfaction of the patient, the patient would go to another doctor, so he was interested in keeping the patient. But here, where the doctors are paid per capita, they feel they do you a service if they hardly look at you. So the-- the health scheme sold out to them, so that they would play their part in joining at all. And similar, the dental-- the dental surgeons were bribed by being paid for the mechanics. And the mechanics, then they paid the mechanics, instead that the mechanics were paid directly, who would have felt, when able, to-- to reject terrible, bad work by the dentist. And I have seen-- I worked in a dental laboratory at that time. And I asked one of-- of those people-- I-- those dental surgeons. I said, how do you manage your pass your exam? I said, I wouldn't have dared to show to my professor, in the first clinical term, what you produce for your clinics. And he laughed. He said, I was a-- I was in the Burma and so on. But you see, so this-- the whole health scheme was sold out as a bribery to-- for them to participate. 
INT: So your-- your half-sister was able to get you a job here? EM: Yeah.  INT: In England? EM: As a dental mechanic.  INT: In the new health service? EM: And what I-- yes. And what-- then I tried to get at least a qualification via citizen guilds, by-- although not enrolled-- by taking a full-time-- or not full-time course, evening classes in dental mechanics. And after a successful year, passed, naturally, I was thrown out, because they didn't have enough places. And that-- that was [? Bournemouth ?] Polytechnic. And first of all, I was too old. I was already in my 30s. Secondly, I was a foreigner. Thirdly, I wasn't an indentured apprentice. So naturally, first of all, the natives and the indentured young apprentices had to get preference, which I agree. So I was thrown out. And then, to my surprise, I found-- I got-- I married. And to my surprise, I found I-- I could then accept any-- any work under the same condition as an-- as an Englishman.  INT: What year was it you arrived in England? EM: On the third of May, '48. Wait a minute. Yeah.  INT: And what was it like? What was your first impression? EM: Gosh. Freedom! Liberty! The minute I crossed the border, I could breathe. You wouldn't believe it. You could cut it with a-- with an axe. Just crossing the German border, I couldn't believe it. And when I arrived here, the customs officer started a conversation with me, because it was just the time when the Iron Curtain went down. And presently, a porter came and said to me, to me and nobody, sir, the train is waiting for you. And then I knew I had come home. I didn't have a [NON-ENGLISH] to bless myself. I didn't have a job. I didn't have clothing. I didn't have anything. But I had come home. That is something unforgettable. [LAUGHS] That-- that was really-- you-- as I say, I was also much impressed, yeah, disagreeably impressed, by the blackened houses when you go by train through-- from-- from where was it? To-- towards Victoria from the harbor. You know, these blackened houses look terrible. You know, this full of-- full of dirt, and the-- from the-- from the locomotives, of course. 
INT: The soot. EM: The soot. I'd never seen anything like that either. Anyhow, I was at home. I didn't have a job. I didn't have a penny. I didn't have nothing, but I was at home.  INT: You said you got married. Did you marry an English woman? EM: Yes. Yes, there was one. She died half a year ago. And I said, she was a very, very courageous woman. And one of her courageous acts was to get married to an unqualified, foreign-- foreign Jew, German on top of that. You know?  INT: Was she Jewish, your wife? EM: No, no. She was [PAUSES FOR 5 SECONDS] and she was-- she was a agnostic. She was the head of a-- a department at the college and doing-- or introducing first, pioneering social biology at her college.  INT: And you stayed in England after that? EM: Yeah.  INT: Did you ever go back to Germany later on? EM: Yes. Was to visit a schoolmate, to show him-- who was very sensitive and felt very guilty for what the others had done. Just to-- my presence to show him that I don't-- I-- to relieve his own-- to relieve his guilt feeling.  INT: How was it for you in Germany? How did you find it going back, later, after the war? EM: Oh, I didn't-- I didn't want to have anything to do with Germany or the Germans. I just went to see that man. [PAUSES FOR 8 SECONDS] [LAUGHS] It was very funny. One night, I had to wait for a train in Cologne. And I got myself a pair of sausages. And that woman was screaming at me. I did not know they had changed. How should I have known? Some-- some outdated coin or-- or-- or note-- a coin, probably. And she start screaming at me. She thought I was cheating her of her money. And I said, I don't know. She said, well, you speak the language. [LAUGHS] I thought it was no good showing her my passport. 
INT: And how did you come to take the name Mitchell, because-- EM: My wife's name.  INT: So you changed your name to-- EM: I didn't saw-- see how she, as a born English woman, should go home with an unspeakable German name. [LAUGHS]  INT: So that's when you became Mitchell? EM: Yeah.  INT: And what did you do in England, then, for your profession? EM: First I tried a long time to get a job. Then I got a job as an improver. But it was, you know, I wasn't a technician. And then I worked a year in the East End brush making factory. And then I worked for 17 years in a sweatshop called Selfridges, in-- where I had the whole time to work with money. Which, originally, as an ignorant man, put my nose up to the dirty world of trade and commerce, so I had to learn to respect it. And then I had to take over the post department, with the natives under me. [LAUGHS] I was in the shipping office and the chief cashier's office and then in the post department. And then I gave them the sack to work for [NON-ENGLISH], for-- for mentally handicapped ones, seven years. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] And when I had still half a year to go to my pension, then I worked in the post room of New Haven Harbor, which was British Rail. I made friends there. Oh, a different environment, there I was a trade union man, because you couldn't get a job without joining the trade union. So I have seen all kinds of aspects. 
INT: Did people ask you about your experiences in the war? Did they want to know? Did you want to talk about it? EM: Some-- I was quiet. I-- I-- it didn't hit me. I mean, I was quite clear to tell anybody whatever they wanted. I had never had any qualms about that. [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] Nor do I now. I mean, people have questions, I'm glad to answer any.  INT: As we're coming to the end of the interview, now, Ernst, I wondered if there's anything that you would like to say? EM: I just wanted to say a lot of thank yous. First of all, to yourself and to Steve and to those people, to my parents, who brought me up-- my father, in religion, my mother teaching me reverence-- to that famous Nazi professor, who taught me working with-- conscientiously. And if your like, Adolf the great, because without-- without his hard teaching, my horizon would still be very tiny. [LAUGHS] And of course, I would have to thank Rudolf Steiner for that gift of being able to believe in reincarnation and karma, which carried me through and still carries me. Because then everything makes sense. And I think it's thus, where you-- where you stop, you carry on later. I mean, that enabled me to be calm in front of-- of death or anything else. You didn't feel lost. You can call, perhaps, a-- a-- my spiritual father who died in Riga. Or if you like, my [LAUGHS] guardian angel or whatever. [LAUGHS] So. And I have to thank-- thank, also, the Red Cross and the Samaritans for the training they gave me and possibility. They let me work there and also widened my horizon. And the prison service, where, I mean, I did many years as a prison visitor. Actually, like the chaplain visited me a few days ago. Still friends from many years back, when we-- when we first started. So I'm very grateful for a rich life. 
INT: Mr. Mitchell, thank you very much. EM: Thank you. And thank you, Steve. Yeah.  INT: Tell me about this picture please, Ernst. When was this taken? EM: Well, this was the whole family at my father's, probably, 75th or 80th birthday, where the whole family was together. And to-- seen from here to the right, his oldest-- his oldest daughter-- daughter is sitting. And the little girl got-- got killed in the when she emigrated to Israel. And to the other side of that little girl is my mother, who died in Theresienstadt. To the right of her is an grand-- a grandson of my father's, who, with his parents, perished in-- in the East. I don't know, Litzmannstadt or wherever it was. And so do the two ladies behind-- no. There is one who is still alive now. She is 89 and lives in New York. She is the only one so far alive.  INT: And your father is sitting there, second from the right. EM: My father sits next to that candelabra.  INT: And what was his name? EM: Julius.  INT: And his surname? EM: Schampanier.  INT: Can you spell Julius for me? EM: J-U-L-I-U-S.  INT: And Schampanier? EM: S-C-H-A-M-P-A-N-I-E-R.  INT: And where are you in the photograph? EM: I am in front of the little painting, which was one of my immortal works. [LAUGHS] Next to me is the half-sister with her husband. And on the other side is also one-- I can't read from here who she is. So that is the whole-- last time the whole family has been together. 
INT: So you are standing directly behind your father, wearing that smart wing collar and tie? EM: That's correct. [LAUGHS]  INT: What-- what year would it have been about, this photograph? EM: Wait a minute. I have to recollect. It's difficult to-- oh, that was a lifetime. To-- this would have been 1939 or '40, something like that.  INT: Who is this a picture of? EM: My father.  INT: And his name again was-- EM: Julius Schampanier.  INT: When was this taken? Do you know? EM: I took it. But I forgot-- it must have been on one of my visits from Berlin, probably '39, 1939 or '38. I don't know anymore.  INT: What year was your father born? EM: '59.  INT: 1859? EM: Yeah.  INT: So he was already quite-- quite an elderly gentleman there. EM: Yeah.  INT: Do you know what town he was born in? EM: A place called-- [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] yeah, I knew. This is it. [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] Oh, that slipped. [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] Sorry, it's-- I knew it.  INT: It doesn't matter EM: It slipped.  INT: It'll come back to you. What was your mother's name? I'm not sure we ever mentioned your mother's maiden name. EM: Rose Lowenstein.  INT: And how do you spell the Lowenstein? EM: L-O-- with the dots-- W-E-N-S-T-E-I-N.  INT: And where was she born? EM: In Naugard, in Pomerania.  INT: And when? What was her birthday? EM: 24, February of 1975. 
INT: 1875. EM: Yeah. [LAUGHS]  INT: Fine. EM: And here I am as a stateless person after the war. And it is stamped, 'Not Proven.' Because I had no birth certificate. I still have no birth certificate. I can't prove I'm born. And I can't prove who I am. And because it was difficult for me, I was told, I can't, as a German, get into Britain, I have to be stateless. So I managed to lose my German nationality, becoming stateless. Because there was a pre-Nazi law. When you left outside the German Reich and didn't go to the German consul, to state that you want to retain your German nationality, which I couldn't do, because I was in prison, so I was able to lose my lovely German nationality. [LAUGHS] Well, this is a-- a certificate sworn before an American attorney that I have been a prisoner of the Nazis in these particular camps. And as there are people who deny the Holocaust existed at all, I think that is quite a good document to show that I really have been a prisoner, and I have been really in those camps. Thank you very much. This is some of my Red Cross glory. [LAUGHS] One of the proficiency badges in first aid and nursing. And in the middle is a Queen's Medal for 20 years or more voluntary and efficient service. And in the corner, over there, it seems to me-- I can't see.  INT: On the left? On the white ribbon. EM: On the white, seems also an instructor's badge. Because I was also, at that time, an instructor, and I use that for teaching the youngsters. So I stayed in nursing and so on. Yeah. Thank you. 
INT: Thank you.