INT: My name is Andrea Rhodes-Little. I-- today's date is September the 28th, 1997. I'm interviewing Regina Littmann in Melbourne, Australia, and we're conducting the interview in the English language. What is your name? RL: Regina Littmann.  INT: Could you spell that please? RL: L-I-T-T-- two cups of tea-- M-A-N-N.  INT: And what was your name at birth? RL: Regina Griess.  INT: Could you spell that? RL: G-R-I-E-S.  INT: And when were you born? RL: The 9th of December, 1922.  INT: Where? RL: Luck, Poland.  INT: What was the name of your mother? RL: Mania.  INT: Could you spell that? RL: M-A-N-I-A.  INT: And your father? RL: Baruch.  INT: Tell us about your mother. RL: She wasn't tall. And she was a nice looking woman. And she was very, very clever. She worked-- was a business woman. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] And she behaved beautiful to everybody.  INT: Can you think of an occasion to tell us about that you remember? RL: Well, it was something oh home, at home, or something with people. She knew what to say and what to do. [PAUSES FOR 5 SECONDS] She was clever.  INT: Did she-- did she teach you those things? RL: Yes. She taught us how to behave and what to do. And I remember too, [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] when they took my father away, I have to [INAUDIBLE]. And they had then already the Germans, and they didn't have any money or food. And we used to take some stuff. Mother used to give us and to sell or to take to Germans and-- and get some money to buy stuff. And she always used to say to my sister and my brother listen what she says in business. Because they were already two accountants. She finished her school as accountant, and my brother was accountant. But she used-- ask her about business. She thought I am the only one who understand, and I am good in business. That's what she thought. 
INT: And did-- did your family have a business? RL: No. My mother was from a business place, and she understood business. She knew.  INT: What business was she involved with? RL: Fur coats-- with fur.  INT: Did you go to the business? RL: No, no, no, no, no, no. Because when my mother married my father, they didn't have any business anymore, and she didn't have any father. The father died before. So she was in the business. She was the business woman. And she had a business till she married.  INT: Do you remember the name of that business? RL: No.  INT: What was her father's name? RL: Miodownik. M-I-O-D-O-W-N-I-K.  INT: Tell us about your father. RL: About my father?  INT: Yes. What-- what did he do? RL: He was a singer, a cantor. He had a beautiful voice. When I hear people singing, I just can't-- can't imagine.  INT: And where did he sing? RL: In Poland.  INT: Did he sing-- how often did he sing? RL: As often as he should, as he could.  INT: And why did he sing? RL: To make money. To earn money.  INT: And what kinds of things did he sing? RL: Oh, it's-- in a synagogue, he sang. In private, he sang. Yes.  INT: Did he sing to you at home? RL: Yes, he did.  INT: Do you remember any of those songs? RL: Yes. I still, when I hear them singing, I can remember that he used to sing. He had a beautiful tenor-- nice and loud and-- and good. That's why I just can't hear just somebody singing and just-- which doesn't-- doesn't take-- get me. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] I like good singing. 
INT: Did he encourage you to sing? RL: My parents didn't-- no. They-- they didn't interfere. Whatever we choose, whatever we were good at, do it. They didn't say do this or do that.  INT: Do you remember any of the songs he sang to you as a child? RL: No. When I hear them singing, I know my father used to sing that. But me singing, no. I had a nice voice too. But no more.  INT: What sorts of occasions would-- on what sorts of occasions would he sing at home? RL: No, not special occasions, no, just like to sing, and we liked to listen.  INT: Did you have brothers and sisters? RL: Yes. I had a sister, Hanka, and I had a brother. And I had another sister, yeah, the younger sister, who came with me here to Melbourne. And nearly 20 years or 18 years ago, she was sick. She did get cancer and died.  INT: What was her name? RL: Eva.  INT: And your brother's name? RL: Mosze.  INT: And where did you come in the family? RL: The second.  INT: Did anyone else live with you when you were a child? RL: All the family were together. I mean, my mother, father, and the-- the children.  INT: Mhm. Did you have anyone else in your house? RL: Yes, a maid-- was four children, so had to cook and to bake and to make everything. Was like a big deal for my mother. 
INT: Do you remember the house? RL: Yes. I would not-- I don't remember the street. But I remember the house. It wasn't a great big house, not like-- like people live here. No.  INT: Can you describe your room? RL: Yes. I had a room with my sister. And we had, like, the two beds, one on this side, and one on that. And my brother had the-- a room-- a bed in the dining room. And then it was the-- the-- the parents. They had a room. And my sister was still the youngest, was still with the parents. And the maid had a very, very tiny room. From the kitchen, you could go in there. It was a tiny room.  INT: Do you remember the maid's name? RL: No way, Jose. [LAUGHS] That's what they say.  INT: Do you remember special occasions when you were a child? One-- RL: Yes. The holidays, the Jewish holidays. That was a--  INT: And how were they celebrated-- RL: Oh--  INT: --in your household? RL: Just religious.  INT: Describe the-- the table, for example. RL: Oh, that was, like, the candles for their light. And the table was set with-- with plates and that, forks and knives and everything, the usual thing-- and wine on the table, and-- and a glass for wine.  INT: Were you allowed to drink that? RL: Yes. Yeah. When we were older, yes. We were allowed to drink. 
INT: Do you remember the first occasion you were allowed to drink the wine? RL: Well, probably teenagers then. Because when the-- when the-- the-- war broke out, we were teenagers. 17 and-- and-- 17. In '39, I was 17, and I had my sister. No. About '39, yes. I was 17, and-- and I had my sister and my brother. We were-- we were young, all young.  INT: Just before we move on to the time when the war broke out, can you tell us about going to school when you were very little? RL: Yes. I went to school. My father took me then to school. And I had a teacher, and a very nice lady, elderly lady. Her I remember. The others I don't remember so well. She was nice, and she was talking to us and explaining things. That was the first, the second grade. And-- and then later on, then the child-- the-- they just started the-- and-- [PAUSES FOR 6 SECONDS] I was a very shy child, very, very shy. I didn't talk a lot. If I knew something like that, the questions, I couldn't stand up and say something. I said to the next girl. The next girl did get up and say, and it was always right. But I couldn't say. I was always shy and that. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] I'm still shy. [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] And so that's what I remember. Everybody was my girlfriend in school. I was with-- with all I was-- was right. And that was mostly the Polish girls. That was a Polish school. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] We were all-- like all together. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] Yes. 
INT: What sorts of things did you especially enjoy when you were a little girl? RL: When a little?  INT: Mm. RL: Oh, to play with them at reading. I used to read a lot. And I used to go to the library, and I had to look how many books. I said, will I be able to read them all? Now I don't read at all. That was how it was for me. Will I be able to read and to finish them all.  INT: Did you hope that you could? RL: I just hoped. Since a few years-- I still did read here too, whenever I had the time. But now it's slow and slow.  INT: Do you-- did you have a favorite book when you were a little girl? RL: When we were little. Yes. I think so. I bought for Mary, too, that book. [BACKGROUND NOISE] Is that you? And my sister read it to her. I think it was about [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] Anne on the Green-- I can't remember that. Yes. And we-- we enjoyed that very, very much. And I did want Mary to read it when she was little. But then now, she says, oh, I might read it. Ah, leave it. And I bought the book for her, but I don't even know if she read it or not.  INT: Did your parents read to you? RL: What I-- yes. They did too, but later on, I did read by myself. I used to get the books, and I read it. 
INT: Can you describe an occasion when one of your parents read to you? RL: Not-- not really. Maybe when it was the holidays, we used to read why the holidays, why we have holidays, what it is and that.  INT: What else did you enjoy when you were very little? RL: Oh, the company, because my parents had friends. And they used to come, and we used to play school and-- so. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] Nothing special, nothing-- and I used to go to my grandparents'. Not to go, we should travel because they-- they used to live far away.  INT: Whose parents were they? RL: My father's parents. I didn't know a soul from my mother.  INT: Why not? RL: Because that-- that was another part. And it was far. And I wouldn't be able to go by myself. And my mother, you know, to a mother-in-law, it's-- it's not so easy to go.  INT: What were your grandparents' names? Your father's parents? RL: Benjamin David. And-- and I think I-- Sara, my grandmother's name was. I think so. I can't remember now. If I am not mistaken.  INT: Did you go on holidays with them? RL: Yes. I used to go to my grandparents. The first and second time, my mother used to take us. And then-- and then I used to like to stay there. And my friend's mother used to take me out and buy and to go to the city and-- and buy me chocolate and buy me-- you know, all sorts what children like. 
INT: What sorts of things exactly? RL: We used to go to a shop and have a soda water and then chocolate and then a sausage. It was that.  INT: How old would you have been then? RL: Oh, then probably 13 or 14, something like that. Ah, she bought me a ring too. And I've got it. But I don't-- I can't wear things, because my fingers get blue. So the doctor said don't wear rings. And I don't wear any rings.  INT: Do you remember going on a holiday with them to another place? RL: With my grandparents? They used to come to a place next to Drohobycz. Truskawiec it was called. And there they had baths. That was a special place for water and baths and all-- all that sort. And they used to stay there a week or two weeks-- a few weeks. I can't remember exactly. And I used to go there and to see them. But we didn't travel because it wasn't far. We used to go by-- walk up.  INT: So how long-- RL: Seven kilometers. And since they-- since then, I love walking up. I do. I still walk a lot.  INT: Have you been to a place where they have baths since then? RL: Here? Yes. I forgot the name. Yes. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] What's the name of the place? I can't remember.  INT: Did you have a garden at your house? RL: Yes, a small garden. And I think that we put some trees-- oh, oh, we put-- to have cherries or something like that. I did it. But I don't know how they came out. 
INT: Did you plant something in the garden? RL: Yes, yes, the children.  INT: Who helped you do that? RL: My sister and my brother. That-- that sister was too young. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] Yes.  INT: What did you like to study at school? Was there a favorite subject? RL: I did like history [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] and geography. That was-- I didn't like math. I never did. That was the subject of my sister and brother that way they are-- they were accountants.  INT: Do you remember learning to write? RL: Yes, I think so. I started writing with my left hand, and then they-- they tied my hand around to-- to write with my right hand.  INT: What did you think about that? RL: I didn't think. I had to do what I was told.  INT: Were you ever naughty as a little girl? RL: Oh, I-- I suppose I was naughty too. Who wasn't? [LAUGHS]  INT: Do you remember ever being naughty? RL: I suppose. No, I can't remember, but I suppose I was naughty too.  INT: Do you remember any of your school friends when you were little, from when you were little? RL: Yes. Even when I was older. I've-- like I said, we were very close. And-- and-- but-- but the-- they were Polish people, but later, when the-- when the war broke out, they didn't want to know us, and we didn't--  INT: When did you become aware that being Jewish made a difference? RL: Oh, when the-- during the war. 
INT: How old were you? RL: During the war.  INT: Did-- did that not happen before the war? RL: No. No, no, no, no. No.  INT: So how old would you have been? RL: You haven't-- then you didn't think about that. It was-- you were young and that. You-- you know people, and then, you know, good morning, and then how are you. That's all. You-- you didn't take notice. You-- you-- I wasn't a politician. Oh, to be in it just when the war started. Then you'd recognize-- then you saw with whom you deal. Then you knew who your friends are and who your enemies are.  INT: What was your first experience of antisemitism? RL: I think, first of all, the Russians came to us. And they stayed about nearly two years. But you didn't have for them really to deal. You could work and that, and you didn't know. But then the Germans came. As soon as they came in, they gave the Poles and the Ukrainians a free hand and say, you can do whatever you feel like doing. So they did.  INT: How did you know about that? RL: Because people said. The-- and when they start killing, people around, when they start seeing them on the street and killing, you knew what is going on.  INT: What did you see? RL: What I saw?  INT: What did you see? RL: I saw-- I didn't see the dead people then. 
INT: What year are we talking about? RL: We're talking '39-- no. '39 the-- '41. After three weeks being there, the Germans send a car to my father and ask him politely, ask him nice to-- that-- that was an invitation to come. They want to see him, and they want to talk to him. so-- and 300 other people, young men. My father was 41 then. And he went there, and he never came back, because they killed. We didn't know, but later, after, oh, maybe a year or two, they told us.  INT: What did you think when he didn't come back? RL: We didn't know what to think. We thought-- thought maybe they sent him somewhere. Maybe they needed him for work somewhere. We didn't know. We didn't think that that what they-- that they are doing it.  INT: What did your mother say? RL: My mother-- my mother cried. She didn't say anything. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] Nobody knew. And later, people start telling us. Do you know? They didn't come back because they killed them. But we didn't want to believe. You know how it is. They don't want to believe.  INT: Before I ask you more about the beginning of the war, can I just take you back and ask you for some details about what it was like when the Russians came? Can you remember the first day they came? RL: The first-- [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] it was nothing. I can't remember. They didn't kill anybody. Later, they were two years, nearly. The Poles said they took them away to Russia-- some. They took away some Poles to Russia and some the-- the families, and some just the men. And-- 
INT: How did you know about that? RL: Because the people told us. We didn't know. The people told us. Or children said, oh, they took my father. But he then write a letter to them in there, wherever it was, and yes.  INT: Where were you when you heard about these things? RL: I was still at home.  INT: Did children at school talk about these things? RL: Yes. Children at school told us that too. Well, we were already-- we passed school, private school. And then we were already in-- in high school, the Jews. That was gymnasium. And some children, they were 14, 15, 16. They said, oh, they took my father away and that and they are in Russian.  INT: Did you-- do you remember your father saying anything before-- sorry. Tell us about the day the Germans came. RL: The Germans-- the day when the Germans came, they give the people a free hand. You can do whatever you think is right. You can do whatever you want to do.  INT: How did you know about that? RL: Because that was loud-- loud spoken. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] Loudspeaker was there.  INT: This was broadcast over loudspeakers. RL: Yes.  INT: Could you tell us the exact words? RL: No. I-- we could-- when we heard this, people start hiding. You couldn't be on the street. You couldn't see nobody. If you have a free hand, you can-- you can go out and kill people running away. Even if you have enemies or not, you're not moving around. 
INT: How did you know who could be killed and who could do the killing? RL: Well, do you know how they used to call the Jewish men, the Jewish people? [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] In-- [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] I can't say it in English. [NON-ENGLISH]. It's mean-- Moishe, a name, Moishe, [NON-ENGLISH] means goes with the-- with the gun. That was a laugh, to laugh. They used to say a Jew can't fight. They are not fighting people. Now they are fighting. A Jew can't fight. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] So they knew Jewish not-- are not-- excuse me-- not doing it.  INT: Was there any sign of what was coming for the Jewish people? RL: Before?  INT: Before the Germans came? RL: Maybe it was a sign in the west. I was in the-- the east. They already had the Germans. They already had the-- the-- how's that called? The-- the Jews were together, like. But not in the-- because we had the Russians first. [SIGHS]  INT: So what is the first thing you remember about the Germans being there? RL: Come in, and they start-- the Poles and the Ukrainians start killing the people.  INT: And what did you do that day? RL: Hiding.  INT: Where did you hide? RL: To other people, far away. Not to be in that part of-- of the city. To be in another part of the city.  INT: And which part did you go to? RL: In another part where the-- they didn't come to fight. 
INT: Who was with you? RL: My sisters, my brother, my mother.  INT: How long after your father had gone was this? RL: No, that was-- that was right when the Germans came. After three weeks when the-- or four weeks, when they were, they did send a letter to my father and took my father away.  INT: Could you go home at any point after they-- RL: When they took my father away?  INT: After the Germans broadcast the message? RL: Well, we went-- we stayed at nighttime at the people's place, and then they came. Somebody came and said, oh, we saw this was killed. He was killed. That was killed. You know, to-- to tell. And then they say, oh, people are going around now in this city and that. So we weren't home.  INT: We're going to stop and change the tape now. RL: OK. You're welcome.  INT: This is tape number two of the interview with Regina Littmann. You were telling us about going back home after you had first fled, when the Germans came. RL: Yeah.  INT: How did you know you could go home? RL: Because people were telling us that now it's-- you can see it's a rush on the street. People are walking around. Some can open their shops. So we went home. Because all the shops were closed, and nobody on the street. But so when it stopped, people went back home.  INT: Did you go back to school? RL: I was-- '39. Was it '39 already? No, that was '41. No more school. That was the holidays too. And I didn't go back to school. After that was school finished was-- it was just before matric. 
INT: How old were you then? RL: 17.  INT: So how did-- how did life change after that? RL: It would start being hell. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] Because you didn't had much money. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] And you didn't had stuff, whatever you had, forget it. [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] That was-- my father was still home, I think. After three weeks, when they took him, Father wasn't home. Just Mother and we were home. And my mother used to take some stuff from home and sell.  INT: What kinds of things? RL: Whatever possible, whatever she knew that-- no food. Food you couldn't sell, because you didn't have for yourself. Just stuff, a picture, that or that, and silver.  INT: Did you go with her? RL: Oh, she had people. Yes, sometimes we used to go with her and that and we-- [SIGHS] we used to sell it, or sometimes they used to come in and-- and take it. Or we used to sell for the Germans too. Because we had to work for the Germans. [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] They said we must. That was a must. Whatever you could do, to clean the floor, sweep the floor, clean the-- the that, anything, something like that.  INT: Did your relationship with the girls you'd been to school with change? RL: Yes very much so. [BACKGROUND NOISE] They didn't want to know us. Bless you. They didn't want to know us because they were Poles, and we were Jewish. Who wants to speak to a bloody Jew? 
INT: How did that change show? RL: Changed everything. Everything was changed.  INT: How did you know? Give us some examples. RL: Well, when you go out, and she turns around her-- her head. She doesn't want to see you. Because then we still could go on the street by ourselves. But as soon as the Germans came, they asked us to put on the bands on our hand. And that everybody had to put it on. But we weren't segregated then. We were all in the same life. But then when we were segregated--  INT: Tell us some more about the way that the different treatment of people who used to be your friends. RL: How it was? They turned around their head, and they didn't want to talk. That's what it was. And you say, well, you can't go. Because if you go to her home and knock at the door, she is not home. She can't speak to you. So you didn't go the next time.  INT: Did you talk about that when you went home? RL: No, I said we can't go then. No. That-- it's a lot of things. We didn't want to upset my mother. Because that was later when Father wasn't there. It was only three weeks when the Germans-- when they took Father away. So we didn't want to upset Mother so much. There's a lot of things that the less we tell her, the better it would be. Because it was terrible for her too. She knew the girls and everything, and she was nice to them. She was nice because they were friends. They were girlfriends from school. [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] Yes. 
INT: What other changes were there in the treatment that you experienced? RL: Then you had to change your place. You couldn't live in the same house that you used to be. You have to be-- we all went-- they gave us a place where to stay. We're told, that's for you. That's for you. That's for you. And we-- we went there to-- to another place, and we stayed somewhere else. And it changed very much. And whatever you have to sell, the stuff from your place, to-- to be able to leave them. We-- we took some stuff to the Germans they used to buy. You know, some of them.  INT: What sorts of things? RL: Some picture, or some silver, or something else what they needed or they want to.  INT: How far from your original house was the next place you lived? RL: Yeah. It was not too far, but it was far. It wasn't the same-- the-- the same distance, the same place. It wasn't. Now I am here, and-- and-- and that's-- that was on the other side. That's-- that's-- Drohobycz wasn't a big city. It wasn't like a ghetto like Lodz or Warsaw. No. It was just--  INT: What happened to the house you had moved out of? RL: Oh, somebody else was-- they rented that place. We had a place in-- in Luck. I was born. Then we had the house.  INT: Had you owned the house that you used to live in? RL: No. No. The-- we had in another city. We had that house that we-- we built. And I still can remember. I was a tiny girl. I couldn't speak. But they say, you put money in the holes from the house. That was Lucky. And I used to say, to go to my grandfather, my father, give my money. I want to put in the hole. 
INT: What happened to that house? RL: I don't know. It's there. I can't even ask about this.  INT: What city is that in? RL: Luck, Poland.  INT: Have you ever tried to find out what happened to that house? RL: I don't go to Poland.  INT: Why not? RL: It's dead for me. I'm in such a state, so many years, I think if I would go there, it would be earthquakes right away there. Because I'd pray for earthquake. So don't ask why. I could have gone, not-- not without paying. They did want to take me there. I said no, not for me.  INT: How old were you when you last saw the house that your family had owned? RL: When the Germans-- when the Russians were-- maybe 17, maybe 18, something like that.  INT: Have you ever made any inquiries about it? RL: By whom? Come on. [LAUGHS] That just a laugh. Who to ask? The Poles?  INT: Can you explain why that's not a good question? RL: No. Because the Poles still hate us. Still. They still come in, heil!  INT: When has that happened to you? RL: All the time. To me, I don't go there, and I don't know. I just heard today on this-- on the news-- in Poland.  INT: Tell us what you heard today. RL: Today, I'm-- I can't remember the city in Poland. It wasn't Gdansk, but it wasn't far. It's not far there, a Jewish place, where they burned the people. And it is a school, a high school or whatever, and a teacher came in. And-- and she said good morning or whatever, and a girl stand up and say, heil-- today in the news. The Jew-- because the Jewish news was-- between-- between 11:00 and 12:00 is Hebrew, and I don't understand, so I don't-- and then from 12:00 to 1 o'clock was English and then Jewish. English I understood, and that's what they were talking. That's what is going on in Poland. 
INT: Did that happen in your school when you were a child? RL: When-- when I was at school, they didn't stand up, because they didn't know still Hitler.  INT: Did you have to give that salute? RL: No. No. They wouldn't ask about the Jews. A Jew had to be burned, put in oven.  INT: When did you understand that? RL: When they did it. I didn't know before.  INT: How old were you when you understood that? RL: Oh, that was already '42 or '43. '43, yes. It was terrible.  INT: How did you learn about that? RL: I had-- we didn't know, first of all, what's going on. But when they start taking people, and they were just grabbing them and pulling them. And putting--  INT: Did you see that? RL: Yes I did.  INT: Tell us about that. RL: That was-- I don't know how you say it in-- in English, [NON-ENGLISH]. That's when they grabbed you. And they recognized the Jews because the Jews had to have the-- the white thing. When they saw a Jew, they come and grab them and then put them. And they put them all together in a place, and then they put them on the-- on-- on the-- [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] on the stations and take them away. I was-- we didn't know in the beginning, but later, we did find out what they were doing with the people. Once I was working for the-- for the Germans, of course, in a kitchen-- 
INT: How did you come to be working for the Germans? RL: Because they gave everybody work. We had to work. We couldn't sit home. And then you did get this. You did get it. I just happened, they put me in a kitchen. Me and my sister-- wherever.  INT: Where was the kitchen? RL: In a German place. That was the kitchen to-- they used to cook for the Jewish people when they come from work. Then-- because they had the Jews to go and-- and-- and-- and-- and make the street or sweep or-- or-- or knock the-- the things out. And they-- and-- and the man who used to buy the stuff, that was the Germans too, said to me, come with me, and we'll do some shopping. No, that was not the man. That was a woman, a German woman. And she said, we'll do some shopping. I went with her, like to-- to the market. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] And a Ukrainian came to me with a gun. Just what I saw was plenty of Jewish men on the-- on the ground-- Jewish people, because you didn't recognize, whatever-- dead, dead. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] I didn't see even rats like this here. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] That one-- and then one came with the-- grabs me by my hand, put the gun on my head. So that German woman says, she's with me, and don't touch her. But he didn't listen to her. He just hold my hand. He didn't want me-- to lead me. And so she said, I'll call your boss-- the German. Because the German was there too. And then she said, if you won't leave her in peace. So he left me. 
INT: What kind of uniform did he have on? RL: A Ukrainian, not a German uniform. That was like Ukrainian police. And that the Polish police was like this, helping them out. And some people won't believe in that.  INT: How many people did you see shooting that day? RL: I did saw on the ground maybe 50. Because he was-- they were selling stuff, because that was a market, all sorts. And they were on the ground, [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] shot down.  INT: What happened after that? RL: After that, I went back with her and start-- and started doing some-- started working there. Tell me, would you like a country like that? Would you like a country like that, who kills in the-- would you go to see? I can't stand the people when I heard them saying, we went to have a look, how it looks. We went to see. I had that house. I had this. I had a house too. But I wouldn't go. They said to me, come. Here, he-- that man was in the picture, what I showed you. That's from my city too. He said, come. You don't have to pay, because we are looking for something. I said, no. I wouldn't go. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] I can love, and I can hate. And to me, it's so big, the hate, so terrible big. I would be only happy to hear that that was an earthquake in all of Europe, [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] and it's gone. And I would say, thank God for that. You are really-- you are God. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] What I saw-- because only what you hear, it's not so important. But what you see, and then you understand. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] The hate is so big, so terrible big. Oye. 
INT: What else did you see? RL: I saw the hate.  INT: Tell us about that. RL: Wherever I went, I heard-- I was in a church too, when they were grabbing children. And I heard when a mother said to-- to the child, don't cry, because the Jew will come and get you. Would you say that to your child too? That's what I heard.  INT: How old were you when you heard that? RL: Oh, come on, now. It'll come to me. I was-- the Germans were-- then it comes 19, then 20. I heard this. I wasn't a baby.  INT: What else did-- RL: And a lot of things that I still remember. And it hurts so much!  INT: What else did you hear? RL: I heard the hate, and that's why I hate. I can hate too. I have Russian thing-- I heard that now that the Germans say, we didn't know. Do you believe that they didn't know? That a soldier comes home, a husband comes home. There were nurses, they come home. Like that was a woman who took me there. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] They said we didn't know.  INT: What was the name of the woman who took you to the market? RL: Lady, I don't know your name. And you said so many times about your name. [SIGHS] [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] She was cooking then for the Germans. Where I was, they were cooking for the Jews. That was another kitchen. And they were-- she was cooking for the Germans. She just-- because she heard what's going on, so she did want to go and have a look if it's the truth. 
INT: Where did you sleep? RL: In that place with the last-- let her have the place. It's like you still could have said it's a home. I just can't remember if my mother was still alive. Because my mother was still alive 11 months, till Father died. And--  INT: Where was your mother while you were working as a cook? RL: Oh, she was home. She was home still, preparing something for us.  INT: Did you go home after you worked as a cook? RL: Yes. I wasn't a cook. I was the helper.  INT: Right. RL: Yes. I wasn't the cook.  INT: Did you go home every night? RL: Yes, I think so. I went every night unless they-- they used to grab the people on the street, so they say you better stay here, because you can't go. They are grabbing people now. [SCOFFS] Like dogs-- I can't see or hear dogs grabbing like this.  INT: Where did you sleep when you had to stay at work? Because-- RL: Oh, on a chair, sitting on a chair or whatever. You don't have-- you can't sleep. [PAUSES FOR 5 SECONDS] It's horrible when you think about it. And I still think about this. Gee. I just pray, pray, pray. I just pray [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] that as still as long as I live, that that was for-- never was for nothing. That God exists and show us, yes. [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] When I saw the children be thrown from the-- from the windows, taken by their little feet and throwing them down. 
INT: When did you see that? RL: When they grabbed the people, when the Germans went up and the-- the Poles helped, and the Ukrainians.  INT: What year would that have been? RL: That-- that would be '41, '42. Because it was so many times that they had them.  INT: Where were you when you saw that? RL: That was still at home, in Drohobycz. Every few months, my poor mother said, I just can't take it anymore. She said to us, if we go through again over this, she said, I want to leave that city. Go anywhere, not to stay here.  INT: What did you do when you saw that being done to the children? RL: You think I could go up and say don't do it? [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] Nothing. I just prayed. I just prayed. But I had to look. When I look at this now, that's what I saw. That's what had happened. And still Germany is so strong. [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] And Germany is a country. And nobody will say a word against Germany. And some people will say, oh, we don't believe it, what happened. I don't believe that they don't believe. They make themselves so-- so important to say I don't believe.  INT: What happened to those children? RL: They died. Because that was already the first or second fall. How can a-- a two-year-old child, a one-year, or even three, be thrown out by the feet and thrown down. You look at that on the floor, and they are gone. [PAUSES FOR 7 SECONDS] It's-- it was just terrible. Like I said to Mary, and I say to all of them, and I say to you too. Before I die, I want to hear-- I don't want to live anymore. That it was such an earthquake, that everything and everybody is gone. [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] It's not only we had to suffer. The Poles said, because you killed Jesus, we can kill you. 
INT: Who said that to you? RL: The Polish people.  INT: Give me an-- a particular example. RL: Like what? Who said it? A Pole, a woman, a man. When you go and say, have a look what they're doing, they say, well, the Jews killed Jesus, so it comes to you too. Now I say, because they were killing all the Jews, burning them, killing them on the street. [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] So they should be killed too.  INT: How did you-- RL: My granddaughter said to me, there are probably nice people that own little children. I said, we had nice people too and little children.  INT: How did you protect yourself then? RL: I couldn't. Just it wasn't my time. That's all what it was.  INT: How-- did you help to protect your little sister? RL: Always.  INT: How did you do that? RL: I pushed her away when I could. She was taller than I am. Did just see Mary? No. We was here. You didn't see Mary. You didn't see my son. They are tall. My husband was tall too. [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] Oh. Do you know what mean hell? That was hell. I won't be in hell anymore, because I had hell here. [PAUSES FOR 12 SECONDS] That's why I don't believe people. I don't trust people-- no way. [PAUSES FOR 5 SECONDS] And sometimes I hate so much. I just can't even say. I can't even tell how much the hate is. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] 
INT: Do you remember any kindness? RL: Any kindness? No. If Pole give you a kind thing, he asked for. To me, a lady said, lady, she said, for you, it's only life, that you worry about your life. For us, it's honor. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] What would you say to that? [PAUSES FOR 8 SECONDS] I think God closed his eyes like this and was asleep.  INT: Tell us what happened to your mother. RL: My mother went with my sister, where she worked. And because she-- she thought she has a place, that the Germans will look after and won't take her. So she knew that they will take people. So she was there where my sister was, and the Germans came and took her.  INT: How did you find out about that? RL: Because my sister told me. She said, if you would be there, they wouldn't take Mother away by herself. She wouldn't have gone without you.  INT: And what year was that? RL: My father was killed '41, and she '42.  INT: Where were you when your mother was taken? RL: I was working too for the Germans in another place. I was with my sister. She was working, I think, with her-- with my brother. But I was with her.  INT: Did you have any precious things that you managed to hold on to in spite of being moved out of your home? RL: Oh, from home was nothing precious. Well, I couldn't. I wouldn't worry about that. That was precious. I have a ring that my grandmother bought me. I was maybe 13 or 14. I've still got it. And I had a watch. Once my mother gave me a golden watch. I [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] got it. I came even to Australia with that. So what did I do here? I've got the-- the things out, what I come [INAUDIBLE]. This my grandmother told us. She was from a very rich family. She was given a broach, and it was very big. And then she couldn't wear it so much. So she went to-- to a man who fixed up gold, and-- and-- and she made three earrings from that. So she said, all right. And she had for her daughter and for two daughters-in-law. And one, that was for my mother. So she gave me that. And the watch, the golden watch was my mother's too. And she said that's for you. And what else? And that's all. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] So that way, I say, that's so precious. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] Because that's diamond, really. And not only that, because that's a memory. 
INT: We're going to stop and change the tape now. RL: OK. And I go.  INT: This is tape number three of the interview with Regina Littmann. RL: [SIGHS]  INT: You were telling us how you got your earrings, Regina. RL: Yes. My earrings and a-- a-- a-- a ring from my grandmother. And what else? And a watch from my mother. But I'll tell it to-- I can't tell you about that, how I-- I did get them normal. But how I brought them here, it's no way that I would say it to tell somebody. I'm sorry.  INT: It must have been very hard to hold on to valuable things. RL: No. All the valuable I could sell. I couldn't care less to keep. Those things are really very, very important to me. You see, from them-- the watch I made a ring for myself, and still was a bit left so I made a bracelet for Allisa. And she told me it's too small for her now, and so her father wants to make it bigger. All right. I did want to take it to make it, but she said Father will do it. All right.  INT: Will you tell us who Allisa is? RL: My granddaughter. Oh, they are lovely. They are lovely. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] And I said to them-- and she was sitting-- and I would like if God is still-- if God exist, not to have to make-- to have an earthquake in Europe. So she was cross at me, and she said why do you say? Maybe nice people are there, and children are there, and you say you want to see it. I said we had nice people. We had lovely children too. They killed us. Nobody said a word. Nobody cared. Nobody cares now. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] How come? Now, now, now. [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] I'm just boiling. People like myself, or they should have gone or they should be here and talk and do something. And I'm just sitting and boiling and boiling and don't say a word. They didn't say much when they killed a few weeks ago, a few months ago, in Jerusalem so many Jews, so another city. But they start talking because the Jewish [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] head of-- of country says he wants to build 300 houses. They are not happy with that. And he doesn't want to go to-- to the-- to-- to the Arabs to build it on the-- on the Jewish land. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] And everybody talks and everybody's cross. How come? [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] I can't hear it. It's too much for me. 
INT: Can you tell us about an occasion when you tried to get help and there wasn't any? RL: Where? At home still?  INT: During-- during the war. RL: Help from whom?  INT: When you-- RL: I couldn't get help from nobody. You couldn't have ask for help. If you did want a place where to stay and where to live, you have to pay. All right. But then-- then the-- the Germans start getting the people, grabbing them to kill. They said they grabbing the Poles too who look after the Jews, who rent a place for them. So they-- they afraid to let you in. And then they said, well, [PAUSES FOR 5 SECONDS] for you it's only the-- your life that you worried. For us is the honor what we worry. That what a Pole could say. Because if they get a Jew and they find-- the Germans will find the Jew in their place. That means he loses his honor. He looks after a Jew. [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] What would you say? [PAUSES FOR 5 SECONDS] That is the truth what I am talking. I swear to you. I don't say a word what-- what it's not true. If it's not, I don't say it. If I don't want to say. But whatever I say, that's the holy truth.  INT: Who said that to you? RL: The what? What I say it's not true. Oh, some people would say.  INT: Who said that you have-- RL: A Polish woman. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] Yes. [POLISH]-- but she said it in Polish. [POLISH]. And I'm a honor. I could speak Polish like a Pole. 
INT: Why did she say that to you? RL: [DRINKS] Because I did ask. I did want to be in her place. So she told me that. You understand now why I love so much the Poles and other people? I really love them.  INT: What else did you see? RL: What I see? What I-- what I-- what?  INT: What else did you see? RL: See. I didn't see ovens because I didn't went to-- I didn't want to go to see them, even if they would say come and see it. I wouldn't go now to Poles-- to-- to Poland or Germany or-- I was with my husband in Europe, but I was in Belgium. I was in France. I was in-- in Italy. I was in-- in Swiss, just that part where I was.  INT: Explain, for the benefit of people who might see your evidence on tape, what the living conditions were for you when you were working for the Germans. RL: The-- well, I was still with my mother, my sister, and my brother, that we did get a room and a kitchen, that we were all together. And we didn't had the money now to live. Where we get the money is the-- the Jewish people had a like-- what should I say? Somebody who looked after the-- the Jews, like a-- a little-- [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] a-- oh-- [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] a-- that wasn't the place. That was some people were working and-- and paying you like for-- for a helping, going to work for the Germans. You did get like-- like some money. And that was once a week, I think. I can't remember how often now-- once a week, a few dollars. And what that, how much it was-- was enough for you. It wasn't enough. Nobody cares about that. That's how we did get the money, and the rest you had to-- to sell some things at-- from home, whatever you could. 
INT: Could you keep warm? RL: Well, I don't think we stayed so long. My mother was only 11 months longer than my father. And to keep warm, we probably-- we grabbed some-- some wood from-- from the street and-- and heat up the place if we could. Well, that's how it was warm. Yes.  INT: How did you wash? RL: With water. Water-- was enough water, and you could wash. And if you had enough soaps-- everybody had a bit of soap still left from somewhere. Then I can't remember how-- how it was later. I just can't remember some things that-- [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] the most important thing was how you went through and what it was. You didn't think about the washing. Or if you didn't had soap, you washed just without soap. It's no big deal.  INT: What was the most important thing? RL: Not to see people on the street laying there. Or when they grab the people, you only went out and they saw, oh, today they will be catching people. Be careful. That was the most important thing. Because then you didn't need anything because they took you away and-- and they put you on a-- an oven. [PAUSES FOR 6 SECONDS] That was hell.  INT: Did people go out of their way to be mean to you? RL: No. Everybody was the same. You-- nobody was especially mean to me, or I to them. No. We didn't had, and that's how it was. Nobody-- I-- I don't-- didn't know. But I wouldn't grab anybody's piece of bread, and I don't think anybody would grab a piece of bread from me too. Didn't had so much. I had my family. If it was more for me, I did gave it to them. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] [SIGHS] Why is it now that I can only curse [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] and be so vile and so cross. Oh, God. [PAUSES FOR 6 SECONDS] And when I curse and say I mean it, it's not just she says this because it's-- she's cross. I mean it. And I would be so happy to hear what's happened to them, because my whole family and of young and old. You-- how can people do to somebody like-- how? [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] All right. It's a war and you get shot. You are there on the street over-- but that was just to take those and kill. How? Where was God? [PAUSES FOR 6 SECONDS] I was in-- in Jerusalem. I was a few times in Jerusalem. And I asked him why? I went to rabbis. I went to-- to Orthodox people and people who believed. I said to them why? [PAUSES FOR 5 SECONDS] And one said to me, oh, you can't ask. You shouldn't ask this. You can't ask. So I said did you knew my grandfather? One said yes. I said if you knew my grandfather, he always told us, if you don't know, ask. Don't leave it go. Ask and you will be told. And I said, I am asking now. And you tell me. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] He said I am sorry. I haven't got word-- words to tell you. So I said now I understand. But don't tell me you shouldn't ask. [PAUSES FOR 6 SECONDS] And I am always asking now. [PAUSES FOR 8 SECONDS] I'm a nuisance. 
INT: What happened to your siblings? RL: My children?  INT: Your brothers-- your brother and your two-- and your sister. RL: And my sister. What's happened? What's happened to all the Jews? Ask. I'll ask you. What's happened to them? What happened to my grandfather and my grandmother, and my aunties and uncles and cousins? What's happened to them? I'm the only one left. [PAUSES FOR 5 SECONDS] Do you know what's happened? [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] That's a curse, and a curse on the Jews. And I want to live that day to hurl a curse for all the people, all the people. And I don't care who it is-- for us. [SIGHS]  INT: Tell the people who are going to be looking at the tape what you know about what happened to your sister and your brother. RL: I don't know a thing. They were in a-- in a-- in Lwów in a-- [PAUSES FOR 5 SECONDS] how is it called? The-- the [POLISH]. How did he say it? [PAUSES FOR 6 SECONDS] I don't know how you say it in English. It's like a camp. And that's all I know. That was the finish. [PAUSES FOR 5 SECONDS] And my brother too, the whole family. I wasn't with them, like I wasn't with my-- with my mother. Just my sister told me because she was with her. Said Mother wouldn't have gone if you would-- she would be with you. I loved my mother very much. 
INT: How did you find out what happened to your sister and your brother and your mother? RL: I didn't find out. [PAUSES FOR 12 SECONDS] I did go to another city. I didn't stay in that city. And they-- they took them to another city too, my brother, my sister. And we never saw each. That was the finish.  INT: How old were you? RL: Tell me how can people do things like that? And there's some who come and say we don't know. It's not true. [PAUSES FOR 5 SECONDS] Do you know when the Russians came and it was a-- a young German because some families with-- with children came down to-- further too. And he said to me do you want to shoot him? Here's the gun, and it's loaded. If you feel like, do it. [PAUSES FOR 5 SECONDS] I said no. I wouldn't shoot anybody. Today, I don't know. Today my hate is so terrible big that I wouldn't-- I wouldn't spare for today. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] Because I can hear, and I live longer, and I can see, and I understand better how the hate is big. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] And I wouldn't have mercy [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] because I can see when God hasn't got mercy on us.  INT: How did you survive? RL: I traveled around with my sister, and I survived. And I didn't believe, and I didn't trust people. Now you know why I don't trust and why I don't believe because I didn't then, and I'm still not believing. And I can see how it goes on now too. [PAUSES FOR 6 SECONDS] I lived through too much to believe somebody. They can come and say it's not true, what they are saying or what they're writing. 
INT: How did you survive? What did you do? RL: Oh, in the beginning with my sister, she used to sell some things to-- what we did manage to do. So she was selling and sending me money, because she knew where I am, or I-- I let her know where I am. And she just gave me some money, and I can go around. That's why I did want to go to-- to a lady and to stay there with my sister. And she said for you-- and you heard that the Germans used to take the people-- if they grabs a Jew in a-- a-- a Christian place, [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] the-- the Poles used to say they take us away too. I don't know if it's true or not, but that's what they said. That they couldn't have a Jew. Just had--  INT: Did you-- RL: [POLISH]. You are only worried about-- about your life, and we are worried about our honor. It's not to have an honor when you have a-- a Jewish-- you haven't got your honor. I'm talking to you. Or she is sitting here, or this lady there. You are talking to a bloody Jew. Oh, God. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] Where were you? Did he close his eyes not to see what's going on, and he closed his ears too.  INT: You said you moved around. RL: I moved around everywhere.  INT: Tell us about that. Tell us about that. RL: I moved around in cities, [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] and some didn't recognize me. They didn't know who I was. I could come and say I'm a-- a Gypsy. My sister. [PAUSES FOR 7 SECONDS] She was beautiful. Everybody looked at her. [PAUSES FOR 5 SECONDS] Getting a sore throat. [DRINKS] Yes. 
INT: Tell us more about that. RL: It's nothing to say more. [PAUSES FOR 7 SECONDS] I spoke-- I spoke nice German. [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] I spoke Russian. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] When the Russian came, they did ask me. They said, do you know who has a-- a gun or that? Are they afraid of the Germans? If the Russian-- if the Germans are afraid of the Russians-- a Russian. I spoke to a Russian officer because I wasn't looking for just to speak to-- to a soldier, Russian soldier. The Russian soldier, when they start talking between themself, they were so low, so-- you know, rough. And they're like soldiers. One said to the other, don't, because she understands every word. She speaks Russian good. I did. And then when the-- when the Russians came, I did want to speak to find out how-- how they feel, and that. So I went to a higher officer. You recognize who's a real high officer. I said to him-- [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] or he asked me do you know who has guns or that, and how they behave? And if they want to see us. I said no. They don't like you. They don't want to see you. But more, they have-- they were still worse if they'll find-- if a Jew will come here. They were very much afraid because they don't like the Jews because they were killing them out. So the Russian officer says to me, we don't like them either, but for time being we need them. That was a Russian officer, because I could speak. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] The Germans asked me where do you live? Which city I'm from. The Russians ask me how come you speak so well? [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] Because I did. Now I don't speak languages. Even English I don't speak properly, and my grandchildren start laughing how I speak. [SIGHS] 
INT: Were your sister and you ever separated? RL: No. Only now we are separated. [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] We weren't. We were all together, always together. I looked always after her.  INT: What was the age difference between you? RL: Six years. Especially when you go through hell, it's a big difference there.  INT: And you were the oldest. RL: Yeah. I was older than her. She was six years younger, so-- the other one was the oldest, Hanka. And I [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] did want to say something. [PAUSES FOR 8 SECONDS] Yes. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] My sister--  INT: Did you hide your Jewish identity all of that time? RL: Who told you that?  INT: Did you? RL: Yes, [PAUSES FOR 5 SECONDS] a lot. Depends where I had to go and what I have to do. [PAUSES FOR 7 SECONDS] That way when I came here, Mary and Paul, they don't speak-- now because they come with people and they hear-- so they will say a word or two, but they can't speak Yiddish. I didn't spoke to them. Here was years. I think I-- did I mention that? Just a few years ago, three or four years. I don't think it's even four years that I said I am Jewish, because I came in a place and they ask me my name. And I said. And the lady said, oh, I know a man the same name. He's Jewish. He is a-- a friend of my son or they work together, whatever. So she says huh. I said that's my son. So I had to tell I'm Jewish. Wherever I went, I didn't say I am Jewish. 
INT: Was that the first time in Australia that you-- RL: The first time after so many years I didn't say I'm Jewish because I saw how it is to be Jewish, even in Australia. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] Depends with whom you-- you associate or wherever. Yeah. I had businesses and I saw it.  INT: So from the time the Germans came into Poland until-- RL: No, no. That wasn't till they came. Yes, it-- a few years ago I just said that I am Jewish.  INT: --until the 1990s. RL: Oh, I think it was later than 1990. My children didn't-- Paul, now he start because-- but talk funny when they speak, Mary or Paul.  INT: How did it feel to own your Jewish identity for the first time so long after the war? RL: [SIGHS] It was-- [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] it wasn't very-- [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] it was like I was pushed or something. [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] Yes. It's not easy. With some people it was not. They're busy and-- and so-- it's-- I had people here. [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] They leave a mass and you say something-- and you-- I don't say it because I have a agent at the-- but if you say something, they say, oh, have a look. A bloody Jew.  INT: So you hid-- RL: Yes, I did.  INT: You hid. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] How did you live? RL: It didn't worry me [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] because depends when it is and what it is. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] You see? If you as a person now being in that, and tomorrow you leave here and you go to Sydney. And you say, oh, I'm whatever-- whatever you want to be in Sydney. And to some people it doesn't matter. Doesn't matter what-- if-- if you're Australia, or you're from-- say I'm French. But now I speak well like the-- as English and that. And so that doesn't matter. When you have to be covered up, it matters a lot. Then it matters. [PAUSES FOR 5 SECONDS] Like I say, [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] to live through that was hell. 
INT: We're going to change the tape now. RL: Do you know, I think I will be now when I die, I will go straight to heaven, not to hell.  INT: This is tape number four of the interview with Regina Littmann. You were telling us about hiding. Can you tell us more about what it was like to be the main source of the emotional support for your little sister? RL: I don't think I was really-- it was-- [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] we talked. I wasn't like a mother to her. I was usually-- [PAUSES FOR 8 SECONDS] probably very nervous too. And-- and I couldn't sit with her and talk nice and quiet and explain. I couldn't do this. Because I-- [PAUSES FOR 5 SECONDS] I couldn't think that she is a little girl. Because she was tall. She was always taller than I was. And she was intelligent and clever too. Even if she was-- she knew what's going on.  INT: Did you talk together about that? RL: Oh, about everything. I didn't do-- I didn't do by myself a thing. We just talk together, and I was telling her what I think and what-- what I think, what I would like to do and what I should do. And I was telling her. She said to me, if you think so. I said, listen, think about it properly, and tell me what-- should I do this or not? She said yes, because I can see it's all right. So I did it. 
INT: How old was she? RL: I think my son is here.  INT: How old was she then? RL: Oh, she's six years-- oh, I can't remember. [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] I-- I just can't remember even what year it was. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] Was it in '43, I think. [PAUSES FOR 5 SECONDS] Yes, [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] '43.  INT: How did you comfort each other? RL: We were crying each other, holding ourselves and crying. That's the only thing. I couldn't-- she could have said to me, come, we'll throw ourselves down here to the border, because it was a-- a-- a river there flowing. And she said, then we're finished. Why should we suffer so much?  INT: Did she say that? RL: Yes. And I said, no. Because maybe somebody is still alive, and I want to see how Hitler finishes. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] But Hitler finished wrong, but Germany is right. Have a look how-- how right they are in god. Did you see the pictures yesterday? Was it yesterday it was the picture? I can't remember. A black chap came in. I think it was yesterday. Have a look. Everything gets mixed up. And how a German woman-- that was in Germany. When the-- the-- and how she was talking and that. She was cross that he was sitting next to her. He asked her, and she didn't want to say. And it was that the seat was-- [BACKGROUND NOISE] bless you. The-- the seat was empty, and he did sit down, and then, oh, God. And it was just hit you that Germany is still the old Germany. It didn't change, even when you go out, and they don't say a thing. And they look at you, and they laugh. But that's still the old one. Heil Hitler. 
INT: Was there anything you hid from your little sister? RL: That I had-- hid?  INT: That you hid? RL: No. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] Nothing. Your can't hid-- no. That's-- things like this, and a-- a-- and I saw the Asian like that. You must be honest from the beginning till the end. You can go half way. That's not fair. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] She must know everything, what's going on. And if you are afraid, that you are not afraid, that she is afraid. No way.  INT: She came to Australia with you. RL: Yes. Yes.  INT: How did her experience of hiding affect her as an adult, would you say? RL: Well, that-- but she didn't show it. She was intelligent. She was clever. And she was very, very good and would study too. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] After the war, we were in-- in Italy. And we had-- and-- and it wasn't a concentration camp. It was a camp from the-- you know, UNRRA or whatever it was. And people start saying, have a look. She can't speak Yiddish-- Jewish. And all the Polish, how come? Oh, they were cross, the-- the woman. And she said, well, don't be cross. I wont speak Yiddish. I'll speak Hebrew and English. She did. She came here, and she spoke English, and she-- she took a couple of-- a job in a shop. She came yesterday, and today she worked in a shop. She spoke English. But me, it took me years. And I still can't speak properly. [LAUGHS] [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] She was right. All my family, they are clever people. The only one who's not right is me. 
INT: So the year of hiding, she was-- RL: It wasn't hiding.  INT: I'm trying to work out how old she was. RL: The war started-- oh, I don't remember. I can't remember how old she was when the war started. And I can't remember when she-- [PAUSES FOR 6 SECONDS] it's-- was she 13?  INT: She-- Eva? RL: Eva.  INT: Was born in 1928? RL: Yes. Or '28 or '30. I just can't remember some things. I-- I'm lost.  INT: So she was a young teenager. RL: '38 or '40-- yes.  INT: A young teenager. RL: Yes, I think so. About 15, 16.  INT: Something like that, yeah. RL: Yes.  INT: How did you-- how did you manage things like periods? RL: We didn't had our periods. It was gone. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] It was gone altogether. Sometimes terrible worry or like that, or the-- makes you-- [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] yes. I think it's the worry. It's not only that-- [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] you see, the children were born after the war. During the war, no children. [PAUSES FOR 5 SECONDS] Yes.  INT: Did she express [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] hopes for the future? Did you talk about what you might be able to look forward to? RL: Yes. No, she didn't had hope. She did want to finish it up. She would have finished. Like I said, she wanted to throw herself and finish, because she said, there's no-- there's no future for us, and it's no good. We shouldn't be around anymore to go through so much and to live through so much. It's-- it's not worth it. Now I can see sometimes she's right. And I can hear people talking, and I see what's going on. I can see, it was not worth it. 
INT: Did anyone physically abuse either of you? RL: No. No. [PAUSES FOR 5 SECONDS] Not the Germans, not-- they did abuse people. They did. And not-- not me. Not-- and not the Russians. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] And I told you the Russian said one to the other, don't speak like that. She-- she understands every word. She knows what we are talking, so not to talk. And the Germans too, the Germans knew that I can speak.  INT: Did people ever [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] suspect that you were hiding your Jewish identity and use your fear of exposure? RL: No, nobody did that. No, not with me. Because I could speak Polish. And I didn't look like Jewish. Even the Poles used to say, have a look. We recognize Jewish girls. How? They have-- they haven't got nice feet. [PAUSES FOR 8 SECONDS] Everything, what it was not nice, what it was not clever, what it was no good, what-- everything was the Jew. [PAUSES FOR 5 SECONDS] I wonder, how do you say here? What do you think about bloody Jew? [PAUSES FOR 8 SECONDS] Another country-- did I tell you my-- my father was insured?  INT: Tell us about that. RL: He was insured before the war, because he-- was after Germans came, about three or four weeks, he was killed. And the-- I did not know the beginning of-- but once I was sitting in the room, and not far; from my-- from my father. And a man was there, elderly man. He used to come in. So but I didn't ask who was he? What does he want? And I heard my father. He said to my father, Mr. Greiss, can you take that-- you can take some money out now. It's-- you have enough that if you need some. So my father said to him, no, I don't need any money, because I have enough to live on, and that's the money for my children, for my girls. Because he had three girls. And that was the-- after a month or two, the war broke out. And then Mother told us that Father that was insured with the English insurance. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] So-- and she had-- she used to go around with a pack of-- of letters and that with her always. And then-- then the Germans or the Russians bombed us. She used to go around with a packet like this. I said, why do you carry that? She said, in case the war finish tomorrow. We can get something. That's our money. They invested money in that. Anyway, the-- the-- the-- the-- they took my father, they took my mother and then everything, and we couldn't care less about the papers. Because especially to go through hell like this. Now, coming here and that, I start thinking about-- about the money, about the insurance, what we had in England. I told-- 
INT: Do you remember the name of the insurance company? RL: I think I did remember, yes. I have got it written there. And I told my son, Paul, I think he finished matric. He was in high school, maybe even finished. I said, Paul, see if you can do something about it that we can get some money out. Whatever it is, it will be something. And he said, oh, I don't think so. I'll try. He tried, and then probably a solicitor-- because he has a lot of people that he knows and that they can help. And he says, I don't think so, Mommy, that we couldn't get anything. That was one. Then I asked my solicitor. And I said to him, can we get some money? I said, I have a proposition to you. You will-- you will be in it if we get something out. And I told him about the insurance and the name of the insurance. I said, so try. He said, all right. He rang somebody up, and he said, I'll write a letter to them and see. I don't know if he did, or he didn't. We didn't get a-- a-- a-- he's not there anymore. He's in another country. Anyway, that was the finish. I spoke, and I told this lady, a Jewish lady. And she said, why don't you go to the Jewish whatever it is called, she told me. And then I went there. And I have to wait a few months till the man saw me. I came-- I think that was last week or two weeks ago. And I came, and I told him. And he said, oh. It's too late. He said, it's 50 years ago. And I don't think you'll get something. And that. I said, have a look. After 50 years, they try. And the Swiss too, Switzerland, to get some money. He said, well, they still haven't got it. But they said, that's for so much and-- and so many people. I'm just only one. But I don't think we can do something. That was the answer. So you see? England keeps your money too and doesn't want to give you. But if I would owe them money, they would find me, and they would ask for it. Huh? Huh? Huh? So how can I love the countries [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] or respect them? [PAUSES FOR 13 SECONDS] Yes. [PAUSES FOR 5 SECONDS] I-- [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] we had-- [PAUSES FOR 5 SECONDS] and there, there used to be-- not-- not Drohobycz, but Breslau, they had NAFT, like here, the petrol. But there they-- the-- how the places are here too. What they get there, the NAFT there, the petrol, the-- the-- the oil and that. How do you call it? So we should-- we used to have that there. And they were sold pieces, like a quarter or a half a quarter, or whatever. And it did cost you so and so much money. And when you had a piece, they are still to send you some money. A half a year. Let's say the 15th you did get a count, how much it was and how much you have there, a quarter, how much for a quarter, how much it was paid. That-- the first-- two weeks later, you did get your money. That I understood. That was-- that was on my mother's name. That was-- and all the time, it used to come like that. Once my father came home and said, do you know what, children? You have some, just a quarter. And I remember Edison, because Edison was the-- the light on that. He said, a quarter for all your life, as long as you live. That's yours. Have a look how it is mine. [PAUSES FOR 12 SECONDS] But I wouldn't go there to ask for it. [PAUSES FOR 6 SECONDS] Now, what else do you want to know? 
INT: Can you tell us [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] how you and your sister slept at night during 1943? [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] Where did you sleep? RL: In bed-- still home when we could, and if we couldn't be home, we went not far from home. Because we worked all the time for the Germans. [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] So we had to be in places where they don't-- they didn't grab the people.  INT: Where they didn't-- RL: Grab the people. Because we were grabbed like-- like wild dogs.  INT: How could you find those places? RL: How? There were some places you had to pay, and some places they didn't know if you were Jewish or not. And that's how it did go. To run away-- that-- that was so many people who went to-- and-- and-- [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] and-- [SIGHS] [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] let's see how it comes to me. Sometimes I forgot the names. And [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] where trees are. A lot of trees. How do you call it? Oh, I just-- you know. I just-- it'll come out. [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] Oh. [PAUSES FOR 7 SECONDS] That's a place [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] where it burns down and in Tunisia. How is it called?  INT: A peat forest? RL: A forest. People just run away to forest and be there. A lot. And a lot to come there. Some people are here and there. Because when there was-- war finished, they came out from the forest and-- and came-- here or came in another country, and from there, they come in there. You see? The word forest, that I lost it. That's my nerves. 
INT: Did you-- could you describe a narrow escape that you had? RL: A narrow--  INT: A narrow escape. RL: Oh, well, that was always a narrow escape, all the time. All the time. And I had to go out always. I can't-- couldn't stay home. Because if you have to sell something or buy something or-- or see something, you had to be out. You can't stay home. [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] It wasn't easy. [PAUSES FOR 5 SECONDS] That's why I say-- that's why I say, if this is hell, I'm going straight to heaven. I had hell from the beginning till the end.  INT: What did you do to get money? RL: I had money with me. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] And my sister used to get me some money. She could sell still some stuff. Well, she'd sell the furniture or other things. And she send me. Because she was still in the-- in the-- in-- with the Germans there, working for them.  INT: Later on, after your sister was gone? RL: No. I don't know where she is. Where she's at.  INT: What did you do to comfort yourselves? RL: Each other comfort us. That's all what it was. It wasn't a comfort, somebody came and-- and-- and told us, it will be good. It will finish. You hoped it will be finished. I hoped that Hitler won't be anymore.  INT: Who told you that it will be good, it will finish? RL: Oh, well, we believed in it. It won't be forever. All right? 
INT: Who said that? Who said that to you? RL: I say this. Whatever it is, it's not always bad, Not always good. After bad must come good.  INT: Where did you get that capacity to hope? Where did you get that from? RL: Oh, that's when my grandfather used to talk, used to tell me, to tell us. And I liked to listen to him.  INT: What sorts of things did he say? RL: Well, some of it was-- I say sometimes that to Mary, he told me. I was sitting at my grandfather's place, probably a holiday or whatever, because we were in another city then. And somebody came and cried to my grandfather in that-- that he has girls. He hasn't got money. He can't work. That was before the war. And that, and he said, what should I do? And Grandfather said, so what are you doing? He said, well, I haven't got a job. I can't work. I work whatever it was. I can't remember. So my grandfather said to him, oh, he said to him, I wish God helps me and this. So my grandfather said, well, it's not only God. He doesn't say, I'll come and help you. You do, and I'll help you. I was sitting there, and I heard them saying like this. That stayed. A lot of things, I knew it's worth listening to my grandfather. And when Mary had something in school or something this, I say, God said, you do, and I'll help. And I said, Mary, you start, and he'll help you. [LAUGHS] 
INT: Can you remember some other things he said that turned out to help you? RL: Yes. Don't talk too much. A word less is better than a word too much.  INT: And how did that help you? Can you give us some examples? RL: Oh, I didn't talk too much. I listened. And I tried to find out what they want. And then I thought, can I trust them or not? And I said, don't trust nobody. [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] And it still stays with me. Yes.  INT: Do you remember your grandfather's face? RL: Yes. In the picture, always, I always still remember him. Because I saw him, and then '49. Then-- no. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] I saw him in '39. I think I was there '41-- finishes '41. The Russians were there, so I went to them on the holidays, and I saw them. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] My grandmother didn't talk too much. She was listening too. She was a clever woman. She knew she has a clever husband. It's best not to talk. You make yourself look stupid. [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] Yes.  INT: Did your grandfather know what was coming? RL: That the war is coming? No.  INT: Did you ever experience some gentleness from people during that time you were hiding? RL: Gentleness? [PAUSES FOR 7 SECONDS] No. No way. I had thought I have from that lady who said for you, it's only the-- the-- [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] I forgot what they said. [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] 
INT: Your life. RL: Yeah. For you only risked your life, and for us, it's the honor. I thought they were intelligent people, no, not just-- not just rubbish. You hear a-- a thing like this. And what's happened? After the war, I went there to see them. And-- and she told me that the boy who used to go around with her daughter, that she loved very much, and they did want to marry, was a Jewish boy. After the war, it did come out.  INT: And what did she think about that? RL: I didn't ask her what she thinks. I couldn't care less. She probably hate us.  INT: Why did she tell you that? RL: I don't know. Because her daughter was very much in love with him. He was a nice, intelligent boy. If no, he wouldn't with her. And then he was working, the Germans and the Poles, he was working in a-- in a-- how is it called? In an office for somebody. So they didn't know. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] And I didn't say a word.  INT: How did you know the war was ending? RL: I didn't.  INT: When did you-- RL: The-- the Russians came. Yes. That we knew one day it was-- was saying there war is-- finishes. And that-- that's why I spoke with the-- with the Russians too.  INT: We have to stop the tape now. RL: Yes. See-- RL: Do I have this-- 
INT: This is tape number five of the interview with Regina Littmann. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] Tell us what you were doing when you knew for certain the war was going to end. RL: I was working for the Germans. All the time working for them. You couldn't exist not to work, whatever it was, some-- some-- [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] a-- [PAUSES FOR 5 SECONDS] anything. It was to-- to make-- I can't talk. [PAUSES FOR 5 SECONDS] Not office. What did we make? I can't even remember what I was making, what I was doing. In factories, whatever, whatever they need, they called us to do. So you went, and we did that, because you had to do it, what they say.  INT: Who told you the war was going to end? RL: The Russians came and said that. When you saw the Russians, and you saw-- saw-- all the-- all the people, you knew it's going to-- it's going to be something, that it won't last too long. Then you heard like they go to west, and they start fighting in Warsaw. And then, after that, they-- they started fighting in-- [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] on the west, and more, and more. And-- and they bombard the-- [PAUSES FOR 5 SECONDS] the German city, Berlin and Vienna. Berlin most.  INT: How did you get news of that? RL: Because the soldiers could tell. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] That's the only way was that already there is somebody that and that. It's not like the-- the Germans say, we didn't know a thing. Because they did. 
INT: Which soldiers were telling you this? RL: Only the Russians.  INT: What happened after that? RL: After that, I-- the then-- the-- the Americans took their side, the-- the France and them. You saw it later on, the pictures. But we heard it from the Russians. And-- and the-- the west of-- of Germany. And the Russians took the east. They took Poland and the east of Germany. And then-- and they start burning the place and that. But they didn't burn all, and now Germany looks beautiful. Everything is built up. [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] And they can do everything what they want to do, and they are-- they are a big country with a lot of money and a lot of respect.  INT: How did your-- you and your sister move from where you had been? RL: No, we-- we-- we didn't move around really so much. We did move from-- from our home to the next, because that was a smaller place, and you could-- and you can-- could survive better with that smaller place. And you had the-- them-- to that, the people.  INT: At the end of the war-- at the end of the war, what did you do? RL: I was working in a factory till the end.  INT: And what did you do when you heard the end was-- had arrived? RL: We couldn't do anything. We couldn't do a thing. We couldn't do. Because you were still-- like the-- the-- the Russians there. We couldn't go to go to-- to the-- the Germans. We knew it will finish soon, and that was that. And at least you weren't caught like-- like before, that-- when the Germans were. 
INT: How did you leave that place? RL: How I left--  INT: What made it possible to leave that place, where you were when the war ended? RL: Ah, when the war ended? I didn't-- I could not go to the place where I used to live. I couldn't go back, like to my grandparents' place. I couldn't-- we stayed in the middle. Then we tried to go to Warsaw.  INT: How do you know you couldn't go back? How did you know? RL: How? Because I went to-- to the office to find out that I want to go there or I want to go there, and they said, no. You can't go here or there. You can go only-- If I ask the Russians, they say, if you want to go to the east, you can go. You can go only in [NON-ENGLISH]. You know? You heard about [NON-ENGLISH]? I said, that's-- that's a total [NON-ENGLISH]. That's a Russian country, too, but I don't want to go there. And that's all. I'm going back. So I left it. And I went back. We went back to Warsaw, because we were the east. And going back, I-- I start meeting people.  INT: How did you get back? How did you travel? RL: By train and by foot and by-- and by taxis. We didn't have any-- by car. Whatever we could go, we went there. And--  INT: How did you support yourselves while-- through that journey? RL: That was hard. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] That was very, very hard. Because [PAUSES FOR 5 SECONDS] no Germans. We weren't afraid of that, but the Russian. But the only thing was, if I met a high ranking officer, I could ask him. 
INT: What did you ask? RL: To help us. To help us. I want to go there. That when they went this way, they took us. [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] And then I met some people who they said, all right. We can take you. I said, I want to go to Israel. They said, yes, we can take you, because we are taking them. And they took our names, and we can-- can go to Israel.  INT: Did you know what had happened to all the members of your immediate family? RL: Yes. I did find there. Nobody is there. Nobody alive. That's what I did find there.  INT: How did you find that out? RL: Because some people came from-- from that city, or from there or there. So you tried to find out where are they. Or you could see, in Warsaw, when you were-- they are still alive, or they're alive, or they are there, too. The families and that. But I did find out nobody is there. So I said to my sister, never are we going back. We are going to Israel. I don't want to stay here.  INT: What did she say? RL: She said, if you think so, we'll go. She agreed with me. Because she went through it, too. And she said, she's suffered as much as I did. To lose everybody and then to be in there.  INT: Where did you go-- where did you stay in Warsaw? RL: In Warsaw, that was, too, some-- something for the Jewish girls and boys, and-- and they met. And they-- they had the place boarded. Because it was already like-- like-- oh, I don't know how you call it. And they were all together. And you could stay as long as-- as you need to stay. We said, we are going. And then the-- I think that America sent over there something. I can't remember about that. Because you had some food, too. And-- and-- and there were-- you stayed as long as-- as they start saying we're going now. And so we went to France and-- and-- and then going down to Italy. [PAUSES FOR 5 SECONDS] [SIGHS] I couldn't even carry a thing. It was so hot and heavy through all the-- the-- the hills and the-- the-- [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] it was so terrible. 
INT: What time of the year was that? RL: Oh, from-- from-- you had the Italy, and then that's a-- that wasn't small ones, but they were high, high. How do you call it? The-- it wasn't easy. It wasn't easy. So we came there. There, I met my husband. We married there.  INT: How much did you weigh when you-- at the end of the war? RL: I don't know. I don't think I had that. [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] I was nice and slim.  INT: Is that how you thought of it then? RL: That I'm slim? No, I didn't even think. You know, I'm just telling you now. I was thin. I wasn't big. Yes, I was only very nervous, and that was still pushed in. That's why I still, now, I feel it, and I give it out. A lot, a lot, a lot.  INT: Was your sister, Eva, nervous, too? RL: Yes, but she could-- she could keep it in more. That's why her children were not so nervous like mine, Paul and Mary. You can see them on the pictures. But both very intelligent, very educated children. But-- but not as-- as-- us nervous as Mary. Mary still feels it. Well, she had a such a-- she had a-- a mother, a nut. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] Yes, that's-- that's the truth.  INT: Have you ever felt that you have developed remarkable qualities through coping with what you've coped with? RL: No. Nah. No. I don't feel that. No. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] I did then, when I had-- I-- I knew I can-- maybe now, even, when I am just sitting and thinking what I went through, I think, my God, what I did. And the way I did it. Must have been something. But now I just-- I am a stupid housewife. And I worked so hard all the time since I came here. I slaved. When somebody else will say, I slaved. 
INT: I'll ask you about that a bit later. Tell us how you met your husband. RL: My husband was in France. He was educated in Belgium and in France. And he was in Spain. And after the war, he came to Italy. I don't know what it was in Spain that he came to Italy. And being in Italy, he thought he'll get a position there or job. And they told him there, in Italy, that go to the Jewish-- [PAUSES FOR 5 SECONDS] go to the Jewish camp. It's a lot of Jewish people. You can go there. So that, he was so pushed back that they told him to go to a Jewish camp. With so many languages and an educated man, and they say, go to the Jewish. So he left. He came to the Jewish. And so the camp, he stayed in the camp, and then we married. And then I-- I did want to go to Israel. My sister wouldn't mind, too. Oh, and then we met some people from the same city, and then they knew my husband's family. They knew my family, too. And they said they went to Australia, because they had family there. And one of uncles said, oh, I'll send you papers when I'll go there. And I laughed and said, oh, send me papers. [LAUGHS] They all say like this, but never. But he did. And with us was-- I-- my husband did want to come to-- to Australia. Mary, Mary, I say, my sister, she couldn't care less which way she goes. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] So and with us was if-- the-- they were two. I was just one. So they had to win. And they want to come to Australia. That was only that. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] Because, to me, I couldn't care less. Even today, the feeling that I have and I had then would be much better if I would said there. 
INT: Say that again? It would be better if-- RL: If I would be in Israel.  INT: Why do you think that? RL: [SIGHS] Because I think-- you want me to tell it now or when they will be here? That every person, how I feel, going through so much, because I wasn't at home. We didn't know Israel so much, and we didn't want to go. We didn't care about it. But now, living through so much and hearing-- and what I heard, and what I can see now, and what I can hear now, I think, for the-- the Jewish people, they need their own country. My little grandson will say, I'm so happy. I love Australia. I'm Australian. I love Australia. But their grandmother lived so much through, and she hears, and she knows, and she thinks he can be happy here. He can be a little Australian. But to have a-- a country to which he can say, that is a Jewish country, that's a must for the Jews!  INT: Before you came to Australia and after you met your husband, did you make any attempt to find out about your husband's family? RL: Yes. Oh, yes. He said to me, let's go to Belgium and see what's happened there and find out. When we came to Belgium, he saw the people, neighbors, and then he start talking. And they said, oh, your mother-- your parents left everything to a neighbor there. And well, the Germans took them away, too. And she said to me, if you would have the things what they took, what she gave to-- to-- to keep them, to-- to put away, you would be very, very rich. My husband went to the-- to people to find out if he can get something. They said, we haven't got a thing. 
INT: What city was that, or what town? RL: Amsterdam. Belgium, was Amsterdam. Oh, that's Holland. I don't know now which one it is. Belgium is-- [SIGHS] we were-- well, which one is the-- the city from Belgium? I must ask Mary, because I forgot.  INT: Brussels, or-- RL: Brussels. Or Brussels, it's one of the two, Amsterdam or Brussels. There where we stayed, oh, I think a half a year to start working. And then we had enough, and we went back.  INT: What did your husband say about what had happened to his mother's things? RL: They couldn't save it. The Germans took them. Like they did, and that said, they take it here, too, but not as much. And they-- they didn't-- Belgium didn't come in and say, oh, he said you'll take them away.  INT: What happened to his mother his-- and his father? RL: They burned them.  INT: How did you find that out? RL: They weren't alive anymore.  INT: Who told you about that? RL: The people who were there. [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] That-- that the Germans took them. They took from everywhere, where they could get them. They--  INT: Tell me what you liked about your husband when you first met him. RL: He was very intelligent. He could speak. [SIGHS] And he could behave.  INT: What does that mean? RL: Well, [SIGHS] you had rough people. And you had the people who-- [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] could by-- have a look, not only that, but not even married, being already here. Then we had a shop. And-- and I don't have to tell you. And the last sandwich, what we had on the dry dock. And all sorts of people came in and how they call-- how they talk. And when they said something to my husband, he was standing and talking to them. And I later asked, what does it mean? What it-- what? He said, that's not for you. You don't have to know. That's how my husband talked to me. He didn't want me to say even a rude word. My children never heard a rude word from their father to talk to me. They know that that's how. Mary knows, Paul knows, all-- all the rude words. But they never heard father to say something to me. 
INT: Tell us about the first time you saw your husband. RL: He was nicely dressed. He was nicely behaved.  INT: What kind of day was it? RL: A day? Oh, I don't remember days. I don't remember things [LAUGHS] like that. So far to go. No.  INT: Did he speak to you? RL: Pardon me?  INT: Did he speak to you that day? RL: Yes. Yes. He speak to me, just-- just always-- I'm just telling you how it was even here, not there, when they knew me, but here even. At home was never a rude word. Not here only with my husband, in my place, when I'd be with children, we never heard a rude or rough words. When somebody during the war talked a rude word to me-- I was at the place, at the Polish lady. And she said a-- a rude word I couldn't understand, like slang. But it was rude. And I couldn't understand. And she said, what don't you understand? What I said? I said, no. Is that true? Are you just pretending, or you really don't know? I said, no, I don't know. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] And then she start showing me. Then I said, I know, but I don't know that expression. [PAUSES FOR 5 SECONDS] That was my hope. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] And that's how it was with my husband, too. [PAUSES FOR 8 SECONDS] And I don't like when somebody's rude or-- or rough with the-- 
INT: Did you fall in love with him, straightaway? RL: No, not straightaway.  INT: How did that happen? RL: Oh, we-- we did go around a few months and that. And-- then we married. He said, how long should we wait? Where should we go, and what should we do? And then he said, oh, better marry, and then we'll do everything together. I thought, maybe he's right.  INT: What was his name? RL: Oswald.  INT: And how old was he then? RL: [SIGHS] Can't remember how old. But he wasn't old man.  INT: When you met him? RL: Yes. He wasn't old. Between 30, 28, something like that. Yes. Life is not easy. But he is dead already maybe 25 years. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] A very sick man.  INT: Where did you go from Belgium? RL: We came back to Italy.  INT: And what did you do there? RL: In Italy, we waited till we all to go to Israel or to go to-- to Australia if they sent us papers. To-- it wasn't easy to go to-- to Israel, because they didn't let you in, the big people. England was there. And they didn't let the Jews in. Because it's Arabic land. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] And then, in meantime, we did get our papers to come here. So we came here.  INT: Describe the trip to Australia. RL: On a ship. I was sick all the time. [LAUGHS] I couldn't even-- I couldn't eat. I was in bed, sick. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] For me, was enough. Even now, I'm not going on ships. I can fly, but not on a ship. Then when we came here, I just did want a drink. I-- I'm not a beer drinker. Even now, I can have beer, how much-- how-- how many bottles do you want them? But I-- we couldn't get beer then, so many years ago. And to go in a pub, they wouldn't let a-- a woman go in. You remember that? So we couldn't have. So I didn't go anywhere. 
INT: Was there antisemitism in Australia when you arrived? RL: I couldn't understand a word, like my sister could and my husband, too. But I couldn't understand a word. When we talked, and I asked something, it was nice and quiet and-- but everybody said, speak English. Speak English. I don't know if they would say now to-- to a Chinese or that, but that was the-- whatever they say, I couldn't understand. So I don't know if it was antisemitism or not.  INT: Have you experienced antisemitism in Australia? RL: Yes. Yes I did. I did.  INT: Tell us about that. RL: Well, when they said to you, bloody Jew, I didn't like it. Because it wasn't nice said. To me, they didn't talk about it. They didn't know if I'm Jew or not. Because nobody knew, even in Poland, that they would recognize that-- they never recognized who I am. But they could say, have a look how he looks, a bloody Jew, how he looks, the Jew. You could feel it. You could see it. I didn't like it. I had enough. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] If they really felt like this, I think I could see in the papers something, sometimes or on this.  INT: Where did you first live in Australia? RL: Somewhere in Brunswick. And then--  INT: In Victoria? RL: Yes. And then Victor-- did Mary tell you in Victoria Street? Always in Victoria, that's there. Then I-- I think it was Victoria Street that we lived the first. I think so. But I can't remember now. We did get two weeks off, one week from the people who brought us into-- to Australia, just a place where to stay. 
INT: What was that like? RL: Pardon?  INT: What was that place like? RL: It was all right.  INT: Could you describe it? RL: It was nice, with rooms on both sides. And-- and we had a room, like for the three of us. And that was a husband, wife, I think, and children, and somebody else had a-- another room, too. You know. And that was paid. The man who brought us then paid for it. That was very, very nice. And then he's dead a long time now. And-- and then my sister did get a-- a job straightaway to work in a shop.  INT: We have to stop and change the tape now. RL: Oh, that's all right.  INT: This is tape number six of the interview with Regina Littmann. You were telling us about the first places you lived in Melbourne. RL: Yes. That was-- I forgot the street, but that was in-- in-- Sydney on Brunswick. Yes. And that was a place where the person, we used to call him Uncle David-- where he did find a place for. That was his nephew, whoever it was. And we had there a room, and my husband, myself, and my sister, and we stayed there a few weeks. It was paid two weeks for us, so we stayed two weeks, and then we moved out another place. We rented, yes, the first place, we rented. It was a bit bigger. We stayed there a few months. And-- and then we stayed, I think, a year or two years still. I-- Mary was-- was born. And then I was in a hospital to come. The hospital wasn't very nice though. I couldn't speak English, that was one thing. And my husband used to come after work or before work, I can't remember. And Eva was working there, too, so she couldn't come much. That was Women's Hospital. Because I had a private doctor, and he did want me to go to Women's Hospital. He said, I'm a doctor there, too, and I would look after you. And then they didn't help me out how to feed the baby, what to do with the baby. All right, I couldn't understand, but they could have told my husband. It was so-- so rough and so-- and I was there during three days. And I think my sister came, and she said, she hasn't got nobody to look after her. I go to work, her husband works. She will be just by herself. Can't she stay a few days longer? They said no. That was so rough, and so terrible and really terrible. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] And then I did come out. Oh, my husband came then and said, I bought a house. I said, how did you buy the house? He said, between myself and between-- between Eva. My sister used to come with her money, weekly money, and said, take this. I said, why? You need the money for yourself. Because we didn't have money. She said, why? Because when I will need, you will give me, and now you need the money. She left herself just to have to go by tram to work. 
INT: What did she do? What did she work at? RL: She worked in a-- in a shop, in a-- in a grocery shop, because she spoke English.  INT: And what did your husband do? RL: And he went to work-- how is that factory called? They used to make the-- Holden. I couldn't go to work anywhere. I start doing some sewing, some finishing things. So we all worked enough that-- that he gave a deposit on a house. Yes, it wasn't much. Somebody said to, you can lend the money, they will give it back. And we used to pay up monthly. We didn't drink. We didn't go anywhere. We just saved the money to pay it down.  INT: How long did that take you? RL: What?  INT: To buy the house. RL: Maybe two years, all the three of us worked. We didn't go to the pub. Don't forget this. I saw what is going-- what it was here in Melbourne. I saw it. And-- and we all worked when this happen.  INT: Did you mix with the Jewish community in Melbourne? RL: Not really. We were too busy. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] I-- I-- yes, I had some people that when we work, leave together, like the people. And we mixed with them. They used to come to us, we used to go to them. And from their family, we-- we had-- I used to get some work to finish. And I had some money through them, too. So some-- and the living was so cheap. I think two pounds was enough for us three to live a week. 
INT: Did you talk about your experiences, your war experiences, when you came to Australia? RL: The war experiences?  INT: Did you talk about your war experiences? RL: To whom?  INT: To anyone. RL: No. Everybody-- the-- the people that I knew went through the war, too. Not the same experience, something else, but they did have some sort of experiences.  INT: Did you talk about it with those people? RL: About my experiences? Not really. Not really.  INT: Why not? RL: Because we were busy with something else, and we didn't want to-- maybe that was a time that they say, leave it. Don't-- don't. Now, it's something else. Now they say talk, talk. Give it out. Even the-- the-- the psychiatrist say, give it out. Don't keep it. And I think it's better not to keep it, because it hurts you more than somebody who listens. And it hurt my family. Always did. Because I couldn't-- I couldn't keep it too long. I say do this or do that, but-- and if they did not, I did get wild. And I can see my daughter will say to-- to the child, she'll say, do it. If he is not doing it, do it, please. Do this. If he's not doing, she'll say, you will go to your room. Or I say it three times. If you won't do it, remember, it's no good. You won't get this-- you know, she-- she makes it cool, and it's lovely. Well, I couldn't do it. I was too busy to stay in there, oh, you do-- because at three-- three hours or three times will go, and I will be in the business, or I will be doing some work. 
INT: What businesses did you run in Australia? RL: The first one, it was a fruit shop. The other one was a-- a sandwich bar and a bakery. I think that was the-- the second. The third one was a mixed business in Clayton. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] And-- and what else? Something else, I can't remember. And the last one was a sandwich bar in the-- I told you before, in the-- oh-- [SIGHS] in the dry dock.  INT: What hours did you work? RL: As long as my husband was-- when my husband was alive, we used to go about 7 o'clock, open the shop till about 5:00. That was not bad. He did want to buy a sandwich bar. And then it wasn't the city. It was a-- a-- where you-- before the city start. Here was a sandwich bar, and there-- this a-- a-- it was a-- oh, a chemist shop. And the second floor was-- was a-- like a dwelling. My husband liked that shop. It was a lot of money to pay. And we had an agent, a very nice man. We were close with him. And I said to the agent, do you know-- because I had already some shops, that-- that the position opened, so this became our position. I said, I want to go and find out if that will be a position somewhere here. So he said, all right, Mrs. Littmann, I'll take you. Let us go together. Because my husband didn't want to interfere in that. He was too honest, too-- too shy. I said, I'll go with you. We went down to find it, and I said, well, everybody can do whatever that pleases. And we can open a shop. So I said, but so much money to buy this and to have a position. Not me. I'm not doing this. Anyway, we didn't get this. So then he came with the things to get the shop in the-- in the dry dock. It wasn't much money. And it was all right. I said, I'll buy this. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] My husband said, too. Because with that, I wouldn't-- so terrible, like with the house, to say that, no, we bought this, and we were quite happy. 
INT: What was your husband educated to do in Europe? RL: The chemistry. But [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] I think, when he came here, he couldn't get a job then. He did want to be a-- with so many languages, he want to be a-- [SIGHS] [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] to be in court or somewhere that he can there. And he couldn't get a job at all. I don't know why. He said he can't get a job. So we started with businesses.  INT: And while I'm asking about what your husband was trained as, [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] before the war, what did you-- what did you hope for as a young woman? As a very young-- as a young girl, what did you want to be? Do you remember? RL: A teacher, I think. I think so. I did want to be a teacher. Because the children from my parents' family-- not his family, but-- but the-- the people that we knew, they had children. They used to come to us, or we used to come to them. And we used to play. And always school. Always. And I did want to be a teacher.  INT: What did you do with your sense of Jewishness in Australia? RL: In Australia?  INT: Mhm. RL: I didn't do special. What I can see now, I should have done, maybe. But I didn't do a thing. I didn't do anywhere a thing about my Jewishness. I wasn't brought up to be like this for Israel like I am now. Now I am. Because I lived through so much. I saw so much. I saw it. I-- I can see it now, what's going on. I can see it now, what's going on. The worst thing is about-- if somebody is Jewish, the worst thing is about Israel. That's the worst thing, what-- when they hear about that, they would kill them all up. I can hear it. I can see it. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] I remember when we had that fruit shop, and Mary was at Gilmore College. You know, that was a private school. A very good school, too. And she had people, like children, from not far away. And somewhere, they had a-- a-- a-- oh, a pub. The pub was in the corner, not far, we had the shop. And Mary used to go and play. You know how children go to play? And once, it was over the dinner time. Mary wasn't there, so I thought, I'll go and have a look where she is. I wouldn't go in-- in the pub to have a look and to call Mary. You know, the apron and that from the shop. But then I came, and I had a look, being, looking in, what it is. How mothers and fathers were sitting and drinking, and the children were playing outside. Saying, my God, that's Australian people. And then later, they haven't got any money. And why? Because they are going and drinking both. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] And they didn't-- the-- the Australian people didn't like the-- the Italians, but, of course, Italians didn't go there. They were sitting and working, too. They said, oh, the Italian. How did you used to call the Italian? I forgot. They had a name for them. I forgot the name even. And that was terrible. And when I saw this, then, my God, have a look. The people-- the children are playing outside, and the father and mother are sitting there and drinking. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] That was-- to me, it looks that's the Australian way. 
INT: When was your son born? RL: '53, but not in Women's Hospital. He was in the private.  INT: Was that a different experience for you? RL: Yes. And the doctor had the say. Not the nurses, but the doctor. And, too, the doctor, say, don't let her get up from that before the day, before she can. Keep her. They didn't let me go even to the toilet. [LAUGHS] That was too much. [LAUGHS] Yes. But that was different then. But here, oh. I had just-- last week or two weeks, somebody complained that they didn't stay long enough in Women's Hospital, the lady. And she said, she did want to stay longer or whatever, and that was a complaint. [SIGHS]  INT: A little bit earlier you said that maybe you'd done the wrong thing not-- RL: Not to go to Israel?  INT: Not embracing your Jewish identity more or earlier. What did you mean by that? RL: No. Embracing, you can't embrace or not to embrace. I was Jewish and that-- I didn't go around that to say I'm Jew. Because I had so much, I lived through so much. But I-- I just wasn't free to go around and talk about it. I just were. But I wasn't about Israel. I wasn't brought up about to go-- to go to Israel. Not like I think now. Now I do. I won't say to my children or my grandchildren about this, for it to be so-- so-- so-- so terrible, like I am now. Because living so much-- through so much and seeing what it was. And-- and I did find out that when-- when the war was finished-- and not so much finished, when they is still there. And-- and then-- then [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] the boats, where the, the people, the Jewish people, to England, to America, there. To leave them, to let them in. They didn't want to let them in. So they took him back to Germany. [SIGHS] Now, I can see what it is. And now, my-- by myself, with the German-- [LAUGHS] the, the money that my father paid in for the insurance. I don't know who would like it. Yes, I haven't got any papers now, but they-- they want to, they can find the papers. They can say, Mrs. Littmann, we did find. We've got it, but we can't give it back, because we kept it so long. And there, that's method they have the interest. They can't give it back. But just not that the-- isn't that just a thief? That's theft. [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] That's why I say I don't trust nobody. And I don't believe what people are saying, even the government. 
INT: Is there anything else you'd like to tell us about your-- about what you learned from the experiences that you've gone through? RL: What I learned? I'm just telling you that I learned, if somebody doesn't know, I learned about Israel, that the Jewish people need Israel. Whatever it is, whatever it takes. I was this year in Israel. I was not long enough. And I say, if I would be here, and the war is there, I wouldn't go back. So they said, what would you do? You can't speak. You're old. I say anything. A soldier is sick. He needs the-- the-- the-- the-- the potty. I'll bring it to him. I'll look after him. [PAUSES FOR 6 SECONDS] Anything, I wouldn't go back. Because we need it so much. It-- it's-- it's not now, but it's you-- I want you to understand what I mean. Going through so much and seeing so much death and seeing the hate, the hate of people, I just can't take it anymore. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] I just can't say like my little grandson says. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] Because I saw it. And I wouldn't tell them.  INT: What would be [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] a final message you would like to leave to people who would be seeing this tape in 100 years? What would you like to say to them? RL: In 100 years? They would have probably all the ideas. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] Every country, every person should belong somewhere. But they can't tell him, you allowed to do this, or you are this, or you are that. Go where you belong. Every person should have something where he can stay and be. Doesn't matter if he's very rich or not rich. That's not the important thing. Where it feels good, where he's-- where he's liked, and where he likes the people. That's very important. Even not to like, to know, I am here. That's mine. I belong here. I was in Israel. When I come down, and I sit on the bench-- I think I was once, and my son was there with somebody else. And I had to wait. And I was sitting outside on the bench, and said, go and sit down. Your legs. Have a look out. It looks-- I felt to go out. And sitting down, I felt it-- it talks to me. It embraces me. It keeps me. I felt so close that that piece of-- of-- of-- of bench that I was sitting. I felt good. I don't say about the people, I say about the place. [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] Yes. I felt so close to that place. Like that things would talk to me. Can you imagine that? [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] That's how I felt there. That was in Jerusalem, next to that place to-- to-- to-- to the old place. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] Other parties cross that the Jewish people start building this-- their-- the place. How come that they are already saying it's-- it's a-- half Jerusalem belongs to us? That's our place. All the things are their place. With whom did I talk? I think it was a priest that I once talked. And I said, well, if you are a priest, you know what it says, too, about Israel, about that. Was it Arabic? [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] Was it Jerusalem Arabic? I asked the priest what he says. He says, no. Does it say something about the Jew? He said, yes. So you see, and now they say, what are you doing here? That doesn't belong to you. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] That's what I want to say. That's-- or-- or you don't believe in God, and you don't believe in anything. So that's that. [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] But I still belong-- believe in God. And if he's good, or if he can close his eyes, and then see us, and not to see and not to hear, but it comes a time when he takes his hands away, and from his eyes and ears, and he sees. And I hope that I will see, too. If I don't see, as my children, grandchildren will see and hear that he took his hands away from his eyes and ears, and he can help them. [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] The Jewish people went through a lot. That's enough for them. They feel like sitting here, they can. Like my grandson says, I am happy I'm Australian, and I am happy. He can be happy here. 
INT: Thank you, Regina, very much. RL: Thank you. Thank you for listening to me. RL: Well, on my right is my son, Paul, Paul Littman. In the back is my daughter-in-law, Sandra Littman. That's my daughter, Mary, Mary Littman. In the back I've got my two grandchildren, Allisa and Josh. And here in the front is my little grandson, Zac-- [? Zacush. ?] [LAUGHTER] ZAC LITTMAN: [? Zachary. ?] . [LAUGHTER]  INT: Who would like to say something? [INAUDIBLE] RL: Does somebody wants to say something?  INT: Paul, you-- Paul, you kick off. RL: Has to think hard. PAUL LITTMAN: Yeah, I guess it's true to say that, for all my life, the-- the suffering of my mother, in particular, has been an integral part in my development and I think, in many ways, has translated through to my children. The way that I see the world, I think, is directly attributable to many-- much of the input from my mother, as distinct from my father, who had different attitudes, different results of the war. But there's a lot that goes on in our lives, at home, that, when we stop and we think about it, relays the thought processes that we've gained due to our mum and due to her way of seeing the world. It's a very powerful story. SANDRA LITTMAN: Don't, Zac. PAUL LITTMAN: That's it. ZAC LITTMAN: Can I say something? SANDRA LITTMAN: Maybe, son. RL: Do you want some? [INTERPOSING VOICES] SANDRA LITTMAN: Mary maybe should speak. ZAC LITTMAN: Me? Can I go next? SANDRA LITTMAN: No, it's Mary's turn. PAUL LITTMAN: Shh. Hang on, [? Zacush. ?] MARY LITTMAN: I hope my mother's given a full and honest testimony, because I know how important it was for her that her father, who was a cantor, when asked by people who were making records to put down his voice, he didn't. And she has often said to me, I wish that his voice was on record so that I could hear it. And so I hope she's given a-- PAUL LITTMAN: Sit down. Sit up straight. MARY LITTMAN: --an honest testimonial of her story and her life or part thereof. PAUL LITTMAN: Sit still. MARY LITTMAN: I concur with what Paul said. And she's been probably my most important teacher. And I don't know if I do her justice. 
INT: Do you have any-- any opinion about the remarkable qualities that your mother has that come from her war experiences? MARY LITTMAN: The inner strength that she has. I don't think I do her justice, because I don't have those strengths. And I don't know-- yeah, well, I won't say that. OK. I think that the remarkableness, in part, is from the family that I never knew and that my brother never knew-- her parents, her grandparents. Would you like to say something, Josh? RL: About the-- MARY LITTMAN: Sh! JOSH LITTMAN: Well, I think my grandmother is very-- I think my grandmother-- which we call [? Sepha ?] because my sister here couldn't say [? Safta ?] when she was a kid-- [LAUGHTER] --is a very lovely lady and that she, out here, and all of my family and all the Jews didn't deserve to go through that suffering. And-- yeah. ALLISA LITTMAN: Zac, do you want to say something?  INT: Thank you. Allisa? ALLISA LITTMAN: Zac. ZAC LITTMAN: Me?  INT: Yes, go on, Zac. ZAC LITTMAN: Zac. Well, I think that [? Sepha, ?] who's our grandmother, is very lucky to be alive right now. [LAUGHTER] PAUL LITTMAN: Shh. And that's about all. [LAUGHTER] RL: Thank you. ALLISA LITTMAN: I-- I just want to say that I think it's-- I think it's amazing that, after all the suffering that so many people went through in the Holocaust, that-- that, today, people that went through it, the survivors, can tell the stories and teach us so much about inner strength and survival. And I think it's remarkable how she survived through it. And I really respect my grandmother for it, and for all the people that survived and teach us now, our generation, about-- and the generation before us-- and we can teach generations to come, about what happened to the Jews and what happened to the people in the Holocaust and how we can avoid that in the future. And that's it. 
INT: Thank you very much. SANDRA LITTMAN: I'll say something too. Having been-- PAUL LITTMAN: Sit up straight. SANDRA LITTMAN: --in this family now of 20 years, the number one thing I think of when I think of my mother-in-law is her number one priority and love in life is her family. The most important thing in the world to her is her family-- her children, her grandchildren. And I find that a highly admirable feature, very highly admirable aspect of her personality.  INT: Thank you. RL: That's my grandfather.  INT: What was his name? RL: David. What did I tell you, before? Because they used to call him-- he had three names-- Benjamin and David. Yes, he was a rabbi. He was very, very clever, intelligent. Oh! He used to tell me-- he write out a prescription and sent me to the chemist and said, go to that chemist, and you'll get the-- the prescription.  INT: How did this photograph survive? RL: I didn't have this. That's from my cousins. You've got them here. Ah, I must ask Mary to bring the-- Mar MARY LITTMAN: Yeah? RL: Get me-- can't I talk? Yes. The picture from [INAUDIBLE], please. MARY LITTMAN: I don't know where it is, Mum. I just-- RL: Yes. That was my mother. You can ask me questions. She was very, very intelligent, very clever. Ah, that was a lady, a real lady.  INT: Where did-- how did this photograph survive? RL: That, I have all the time with me. That-- my grandfather, I didn't, but my mother I had. Like my sister, I had all the time. And my brother, I had all the time. 
INT: And what was her maiden name? RL: Mania Miodownik. I did spell the other day it for you-- Miodownik, M-I-O-D-O-W-N-I-K. --slim, dark blond, blue eyes.  INT: Who is this? RL: My brother.  INT: Tell us his name. RL: Mosze. He was already, at a young age, he was a accountant. And he'd finished his accountancy as soon as the-- the Russian came. When he was working, people used to come to him and ask him how to do, what to do, because they didn't know. Help us. Help us! That's what they did to that young boy.  INT: And how old was he, when he was killed? RL: [SIGHS] That was in, I think, it would be about '43--  INT: In 19-- RL: --in 1943. He was born in 1924. I was '22; he was '24. Yes. That's my sister. She was a bit taller than I am-- not much, just a tiny bit. I was the, the smallest. And too, she wasn't really black, but her hair was dark, like--  INT: What was her name? RL: Hanka-- Anna.  INT: And what happened to her? RL: What's happened, the same as to all Jewish girls. She was in Lwów, in-- in-- in a camp. And she didn't go out from the camp. They killed her-- or there, or after. I don't know. That's how it was. That was my younger sister, Eva. With her, I-- I went through everything. And we looked-- one looked at each other-- how to do, and what to do, and how to behave, and what to make. She was lovely. She was like my child. And I think she looked at me like at a mother. Have a look how beautiful she is. The only-- when we were in Italy, all the Italian people looked how she looks in-- in that. The only people, the only Poles, could say she's Jewish. Other nation, didn't even mention. Yes. That's my sister. That's Eva. And here in the middle is Mary, when she was a little girl. I think she probably was one year old. And that's myself. And she said bye-bye, Mary, bye-bye, I'm going out. I'm going to work. Probably she went to work with her. 
INT: Where was this photo taken? RL: In Melbourne. It probably was here. I-- have a look. I've still got an apron. I was probably doing something. And that was Oswald Littman. I don't remember when it was done. Still probably when he was all right.  INT: How-- how long after you married him was that taken? RL: Which one, that? Well, I-- I don't remember. I don't remember if it was here, and probably already in Melbourne. But that was in the beginning, not when he was all sick. That's my husband then he was a little boy. I don't know what age he was then, but-- with his mother.  INT: What was his mother's name? RL: Pola. My son's is-- Pola. CREW: Recording. RL: It's so far. I can hardly see the people. Should we do that picture?  INT: We had that, didn't we, just then? RL: It's not clear.  INT: Oh-- RL: Yeah, Mary? That's Mrs. Winthrop. That's a Winthrop too from America.  INT: Down the bottom? RL: Yes, on the bottom. And then his wife, too, Mrs. Winthrop, from America. I don't think the-- that picture's bigger than-- than your picture. And that's Mr. Winthrop. He was here in-- in Australia.  INT: And then, at the back, on the right? RL: In the back is-- is Winthrop girl. That's Mrs. Littman. That's Mrs. Winthrop, Eva. That's Brian Winthrop. And that's Paul. You can see, on top, Paul, with the glasses. 
INT: Yes? RL: Come on. We can't see. You must push the picture again here.  INT: We need-- RL: Yes, and that's Dr. Winthrop. And that's Paul Littman. Dr. Winthrop was-- he was in-- oh. Mary? MARY LITTMAN: Yes? RL: Yes. That was my picture. I was working in-- in our shop, but I don't remember where it was. Footscray, or in-- Mary says it was Footscray. Or the other one was in-- where you go to-- [SIGHS] to the university there.  INT: Clayton. RL: Clayton.  INT: This is in Australia. RL: Yes. Everything is in Australia. I didn't work anywhere, except for the Germans.  INT: OK. RL: Yes. I don't even know where it was. Have a look-- at somebody's place what we were drinking and-- and enjoying ourselves and having a party. But where it was, I haven't got an idea. Because I can see the-- the window, and then-- and the blinds in the window. OK? That's was a party. Yes. That's from America. And we went to see him. He spent maybe three hours, yeah, one side to go with me, to see that man, because he's from the same city as I came. And that was the cousin. He says to me, come, I'll take you there, and you will see the people.  INT: What was his name? RL: That man's? Viktor. He was the on of the-- of the rabbi there. And the cousin, he changed his name-- not Littman, but [? Litt. ?] No, no-- how was it I forgot? But now Paul went there, and he said to his son-- because the son is-- that cousin's son is a-- a solicitor. And he took the name from this father, like [? Litt. ?] And Paul said, why do you change your name? Can't you be Littman? And you will have clients too. So-- so he went back to-- to Littman. Yes. Here you can see myself. That was in America. And that's my-- my husband's cousin, the first and the-- the only cousin that he's got from there. 
INT: What was his name? RL: He was Littman, too-- oh, what's his name? I can't remember. No.