INT: Today is December 14, 1997. The survivor's name is Hanka Pressburg, formerly Svarc. The interviewer's name is Jason Walker. This is being filmed in Wellington, New Zealand. This interview will be conducted in English. Today is the 14th of December, 1997. I'm interviewing Hanka Pressburg, formerly Svarc. My name is Jason Walker, and this interview is being conducted in English, in Wellington, New Zealand. Can you tell me your name please? HP: My name is Hanka Pressburg. You want me to spell it? So in New Zealand, we spell it like that, P like Peter-- otherwise they think it's B-- R-E-S-S-B-U-R-G.  INT: And what was your name at birth? HP: My name at birth was 'Schwarz,' but my father changed the name. Actually, originally, it was in German, which would have been S-C-H-W-A-R-Z. But when the Czech Republic was established after 1908-- 1918, later, my father changed the name, which was S-V-A-R-C.  INT: And were you always called Hanka? HP: Not really, because on my birth-- on my birth certificate is Hanicka which is H-A-N-I-C-K-A. In New Zealand would be Hana, but I was known H-A-N-K-A, Hanka.  INT: When were you born? HP: I was born in 1920 in a place called Rakovník, which spells R-A-K-O-V-N-I-K, which is not far away from the capital city, Prague.  INT: And how old are you today? HP: Beg pardon?  INT: How old are you today? HP: How old am I now? I was born 1920, so work it out. 77. [LAUGHS] Now, I was 77, yes. 
INT: What was your father's name? HP: 'Yosef.' Oh, English, Josef  INT: And where was he born? HP: He was born in a-- in-- in south Bohemia, a small place called [? Drázkov. ?] If I spell it for you, D-R-A-Z-K-O-V.  INT: And his date of birth? HP: Look, I really exactly don't know, and I'm sorry. I should have maybe investigated more, but I think it would have been 18-- I exactly don't know, but I'm, I'm sorry for that. Because I could have really-- I just forgot to look at some-- yes.  INT: What was your father's occupation? HP: Well, what was my father occupation? My family owned a shop on the main square in a place called Rakovník. But of course, in those days you didn't buy a shop. You just to have a apprenticeship. So I presume this was really how he originally started before he-- before we bought or bought the shop. Yes.  INT: What was sold in the shop? HP: You know, shop was-- sold-- [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] it's very very hard to combine it to, to the-- today's conditions. I would put menswear-- [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] not material, you know, for, for sewing. There is a special name in, in Czech, but I have to translate [LAUGHS] it, which is very hard. Toys. Actually, in my memory are especially the toys, because, before the Christmas, they used to exhibit it in a shop. They empty various rooms and exhibition of toys. And thinking back, what was really interesting that the toys were already, at that time, imported some of them from Germany, and some of them still I have seen a New Zealand being imported. [LAUGHS] Yes. 
INT: What kind of man was your father? HP: What kind of man? [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] Of course, very nice. I mean, very nice. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] A little bit a softie, I would say. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] And I think what had a big influence on my father, when the Czech-- the Czechoslovak Republic was proclaimed in 19-- 1800-- 1918, it make a big impact on him. And he became very involved, also politically, in the Czech or Czechoslovak Republic. I would say he was a little bit-- no, I can't say a little bit, but he really was involved. And joined, as far as I remember, a special Czech-Jewish organization. For me, it's hard, because I am, the same time while I am talking, I am translating it, in my mind, from Czech, yes?  INT: What was the name of that organization in Czech? HP: [SIGHS] [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] I think it was Czech [NON-ENGLISH]. And they also published the newspaper. And then the newspaper would have been published in Prague. I can't exactly recall that, yes, but I think that was. Yeah.  INT: What was your father's role in the home? HP: What was the father's role in my home? I mean, he was working. You know, he was in a shop. And this is a different situation than today, in New Zealand, when you asked me what was his-- I mean, he was a loving father of the family. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] The conditions were completely different, because we always-- we always, at home, help at home, because my mother also worked in a shop. So we used to-- he used to come with us for walks. He used to come with my late brother swimming. The funny part was he couldn't swim, but he enjoyed to go to swim, [LAUGHS] go to-- there was sort of artificial created lake, and he loved that, yes? He was very-- he was very kind and a soft person, I think. Yes. 
INT: What was your mother's name? HP: Czech or English?  INT: Czech. HP: Czech. R-U-Z-E-N-A, which, which in English would be Rose. That actually were-- our daughter's second name is Rose, yes.  INT: And her maiden name? HP: Popper, P-O-P-P-E-R.  INT: Where was your mother born? HP: My mother was born not long-- I would say a small village not far away from Rakovník. And I think it was a very large family. And I think that I knew my grandfather. At that time, when I was a kid, he was well over 80. I never knew my grandmother. Yes.  INT: Do you know how your parents met? HP: No, no, no.  INT: Can you tell me about your mother's work? HP: My mother-- my mother worked also in a shop. My mother was-- I could put it that way, very advanced in one way. Because she always, I remember, wanted me and also my late brother to be educated. And make really point of it. And always used to say, nobody can ever take away from you education. And I remember that vividly from that. My parents started right from the beginning, you know, very-- there was no-- it started some very-- It's very, very hard to describe it, because the conditions were completely different. You didn't buy the shop, you know? He started really from the beginning, as I mentioned before, and worked extremely hard-- both of them, until they achieved and were doing very well. Yes, until the Nazi came. 
INT: What was your brother's name? HP: 'Karlik,' K-- or Karel, we-- Karel, but we called him 'Karlik,' which is spelled K-A-R-E-L, which is English Charles. And that's where Carol, our daughter here in New Zealand, is Carol.  INT: When was your brother born? HP: He was born in Rakovník in 1926.  INT: Where was your home in Rakovník? HP: The home, as I said, we had a shop on the main square. And we also lived in the same house. So downstairs was a shop, and upstairs were the premises where we-- where we lived, you know, rooms and everything yes.  INT: Could you describe that? HP: I visited it a couple of years ago under different circumstances. It was in the first floor. I had my own small room. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] It had a kitchen, a-- kitchen, family room-- I'm sorry, kitchen, family room, you would call it English sitting room, parents' bedroom, and small other rooms, where actually the cook-- and we used to have somebody who look after us, another person, yes, so they also had their own room. It was an old house, but for Europe the houses are not old if they're 1850 or whatever. That's not old [LAUGHS] compared to Europe, yes.  INT: What languages did you speak at home? HP: We spoke Czech. You can hear my Czech accent. Yes. But I went to school in Prague, later on, and there was German school to learn German, and I also learned French. 
INT: Was your family religious? HP: Semi-religious. Very, very hard to-- [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] how would-- how would I put it properly? [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] Compared what I can see here or especially in Melbourne, I could say not so-- not as much religious. But we-- the strange thing was we didn't have a Friday night, but my father usually, for Friday evening, bought something which was nice. You know, a special fruit, yes, or something special for Friday night. I don't know if we was aware of it that he did it, I can't remember. And he also occasionally were that-- occasionally went to synagogue. We kept Pesach. We always had a Seder. And, and the shop was closed on Rosh Hashanah, on new year, and Yom Kippur. And all the Jewish shops were closed. And we bought-- we, we went to synagogue.  INT: How was Pesach observed in your home? HP: I remember my brother used to say [NON-ENGLISH]. My father didn't eat bread for two days-- the first two days. Yes, that's about what I can remember.  INT: And Rosh Hashanah? HP: Just the [NON-ENGLISH] scrolls. And the same apply at Yom Kippur-- and, and didn't it? And I, I remember-- I remember Rosh Hashanah when, when, when the shofar come. As kids, we used to laugh, and we go outside because behind the synagogue was like a small garden or a park. In that time, we really didn't realize how important is that-- you know, the shofar. 
INT: What synagogue did your family attend? HP: There was only one synagogue in Rakovník, so there was no choice. [LAUGHS] No choice.  INT: How large was the Jewish community there? HP: Well, again, very hard to comment number. And also, they were mixed marriages, so that depends where you draw the line. Yes? It was a small community. Because Rakovník, the population, the whole population in Rakovník would have been about 12,000 or 14,000. It's a very old-- it's a old city, old place.  INT: Growing up, were your friends mostly Jewish or Christian? HP: My friends were mostly Christian. Actually, my neighbor-- our neighbor, I'm still in contact with her. Yes, right.  INT: Were you conscious of any antisemitism in the community? HP: I was very, very lucky, no. I was very, very lucky, no, and I always stress the point what a difference is it when you speak to people from Poland or Russia. It's a completely difference-- it's a completely different situation. No, I was very lucky. Yes, was very lucky. Not visibly, or I can't remember it. Put it that way.  INT: And what was the relationship between the workers employed in your father's shop and your family? HP: Of-- you mean to-- in our family, to, let's say-- do you mean towards the non-Jewish people? Always very tolerant. And put it that way, very good. Very good, yes. Very good.  INT: How old were you when you began schooling? HP: Well, you start in Czechoslovakia. I don't know if it's now when you are a six-year-old, and that's your primary school. And then later comes the secondary school. And you can leave, I think, could have when you were six. It's again-- it again depends what kind of school you attended. The secondary school, I mean. 
INT: And what schools did you attend? HP: No, I attended, of course, the primary school. And after-- then that, again, that's a different name-- secondary school until I was 14 or 15. But then I left Rakovník, and I went to Prague. And I went to German, what you would call, a special commercial school. No, you can't always translate everything. So you really want to translate, yes. Because if you live in Czechoslovakia, you had to know minimum two language. And Czechoslovakia being surrounded by Sudeten, the German part of it, you had to speak German, as well.  INT: What did you study in Prague? HP: In Prague? Well, mathematics, [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] commercial sort of shorthand. All what is connected like you today. Not computers that time. How you would today go in the office. But the main reason was-- and as a matter of interest, it was a state school. Because you could also have a private school, but the state school were harder. So just to learn the language.  INT: Where were you living while you studied? HP: When I was in Prague, I studied. I, I lived what would call-- it's not a boarding school. It had a name, [NON-ENGLISH]. And that belong to a lady, and there used to be there girls, so to speak, from good families. And it was-- it was a very nice time. You know, you had the friends all the time around you. And all the girls were different, different schooling than whatever it was. Yes, and that lady was Jewish and didn't survive the war. 
INT: Do you remember her name? HP: Yes. Her name was Flaum. Oh, it was Flaum. Do I have to-- do I have to spell it? [LAUGHS] It's Czech, would-- it, it, it's hard to spell that one, [LAUGHS] yes.  INT: What were your interests outside of studying? HP: What was my interest? Well, when you are-- when you are a normal teenager, 14 and 16, your interest is enjoy life. You have company. Prague is a beautiful city. You know, just to enjoy like any other normal teenager. Yes.  INT: What kind of things would you do? HP: What did we do? Well, we went-- we went with friends together to see a film or theater or dancing or walking in Prague's beautiful parks. Like-- it's like normal, a normal situation.  INT: What work did you do after you finished your studies? HP: After I finished the study, I started to work in an office. Actually, I, I got back after the war. Because when you are in Czechoslovakia working, you have to pay for, for institution money, [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] which has a certain name. Like a registration-- no, registration is the wrong word. But then I, I have completely forgotten where I used to work, but I got all the documents back. So first I work in, I think, it was a radio firms. I didn't work there for a long time. Then I work in another firm, something to do with paper. But later on, I work in the same firm, like my first husband and like my present husband, which was a big textile firm. Yes, and I worked that office work or whatever it was. Like the beginners, when you finish school and you go somewhere to work, because I was about 16 or 17, yes. 
INT: How strongly did you identify as a Czechoslovakian? HP: I did, because, because the conditions were, at that time, that, you know, when you got school report, you were the Czechoslovak citizen. And the religion was your private thing. So if somebody would ask me, at that time, I would naturally said, I am Czech. Yes? So that I would have identified like that.  INT: How did your-- how did you react when you heard about the annexation of the Sudeten? HP: Well, I like to mention something-- sorry to interrupt. In spite of my parents were free-thinking and Czech, somehow I remember must have been in their mind that they wanted me to come in some Jewish company they were rethinking later on. Because I remember I was involved, which was called Ha-Gibbor, which is spelled H-A-G-I-B-- like Beverly-- -O-R. So somewhere in their mind, in spite of being so assimilated, would have been their wish. Yes.  INT: And what kind of activities did you do with Ha-Gibbor? HP: Some meeting as far as I remember. I mean, maybe a little bit sport, I-- The sport was swimming, and what do you call them-- something else. Can't remember now. But it's something-- not skiing. I know that, because I didn't ever-- ice skating. That's it, yes.  INT: How did you feel when the Sudeten was annexed by Germany? HP: Well, you see, at that time, I really didn't register the consequences of it, that the Jewish people, from the Sudeten, had to leave and, and live in a different-- you know, different places in Czechoslovakia. I didn't really-- couldn't imagine what it really was. But later on, it started to be more known, because it was a part-- there was a political party, which was called Henlein, H-E-N-L-E-I-N, and they were sort of radicals. And the interesting thing was they used to wear white socks, knee socks. And by that, they sort of were recognized. But that already started a little bit the Nazi, Nazi system, indirectly, until the-- until Czechoslovakia became, became occupied. On the 15th of March 1939, that's where the occupation started. 
INT: Where were you living at that time? HP: In Prague. Originally, that [? pension ?] or [NON-ENGLISH]. We shifted to a different place and actually were living not far away what, at that time, used to be the parliament, in Prague, in the old city-- partly in the old city.  INT: What do you remember of the German entry into Prague? HP: I do very much so. Because I was standing on the quay, and I remember the German, the tanks. And what was very unusual for this time of the year, it was still-- it was snowing, which is unusual in March, snowing. And that I remember that very well. Nobody can forget that who witnessed that. Yes.  INT: What was the response of the Czech community to the arrival of the Germans? HP: Well, I'm, I'm sure that it would have been terrible for the Czech population. But maybe, again, they didn't realize that, yes, to being-- the Czechoslovak Republic became a protectorate. Yes. And of course, the government change and went to England. I mean, I think that my husband would be better on that report than I am.  INT: How did things change for you under the German occupation? HP: It changed to me very much, because my parents realized that I should change, so to speak, my profession and be more practical. So they sent me, still in Prague, to attend some courses for practical things like sewing, which I hated, and learning how to cook, some cook. And later on, actually, they wanted me to leave the office and go home and stay at home. That's, that's what they wanted. So I returned back to Rakovník. But at that time, I was already going steady-- want, want can go steady with my boyfriend, so he-- but he stayed in Prague. He actually came from Sudetenland, his family, and they, they lived in Prague. And when my parents asked me to come home, of course, I was very sad. But that's what it was. 
INT: What restrictions were introduced by the Germans? HP: They were arrested-- I mean, we are now going to talk about the year where they already started the restriction and the Nuremberg laws. I think the Nuremberger's laws came in 1940 or 1941, and the restrictions were [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] terrible. I mean, it started with small things. The-- I-- One thing I remember, that actually first one was that the German came and took away the radio. That was the very small. Later on, you have to give all your jewelry away. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] You were-- you were given that-- by that time, the Czech population had already cards, you know? The cards were-- the Jews had printed there, 'Jude.' The ration, ration cards, I wanted to say, they were-- they were printed, 'Jude.' Well, it somes-- sounds maybe very simple, but it wasn't as simple as that. Because we lived in that town, in small town, and the grocer knew us. But if my parents or I would go in a shop, they would be frightened to give us what the normal population were giving, because they never knew who was standing next to them. I mean, the population was called-- maybe, you realize that they were called 'Aryans.' They were no Christians, but called Aryans. And then-- then one day, the German-- I'm using the word 'German,' actually, because it simplifies the matter for me to use one word. But I will later on actually make the difference. But now I will just say the German. They came one day, because the country was occupied, and they said to my father, well, you, raus. That means, 'out.' And my family had to leave the shop, just walk out of it. And we were all put in one house, with other Jewish families. So that was one of the thing which is today hard to imagine that somebody would come and get out without no compensation. And as a matter of interest, after the war, I got the documents back with a sign of SS, I think it was. So it's a very valuable document. 
INT: This is the end of tape 1.  INT: This is tape two of an interview with Hanka Pressburg. Where was your family living after they were ordered out of their home? HP: They move [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] to a larger big house because our other family were as well. And I remember we used to use the attic. You know, in Europe the houses have attic. And I-- they used to live-- the street was Heroldova, which is H-E-R-O-L-D-O-V-A, with other-- with other people as well. But the circumstances were already actually quite abnormal. I remember-- and I don't know exactly the date, but there were some Czech who became very right wing, or one can call it even fascist. And they manage-- they were using the system. And what actually happened to me, I had to go and work for a farmer, of course, without pay, under most unpleasant conditions. And my family try to get me out of that situation. So they manage-- this farmer was not far away from Rakovnik. I would say one hour-- small village, very primitive, very bad. And so they managed to get me out, get me out of that situation. And I worked then in the same place, in Rakovnik, with another farm. And I remember that was only planting cabbages. There were much better conditions [? anyway. ?] So they were already everything under the Nuremberg laws. But what was the impact of the Nuremberg Laws was when the Jewish people have to start to wear the Jewish star. Because then you were really marked, and you really-- [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] and you couldn't travel. You couldn't move. I can't exactly remember in a kilometer to leave the place. But you were really-- [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] how would I put it? You-- you were more-- less than second-class citizen. What was actually-- I had an experience in May 1941 that I had a bicycle accident with-- I went with my non-Jewish friend for a drive, and something happened. And I had a fall from the bicycle. And I was lying, and I came to hospital. But I was not lying in a normal ward. I was lying in a corridor because I was not allowed to mix with the non-Jewish people or Christian. They were called Aryans. So I was already outcast there. But there goes, if I could call it, story with it. One day-- I have to jump, sort of, over that period, when I-- not jump, but I have to skip that period. And I remember one night, when I was already released from hospital. There was a knock or bell on the door. We-- yes, we were still living in that house, in our house. We are not yet move out. And my father went down. And there were two SS men standing there and asking if I was at home. Cut the story short, they took me, and they kept me overnight. They occupied the hotel, if I remember it well, the Gestapo, and gave me various question, gave me a lot of questions. And I realized that they knew that my fiance, who at that time lived in Prague, visited me in the hospital. Well, I realized that they knew about it. So I think I confirm it. But I was puzzled. How did they find out? So what did they find out came out later. When I was in hospital, my neighbor and my friend with whom I went for the drive, lent me a book to read in the hospital. The German used to rule, even for other non-Jewish people, what was called [NON-ENGLISH]-- pronounced that. And they were our next-door neighbor. And they went to their place. And I don't know exactly what else they did, but they had a library, and they pull some books out from the library. And in that book, in one of the book, they found a letter where my fiance wrote to me he will come to visit me. What was happening, the friend of mine, called [? Vera, ?] lent me the book to read in hospital. I returned the book and left the letter in. And when the German came, through coincidence they just got that letter out of the book. That's what they knew he were there. They arrested him in Prague. In Prague there was special palais, where the German, the Gestapo was. They beat him up, but they let him free. So that was incredible coincidence, what had happened, really. And then later on we moved to the other place. We were still in our home. And my mother said that was the one of the worst moment in her life, when the Gestapo came. Because when you have in contact with Gestapo, you never knew what will happen. 
INT: What was your boyfriend's name? HP: I called him Fricek, which is actually English. Freidrich? No, that German. Fricek is F-- F-R-I-C-E-K, because he came, his family, from Sudeten. Yes, that was. And Weil-- W-E-I-L. That's my second-- my first marriage was Weil-- W-E-I-L.  INT: When did you marry? HP: We-- we married on the 31st of October 1941. And that time there were mixed-- there were not mixed marriages, but marriage-- not only one couple got married because they already the transports started. Yes? So people didn't wanted to be separated. So you maybe had, in Prague, one or two marriages altogether. But he came to Rakovnik. And we got married there on the register office. And, as I will later show you, I had the photo with the Jewish star. Yes? And then we had a flat, or room, one room, before we went in transport.  INT: When did the transports begin? HP: Well, the-- the transport in Czechoslovakia started in 1941, from Prague. And the first transport, I think, went now Poland-- Poland. I am not sure about it, but I think so. But I think in November, in 1941, or maybe in October already, there started to come rumors. And the first transports came. First transport went to Theresienstadt, which were called AK1 and AK2. And they were only men. And they were the transport, actually, who were preparing for the first transport to come, later on followed by the women. And that's how Theresienstadt started. And I came-- I came-- my husband-- my husband, Fricek, and I, we left Rakovnik in February 1942 with a transport Z755. So you stopped to be, so to speak, a human being because you became a number. And my parents and my brother left before. 
INT: Do you remember their transport number? HP: Z-- Z [INAUDIBLE], because they went alphabetically actually. Yes.  INT: What were you able to take with you from home? HP: We were able to take with us rucksack. I actually can't remember how many kilo. I had the feeling somehow 75 kilo, your belongings, what you put in a rucksack. All other thing were left behind.  INT: What did you take in particular? HP: There was-- there was no way of thinking what you take particularly. You just put-- you didn't have time because the transport, what it meant, that the people were assembled. They didn't go straightaway to Theresienstadt. They were assembled in a hall. And I have to use the German name, which was [NON-ENGLISH], you know, they were-- and then from that, the transport were, by train, to Theresienstadt. So I really can't remember what we took. Mostly remember what my parents or I consider at that time would have been the most important. Yes?  INT: How were you ordered to report for the transport? HP: How to report? [PAUSES FOR 5 SECONDS] I think you were called. That must have been-- they must have come from Prague. Because in Prague was really what they called the [NON-ENGLISH], which means were the transport all, under the direction of the German, notified really the different part of-- of-- of Czechoslovakia for the transport. I really don't know how the system worked. But I gather that was like that. 
INT: Before you were transported, what did you know about Theresienstadt? HP: Well-- well, Theresienstadt, I-- I knew historically. So it was a place-- it was a what you call festung in German, surrounded by walls. It was all barracks, were under the Hapsburg or Austrian monarchy, the soldiers were. Yes? But that's all what I knew. There were a lot of barracks there. And also the-- the normal population lived there. The Czech lives there as well. There was a garrison or whatever you call it, yes.  INT: How were you transported? HP: Well, you were always transported, not only to Theresienstadt, you actually were always-- there were always things which went for three and a half-- three and a half year while I was in the camp, were always the same. There was always a railway station somewhere. They were always a goods train. And they were always SS and dogs. So they didn't change at all. It just-- just how it was like that before.  INT: When did you arrive at Theresienstadt? HP: Yes. When you arrive in Theresienstadt, you went to a special block. All the barracks had a different name. And all the barracks had German name. So for example, the barracks where I was, what called Bodenbach. I mean, I can translate it in Czech. Then another were Hanover. Then another were Hamburg. Yes? The one was where the men was Sudeten. But you had to understand that, in Theresienstadt, one thing which was different, you were still with your family in a different barracks. So the women were in different barracks, and the men were in different barracks. If I remember it well, the men, the younger one, were called in Sudeten. There was also a barracks which were-- where they were the old people when they arrived. There were also different barracks where were the children. And this is the very significant thing, that Theresienstadt-- in Theresienstadt were children. Yes? That's the very important. And Theresienstadt is actually has been called, after the war, Paradise Camp, because even in spite of being concentration camp, it was paradise compared what came later on. 
INT: Could you describe the accommodation, the barracks? HP: Well, the-- the accommodation varied from barracks to barracks. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] I remember some barracks had bunks. We slept on the floor, on the suitcases. And I think some matter of suitcases or something-- we slept on the floor. I remember that. But all different.  INT: And what were the conditions in the barracks? HP: Well, Theresienstadt, when we came to Theresienstadt, as I mentioned before, in February '42, the Aryans still lives there. So there was no contact with the-- with the Aryans. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] To-- to describe the situation, the inmates created, so to speak, their own police, which was called [NON-ENGLISH]. And the [NON-ENGLISH] was giving warning when the SS or whoever was the German came in a camp. So we had a warning. Then one of the barracks were-- was, so to speak, very hard to describe. But you can describe it a little bit like a government, which was called Magdeburg. That was the name of the-- of the barracks. And they were the people, like a government under the German. Yes, but we couldn't-- we couldn't mix with the population that time. We were not allowed to go out, only certain-- only certain-- certain hours in the evening. So that's mean I could have seen my husband certain times on the evening or the other member, my brother or my father. Yes? The interesting story was that, historically, we came to Theresienstadt in February '42. And in June or July, there was-- we were called out, I remember, assembled in front of the barracks, only women. And I don't know how many women were there-- 500. I really don't know. And we left Theresienstadt. And we came to the place not far away from my hometown. And we planted trees there in a forest. And we came back to Theresienstadt. Nobody escaped. And we returned, the women, back to Theresienstadt. Yes? [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] My parents and my brother left already in September '42, Theresienstadt, and left with another transport, what was called East. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] We were told, after the war, that they went to a concentration camp, [? Rochlitz. ?] Yes? But nobody-- nobody survived the war. And I-- I remember vividly my parents leaving. And actually, the sad thing was that you get the transport. They got-- there's only versions what you could say, we got a transport. What it meant in Theresienstadt, you get a white piece of paper. And you be with you-- with another number. You assembled again on the railway station. And I remember vividly my parents leaving, leaving the gate, you know, so to speak, going out with my brother. And that's the time I saw it, last time. I have vivid descriptions for my parents for that. And the ticket arrived just on my birthday. And I remember my father was very upset, very. 
INT: How old were your parents when they were transported? HP: They would have been about 55, 57, something like that, something like that-- 55, 53, something like that.  INT: And your brother? HP: Well, my brother was six year younger than I am. So my brother would have been 15, 16. My brother was actually the last one who had a bar mitzvah in Rakovnik, the last one. And I think there is one photo. I feel that the photo, when he had a bar mitzvah. So I [INAUDIBLE]. Yes? And I stay in the Theresienstadt on-- we stay in Theresienstadt until December [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] '43.  INT: Did you do other work in Theresienstadt? HP: Yes, I did. I did. You see, that-- because we came early to Theresienstadt, so that was, in a way, advantage because we were sort of the beginners there. So not straightaway, but later on, I was in what is called [NON-ENGLISH]. What does that mean? I was, you can call it, work-- supervising or handling when-- when-- when we were given soup or bread and everything. Yes? And I'd like to talk a little bit about Theresienstadt because Theresienstadt was unique in that case, because the people who came to Theresienstadt were also coming from Germany and-- and different, I think even from Holland, but I'm not sure about that. They were artists coming, musician. And they actually were educating the children in a special home. And that's what-- and encourage the kids to-- to do the drawings, to try to educate them in one way or the other. Yes? And that's what came to-- the drawings of the children of Theresienstadt, which were found then after the war. Yes? It was a very well known painter, educator, who helped them. They were encouraged to music, all behind the scene, all behind the scene of the-- of the German. Paper was smuggled, pencils. They were doing music. Today you can listen to music which was composed in Theresienstadt. There was even an opera composed. So if you look at the book of Theresienstadt, you can see pictures of painters who were there. So it was a unique situation. But in 1942, in the summer, the Aryans had to leave Theresienstadt. They were evacuated. And it became a ghetto. I mean that's all before I-- it happened all before I left. So I maybe didn't say the correct sequence of it. Yes? 
INT: Could you describe the food that was available? HP: Oh, that very simple. [LAUGHS] You get a piece of bread, small piece of bread, margarine, black coffee, and soup. And that was always, for three and a half years. Sometimes the soup was better. Sometimes it was worse. You could have, actually, get something because there was a group of the inmates who had to-- who had to leave Theresienstadt under the supervision of the German and went-- went-- and work in the fields or somewhere. So if they pinched tomatoes or something and managed to bring it inside, so if you could, you can get a tomato or something like that. Yes.  INT: How was the food distributed? HP: You stand in a row. There were established kitchen. And you stand in a row. And there are pictures in a book, standing in a row. You had a special dish, and that a cook gave you soup, just like that. Yes.  INT: How were the lists for transports drawn up? Who did that work? HP: The transport? [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] Oh, when they-- you mean-- do you mean when they left Theresienstadt? That came from-- from a special barracks called Magdeburg, which was called-- it's a certain language, which was established in the camp, which was called Stab. That's mean like a government, S-T-A-B, under the direction of the German. They-- the [? most ?] of the Germans said so many people has to leave the place, because while the transport were coming in, there were, the same times, transport leaving Theresienstadt. So there was non-stop something happening in that field. Yes? 
INT: Do you remember the arrival of the Germans and Austrians? HP: No. You mean the-- from Germany, the transport? I remember only one thing. That was the, really, I would say, the sad and very funny thing, sad thing too. I remember the German. They came old age home, start. They had a special barracks as well. And they were standing in a queue and waiting for the soup. And they still addressed themself what they were before. That's mean they say, somebody was a director, so he call him, in German, Herr Director. In spite of the horrible condition, in their way, they address them like that, which was very sad and very strange.  INT: Were you sick at any time in Theresienstadt? HP: Were I what?  INT: Were you ill at any time? HP: I can't-- I can't remember. I don't think so. I don't remember. No.  INT: Do you recall being in Theresienstadt when Heydrich was assassinated? HP: Well, you see, when Heydrich was assassinated, that's where we planted the trees. That's where we planted the trees. And when Heydrich was assassinated, you know what's happened with Lidice? That actually, the whole village was wipe off. But it came all through England. I think George, my husband, could report on better that, where he was, during the war, in England. Because, as you can imagine, we didn't know what was really happening, not at all. But that was a time when we were-- when we-- when we planted the trees. Yes. 
INT: When were you transported? HP: Where to?  INT: From Theresienstadt. HP: From-- in December-- in December '43 we were called. And we went to-- we went to Auschwitz. Yes, we went to Auschwitz, my husband and I, yes. We-- it was again this-- again train, and train and dogs, and trying to remember, we-- I even don't know how long we traveled to Auschwitz. I only remember, as you know, this always was the cattle wagons, no ventilation, nothing, standing next to each other, and unbelievable conditions, unbelievable conditions. And when the trains stop, which was in December, all what we could see was snow and wires and the German shouting 'raus' and the dogs. And we started to walk and walk. And we-- and the person who couldn't walk just stayed in the snow. And we came in there-- we came in Auschwitz barracks. And I don't know exactly, don't know the sequence, how it follow. I can't remember. But when we arrive in Auschwitz, we still had the clothing, what we brought in Theresienstadt. So first of all, I think it was we were stripped of our clothing, was taken away from us. We went through showers. We were divided, men different row, and the women different row. And I have no recollection what happened with the children. I only remember men and women. And we came to barracks. We went under the shower. But the showers was water. It sounds maybe very strange that I mention that showers was water. But later on we knew that the other showers were gas. So we were in the showers, the women, naked. The men were-- the SS walking there in between us. Then we were shaven on our private parts of our body. We-- we signed something. We went right through some procedure. Yes? And later on we were given our transport. We we're given the number. So my number is 73660. Yes? And we came to barracks, divided there. But something was-- I think it's all very-- looking back to it, I think it all were-- it was all different with various transport. We came to a camp called Birkenau, which was a family camp. There was divided blocks, men and women. There were no more children. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] We-- what [INAUDIBLE]? Yes. We didn't have the, what they called pajama, the striped one. We were given a horrible thing. We were given garments or whatever you would call it after people who were dead. And we looked so ridiculous. I had a friend, and she was shorter than I am. And she was given a long coat like that. Yes. My husband had some cape. I remember that we even had to laugh how horrible we looked. Yes? But that varies from transport to transport. So we went in a barracks. We stay in a barracks-- [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] only men in a different barracks. We can see them in the evening. Auschwitz in winter was horrible. It was covered with snow, all muddy. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] The unbelievable thing was that, in that block where we stayed, or where I stayed, was music. The music was from some inmate. Punishment or whatever took place, what's called-- we call it on chimney, which actually was in the middle of the barracks, was you can call it like a podium. And whatever happened there, everybody got punished there. In the beginning we worked what would-- you could call building a lot-- building mean a-- building a lagerstrasse. That's mean the road. What we did build-- what we did, we took a boulder, carry it, put it down, and did it like that regardless if you could or you couldn't. If you couldn't, you were just left behind. We were standing hours and hours appell, outside. I don't know the German counting. I mean, we did not know if it was Monday or Tuesday because we have no idea really. It was unbelievable condition, no toilets, no sanitation, one place where you could wash. We wash with snow-- unbelievable conditions. 
INT: This is the end of tape two.  INT: This is tape three of an interview with Hanka Pressburg. What was the daily routine of the camp? HP: The daily routine was that you get up-- I don't know what-- very, very early in the morning, standing, as I mentioned, before-- standing outside. That was called appell. And then building the road. But later on, actually, we were doing something for the Army. I think it was something to do for the Army. And that was actually maybe more pleasant, because we were inside. We-- you know, it's very, very hard to describe the situation. We were actually aware of it, that we have to keep clean, if possible, or had-- not have any health problem. Because if somebody had a health problem or something, the person disappeared. The person went to a different block, and you'll never have seen it again. I'd like to mention something. That in my particular case, I didn't have any contact apart with the inmates, because there was a situation, people who were called kapo or the person who was looking after-- each block had somebody, like, in a leading position. That person maybe knew much more than I did. I was just an ordinary inmate in that camp. So I really didn't know what was happening without the electrical wire at all. We never, ever believed, or didn't want to believe, or didn't know about the gas chamber. But in March, I think March in 1944, came a transport from Theresienstadt. And you could see the people arriving behind the wires. And the next day, you could see heaps of their belongings there. And you could see the chimney smoking. And you could even smell it. And later on, you could-- you could see the-- looked like-- it looked like a container, with the gas. I mean, today, years or so, looking back, it was an unbelievable situation of destruction, of this-- just absolutely unbelievable. Also the conditions, how people can live. Yes? And I-- something-- what sometimes I think about it, the-- we were given the same soup and the ration of bread, but the bread was given maybe to one person, and the person had to break it. In general, though, I can't remember any fights. But one thing was, if somebody died, and you have people who are right next to you, you kept it-- you sort of tried that the Germans don't find out, because you would have the ration of the bread of the person. Yes? [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] So this-- I remember, as I mentioned before, this transport, seeing and disappearing. And I had relations there as well.
In June or July 1944, we were called to selection. I think maybe you heard the name of Dr. Mengele. What it was, we were again stripped naked. And again, as I mentioned before in the chimney and the podium, we had to parade. And all what he was doing was right, left, right, left, yes? So I came-- I came to the right side, to be here. From that-- Birkenau-- that's the last time I have seen my husband, Fritz, right there, because the same applied to men. And that's maybe what [INAUDIBLE] mentioned, that the camp was liquidated, that the camp was empty. Yes? We came for a short time. And I can't remember that-- the date. We came to another camp in Auschwitz, which was called a woman's camp, woman's camp. And the-- it was crazy. I remember greet-- being greeted by music. And that's where it comes to well known, the writing, arbeit macht frei. When we walked into the camp, the people who were lying there, they looked [? insane ?] skeleton, horrible looking. We were given, like, an overall, and we got a number, again, different number here. And we were transported, women. I don't know if it was-- somebody said 500 women. Somebody said more than that. Or some were-- we were transported to Hamburg. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] And I don't know where the men went, but as I mentioned before, that was the last time I have seen my husband. We work in Hamburg. We stay in Hamburg, where was called Dessauer Ufer in barracks. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] The beginning, we worked in the streets of Hamburg, which was bombed terrible, terrible. We were clearing all the mess and the rubbles. And there were actually Germans who helped us. How did they help us? They were-- usually was an elderly person. We used to call him [INAUDIBLE] like a grandfather. He used to come and left somewhere a parcel. And it would have been up to you to get the parcel. And usually it was bread or something. Because Hamburg was known to be more, in English, labor orientated. So I like to, you know, I pay tribute to the people who really tried to help us. Afterwards, we also-- [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] what-- what was in Hamburg, what was in Hamburg, horrible, was the bombing. Bombing day and night. And that time, already in Hamburg, we formed a group, a small group of the inmates. Maybe there's something to do with that we were alone. You know? There was no more husband, nobody else. A single person. So in my case, were two other women. I was the youngest one from them. It was 10 years difference. And we helped each other. And one of them-- actually, the middle one-- her name was Anka, A-N-K-A, [? or ?] [? N. ?] She helped me very much, because she used to say, when it was bombing, you stay where you are. And she used to say, don't worry. Tonight, I was dreaming about-- about my mother, and nothing will happen to us. And that was really her saying. Yes. Then another person was-- difference about 20 years. So if we got a piece of bread, it was like a commune of three people. We supported each other. And I think that looking back so many years, it was absolutely fantastic, yes, to support in a small thing. And later on, why I mentioned that as well, because later on, we worked in-- [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] we travel from-- from the-- from the Dessauer Ufer, which the place was called. We traveled by boat and work some connection with oil. In-- in New Zealand, you would call it like-- like Marsden oil refinery. And that was heavily bombed. But it had also one thing that further away we could see, working, the French prisoner of war. And they took pity of the woman, and it was the same story. They left a parcel. And it's up to you and the guard watching that you got something, which usually was biscuit or what the rations were from the Red Cross, because prisoner of war is completely different. But I don't know if you really can visualize or somebody who ever is watching that, leaving Auschwitz was, in a way, saving your life. And also you have seen, as a human beings, then your inmate. You know? You-- we have seen the French prisoner of war, some various-- was Italian. And we were-- we worked there. It was heavily bombed. And we were very lucky. We had only about five people, women, who were killed. And we really became experts. Because we had known, if you see a bomb, that bomb would not hit you. Yes? I don't know how it works, but that-- that's apparently how it was. Then later on, it must have been getting towards the end of the war, we were starting to move and walk. And we walked to various small camps, not far away from Hamburg. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] And we-- at the end, we came to Bergen-Belsen, where I was liberated of the 15th of April by the British Army. 
INT: What were the small camps you were sent to? HP: One was called Neuengamme, and one was called Tiefstack. I can't-- we were building something there as well. And of course the guards were changing, because it must have been towards the end of the war. I have a recollection of different guards, sometimes were-- sometimes were the SS, sometimes were-- sometimes were the soldiers who came back from the war. They were a little bit better. But towards the end were women, and they were very bad, the SS. Not talking about being lesbian as well. Yes, but some of them were really bad. Yes, that's-- so after we were liberated, yes.  INT: How were you transported to Bergen-Belsen? HP: We walked. All in walking. And I have-- I have very little recollection at that time. I must admit, I have very, very recollection of that. I don't know. I must have been weak or something, or maybe it went fast. Now, can you imagine that you don't know what's the day? Nothing. Nothing. Nothing. Yes.  INT: What happened when you arrived at Bergen-Belsen? HP: When we arrived, we were again in a barracks, very overcrowded. [PAUSES FOR 6 SECONDS] There was a shortage of-- even of the soup and everything. I remember, we walked somewhere with one of the friends from our group and were trying to steal some carrots or cabbage, something, from a-- from a field. And somebody was running the same way, and we were caught. And I remember getting some beating up from the SS woman. I have very little, actually, recollection of that time. I remember Hamburg and that, but when we started to walk, very little. I-- I think we didn't stay long time in Bergen-Belsen. My guess is maximum three weeks. Because [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] there was some shooting in Bergen-Belsen. Actually, one of the girls was hit. She actually returned after the war and [INAUDIBLE] not long time ago, died in Melbourne. Yes. But it was absolutely [INAUDIBLE]. It must have been, because end of the war was approaching. Yes? 
INT: Can you describe the day you were liberated? HP: I can describe it. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] Just not comprehend the liberation at all. Not comprehend the liberation at all. I remember that, as I said, and there also was some shooting, that somebody came and open the barracks door. And we went out. And the sight was absolutely unbelievable, to think about it today. We were confronted with heaps of dead people. But not normally skinny skeleton. There was a certain language, Muselmann, it was called. There were no toilets, nothing. You know, everything was on the ground. It was unbelievable. Then I remember, that came when-- I-- I think the Army must have been shocked by that. I think so. And I read something about it in a book recently. That was-- for them was absolutely unbelievable, what they have seen. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] What they did first, establish kitchen, so to speak, and gave us-- to eat, they gave us-- which is like a mincemeat in a tin, and it's called Spam. But that-- what actually happening was that we didn't eat-- for a couple of days, we didn't get anything to eat. And some people really died. Their stomach wouldn't-- and they gave us a ration card. I remember standing outside and getting some rations, which was a biscuit or something like that. It must have been there. Then they built kitchen, soup kitchen. But what they did first, they spray everything with DDT. They established some water system. And they buried. And then I remember that vividly. The bulldozer came and buried the dead people. It was absolutely unbelievable. You even-- you cannot compare it, what you see today on-- on television, what was happening in Africa or Rwanda or something like that. Yes, absolutely unbelievable. And it was full of typhoid, full of typhoid. And then-- then later on, we-- the-- the soldiers came, and we never could understand that. They all wear a mask, you know, with these-- we didn't know what it was to be frightened. And they stripped everything, what we had, put in blanket. Transported to hospital, to Celle and to Hanover. And I was liberated in Bergen-Belsen in-- as I mentioned before, in 15th of April, 1945. And I returned to Prague on the 7th of June. 
INT: What was your physical condition when you were liberated? HP: Considering-- [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] I-- I-- considering, I think-- [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] I was, of course, very thin and everything. But they only discovered in Prague that I had a light case of typhoid, because I was starting to losing hair. But maybe there was something connected. Because when I was a teenager, I had what was called paratyphoid. I can't remember. Skinny. We were given-- after the liberation, we were given a frock. So I remember, I was getting a frock from some-- from German, some of the German women, they stripped everything. Yes. Unbelievable.  INT: How old were you when you were liberated? HP: I was liberated-- I-- I'm born in 1920. I was liberated in '45. How old I was? 25, no? 25. A long time ago. [DRINKS]  INT: What did you do when you returned to Prague? HP: When I returned to Prague, believe it or not, I remember the phone number of my auntie, and I gave-- no. We were-- when we came to Prague, we came, actually, to some medical examinations. We were transported to some [? Prague-- ?] a special place where they all examined the-- we came-- we actually-- sorry that I skipped from one thing and another one. We came with a bus. But on that bus were people from various different camps, non-Jewish as well. And we were-- we came to special medical center [INAUDIBLE]. And we were examined. And then we were taken to give us something to eat. And next to me was a man who came from Dora, another concentration camp. And I'll never forget that we were sitting there, and he said, [NON-ENGLISH]-- I'm translating. We spoke Czech. I take those cup-- we were given coffee. I takes the cups home. You know, he was so used to being in camp, to-- the expression was [NON-ENGLISH], to take the things back. So he sort of-- he's going to take that-- he's going to take that home as well. That was still in his mind. So I rang my relation. Didn't know if they will be at home or whatever happened to them. And they were at home. It was a mixed marriage. And I stayed with them. 
INT: Tell me about the search for family members. HP: What, the family members? You mean my family? My parents and that? Look, when I was in Auschwitz, and when I was further, I knew my parents couldn't survive. That would-- that would have been a miracle. But I was hoping that my brother, because he was six years younger, that he will survive. So what it was, there was a special office established in Prague, and the lists were coming out from survivors from various camps. So what you did, you went nearly every day and checked the list when people were coming out. Yes? We, of course, were undernourished. And I remember getting up during the night and eating bread and bread and butter. And I stayed with my relations there. And later on, I moved from another cousin, because it was also mixed marriage. They were only short time in a camp. And this is this particular cousin where I met my present husband, George. I just walked down for something in Prague, and a soldier came towards me. And I realized that it was somebody who worked with me in office. And that time, to meet somebody who survived the war, who haven't seen him since 1939, it was quite incredible. You know, you-- somebody is alive. Somebody is here. So the time was spent, actually, trying to-- mostly trying to find out who came back from the war. Yes?  INT: When did you remarry? HP: With George? Well, we married in-- well, we got married-- we married in 1947. God, am I silly. [LAUGHS] Because we had last year the-- well, still this year, the golden wedding. 1947. Yeah. [DRINKS] 
INT: How important was remarrying after the-- your experiences? HP: How-- what-- how I was marrying after the-- look, it was a situation for everybody, different. But it was sort of like fast living. You were here, you were-- you came back. You were alive. You have no responsibility, because nobody came. And you really didn't know what to do with yourself. So if you were physically fit, after some times, you had to do something. Because you didn't have a thing. I mean, I returned in Prague having one-- having that frock. And I remember my late auntie, putting whatever I was wearing, in spite of being sprayed with DDT or whatever we got in-- she always put it out, because she was frightened that something, there were lice. At that time, we didn't have the lice anymore. Yes? So there was an organization, Joint American organization, who start-- who started to support, sending from the United States, things. I had-- before the war, I had a friend who went to Shanghai, managed to go to Shanghai. And in Shanghai, from Shanghai, he went to the United States, and he joined the Navy there. And he found my name in the list published of the survivors of-- from Bergen-Belsen, the Czechoslovak. And he started-- immediately sent me parcels. I mean, it was incredible how fast it started to work, the help. Yes? And when I was more fit or everything, then I managed to get moved from my auntie and from my cousin, and managed to get a flat with one of the inmates. I was with her in a camp. We had a flat together. And I started to look later on for a job. I actually can't remember where I-- when I really started to work, but when I had a job, and I worked in an office of restitution, which was a semi-government job, I-- I was secretary to a lawyer. And you see, then I was started to doing with George. So life was becoming, very, very slowly, when one can call normal. But it was a very, very difficult emotional and altogether a very difficult time. Very difficult time. 
INT: After the war, were you able to recover any family property? HP: Well, also that-- naturally, that was not as easy as that. Because first of all, you have to legally prove that you are entitled to it. So I had to prove that my parents didn't survive, that my brother didn't survive, yes? So there was a legal thing which was called-- I couldn't properly translate it. You see, in my case, nobody was witness where they died or whatever. So there was a certain period of time where they declare they-- you didn't know where they were and so on. I can't really practically translate the word correctly. And after which, you had to go to court. And I got back the house. Not the shop. The shop, I so-- wouldn't know what to do with it. Somebody else had it already. And [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] then when I got-- I lived in Prague with my cousin, used to work. And went with George already. But then he went-- he was out of Prague, working. And later, when we decided to get married, you know. So then we moved the place where was his job. And it's-- I mean, George was interviewed before me. Again, to get married, everybody who was married before and wanted to get married for the second time, there was a special law established that you are divorced. So I don't know where you put the Jewish religion into it, because you are divorced. The law, I think, is 103, which is on your marriage certificate. We got married on the Register Office, because that didn't at that time existed. And that was all protection from the legal point. When I-- and I have to say that the Czechoslovak government, at that time, was very good and very helpful. We got-- because I was a widow, I was getting a pension from the government. Yes. Of course, when we got married, that-- that stopped. And that, of course, had at that time-- it was a situation at that time that the partnership could exist, right, exists now. You don't need to get married, and you were still getting the pension. So once you got married, well, we-- we had to get married, which George explained before, in his interview. But I want to-- actually, that it should be in my interview. There was already-- Czechoslovakia was, again, Czechoslovakia was already under the Communist system. And to be able to get a flat was very, very hard. And George worked in a textile industry or textile institute. And to be able to get-- to get a flat, we had to be legally married. So the office wrote, you have to get married, and then you will get the flat. So we got married. And it was allocated flat in a place called [NON-ENGLISH], which is an industrial place. And George had a job there. And when we got married, it was a mistake from that particular institution. And we didn't get the flat. The hospital got the flat. So what was happening, we got married, and no flat. So later on, he took a job in a textile institute, and the first condition was to get a-- the first condition was to get a flat. So we had a very, very small flat in place called Brno, which is the capital of Moravia. Yes. 
INT: How long did you remain in Czechoslovakia after the war? HP: How long did I been-- well, look. I was-- I came in June '45 and left Czechoslovakia in-- in December. We arrived at '48.  INT: This is the end of the tape. HP: That's good. There will be--  INT: This is tape four of an interview with Hanka Pressburg. How did you get the permits to come to New Zealand? HP: Well, I'd rather start from a different angle, if I may. You know, Czechoslovakia became, actually, occupied later on by-- by the Russians, you know, under the Communist system. But I'd like to say, that was not the reason why we came to New Zealand. After the consequences what happened in Europe and with us, we-- George and I wanted to get away from Europe. We just wanted to get away and not stay in that-- in Europe. Well, George had friends here who came to New Zealand in 1938 or '39. And they sent us a permit to come to New Zealand. But it was not as easy. That-- that-- I have to say one thing. There was one exception, what the Czechoslovak government was doing. People who were persecuted during the war, most-- mostly the Jewish people, they were allowed to leave the country. Because under the Communist system, the Czechs couldn't legally leave the country. But there were various conditions attached to that. And one of the conditions was that was a special institution, something, where-- where all our documents were stamped that we have to renounce our Czechoslovak citizenship. Yes? And also when we-- we-- we took the-- we had the permit. And we took-- you know, after the war, when we got married, we had a very small flat in Brno George was in a textile institute. And we had a bedsitter there, so we were allowed to take the furniture and everything, which was recommended from our friends, to New Zealand, to take it with you. But everything had to be paid. And I remember that you-- you had to approach the ministry, the Czechoslovak-- the Czech Ministry of Finance. They came, and they actually inspected everything, what we were. And just as an example, we managed to buy a new washing-- a new-- not washing machine, sewing machine. They didn't allow it to take, us. So we managed from a neighbor there to get an old one and get it. And it was very strict restriction. And also we were not allowed to take any money. We came to New Zealand with 2 pound 10 per head. And you can call it-- it was called [? lift, ?] what we took.
But it's a container, really, that everything would have been paid here. So when we came here, we owe the people about 150 pounds. So when you come to a different country with-- with 2 pound 10, you already owe some money. It wasn't easy. [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] We-- we came by ship called We-- we-- we crossed-- we-- we crossed the Czech-- Czech border. And I remember my cousin, or actually, George's cousin, who was still in Prague, came with us to the border, to crossing the border. And I remember, I had a gold chain, and it was not allowed to take. So he took it off on the border, when we said goodbye. We came via-- via Holland. We stayed a couple of days in Amsterdam, because George has some friend there, and we sailed from Rotterdam. And I remember sailing, you know, when the boat start-- sails started. I said, that's a goodbye of Europe, goodbye to Europe. We arrived. We-- the boat traveled via Suez Canal. But it was what was called a troop and transport. It was the boat who originally called who took back the Dutch people from Indonesia, back. So for example, where we slept, and paying a lot of money for the transportation to New Zealand, I think I stayed-- I don't know with how many people. There was no cabin, bunks. And with some 500 displaced persons as well. We were coming to-- we came to Melbourne first. And where we had a very, very good friends also, who were-- he was with George in Army during the war. And he wanted us to stay in Melbourne, but we didn't. And came to New Zealand. I arrived here, arrived, I think, on the 23rd or 24th of January, 1949, in Wellington, met by our friends on the railway station. Yes, we arrived by plane to Auckland, and from Auckland by train here. It was-- we stayed with our friends, who sent us the permit. I couldn't speak English at all. I remember George teaching me on the boat a-- a few words. When we arrived, I was looking after my friend, where we stayed, because she was highly pregnant. And I helped her in the household. And George was-- managed to get work. I think he was quite disappointed, because he is a textile man, but he couldn't get a job. So he started in the different factories. I mean, life was, in the beginning, hard in some way, in spite of having accommodation and friends. Because I didn't understand not a word of English. And I remember one day, my friends invited some New Zealanders who later became our very, very good friends. And they were telling jokes. And they all laughed, and I didn't know what they were talking about. You know? But later on, I-- my first job in New Zealand was in a factory that doesn't exist anymore, Queen Anne was it. It was a factory, and I was putting chocolates in a box. You know? It was a very boring job, very sweet job. Afterwards, I-- when I left that job, we still stayed with-- with our friends. It was a big house. We stayed with them. But later on, their parents arrived, actually, from Cuba, so we had to move out. And I started to work in a factory of our friends. The firm was called Tatra Leather Goods, producing billfolds. And I was starting to work there, in a factory. Later on, I was expecting Carol, and we moved in a flat and had to stay-- stay in that flat for a very, very short time. Somebody was overseas, and also the landlord didn't like-- wouldn't like to have children. So we moved out and had another flat somewhere else. At that time, we already started to think to bring George's cousin, also my cousin, from Czechoslovakia. He also wanted to emigrate. We managed to get him a permit. He was the first one who got a permit to come to New Zealand in 1949. And later on was my late friend, Anka, which I mentioned before in Hamburg. We have been together in camp. She didn't wanted to stay, so we managed to bring her to New Zealand as well. Then later on, I-- Carol was born. I do various jobs at home, because we came without money. We managed to buy the house with everybody else's money. I was doing various jobs at home in the evening, having two jobs, George as well. So started, really, just like nothing. Yes? Later on, when Carol was born, I-- I worked doing finishing job, did some sewing. Whatever was available, actually, I was trying to do before-- when the kids were small. Later on, when already Suzi was born, or later on, [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] I work-- I worked-- I came back to Tatra, but not in a factory, in an office. Much, much later on, I worked in a lottery, which was called Golden Kiwi, where I worked for 22 years, until I retired in-- yes, when I was 65, I retired from the lottery. 
INT: How important was having a family to you? HP: Well, having family was, of course, very, very important, naturally. [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] The life was concentrated-- concentrated on the family. At the same time, maybe aware, as Carol mentioned before, that-- that there was-- that we were different. We were different, you know? The accent, the accent you never lose. It's a different way of various things. I remember when the kids invited New Zealand friends, they always used to laugh, because I grew two or three vegetables. Yes? And of course, when the-- the kids were teenagers, they have their own way of doing things. They were involved later on in Jewish organization, both were. Carol-- Carol and Suzi were involved in Habonim. Then came a time where Israel was established, and you know, they wanted also to go to Israel, Suzi more. Then Carol, Carol might be-- already had a boyfriend, who is now her present husband. Well, of course, like any parents, we were very much interested. I don't know how much we were different from other families, from New Zealand families, apart of the languages. It's very, very hard to comment. Maybe different way of cooking. We were very conscious of it, that the kids had no relation. And we had very, very good friends that become almost like a family. I mean, they are now all in Sydney. Yes.  INT: When you arrived here, how involved were you with the Jewish community? HP: When we arrived, well, we were actually not involved so much, because-- and I really don't want to do injustice to the community in one way or the other. The Jewish community here thought you have to go to shul, to synagogue, and you are part of it. But George is not religious, so we didn't-- we didn't go. I went only on holidays. So there was sort of a-- not a meeting point. The people who-- the friends who brought [INAUDIBLE] New Zealand, they originally are Jewish, yes. But they were-- they-- they were not affiliated. As a matter of fact, I think they-- I don't know if they were baptized. I really don't know. Because it was a trend after the war as well that people who survived, or what they wanted that that should not happen again, the persecution. And they just wanted to get out of it. And nobody really could blame them. You-- can you-- anybody-- anybody who went through the war cannot blame that-- the horrible situation, what it was during the war. Yes? And later on, when the kids started-- you see, at that time, the kids were in here at Wadestown School. And there was classes, you know, religious classes. They never attended it. So we said, if they want to go, whatever, have knowledge of it. So they attended Hebrew, Hebrew school. And then we became a member of the community. But as an active member of the community, if one can call active, is when I retired. Because when I was working and running the household, I always worked, even if the kids were small. And I always make a point to be at home when the kids were coming back from school. So then I became more involved. I wouldn't have-- I couldn't cope to accept any position-- not position, but be involved in a community. 
INT: Can you tell me about your involvement? HP: In a community now or when [INAUDIBLE]. [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] I joined the Jewish women. And to be truthful, I joined them because it appealed to me that the Jewish-- the organization of the Jewish women goes outside the community as well. Yes? That was the reason what I joined. Then I became active in B'nai B'rith, which is an international Jewish organization, where George was very, very active, because his late parents were also already B'nai B'rith. We're a paying member of all organizations, yes? But I help also in a library once a week for a number of years. But that doesn't mean that I am a librarian, because the other lady who is involved is a librarian, so I help her when it's necessary. [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] I became involved [PAUSES FOR 5 SECONDS] in educations. [INAUDIBLE] call it the Holocaust education of the-- when you-- I have to say like that. When it was 40 years of the war, that was a very, very well organized commemoration of that event. And there were more survivors arrived. And everybody took part in it. There were exhibitions, talks, various things. I actually have it even here, the program of it. But the final thing was interviewed of two survivors. All the other survivors had-- had-- had already allocated [INAUDIBLE]. And a friend of mine, I said we were still [INAUDIBLE]. So at the end, the person who was in charge of it said, now, everybody does something. Roma and you, you are the one who had to do it, yes. And my late friend, Roma, said, oh, yes. I'm going to do everything. [INAUDIBLE] everything. All right? So we were interviewed in Michael Fowler Centre, live, by Ian Fraser. Somebody who we see in New Zealand would know who is still-- who is Ian-- who was Ian Fraser. Which was quite the impact, answering questions in front of the full [? microphones ?] and at the concert hall. After that, the community was approached from various schools if people would like to-- not to talk about it-- well, actually, to explain various things when students come. And I started that with some other people as well, with my late friend of Roma, late friend. Her name was Roma. In the beginning, it was very, very hard to talk about those things, very, very, very hard in New Zealand, being so far away, and not knowing really what was happening in Europe. And I had a few-- what you call it short for? I, you know, became emotional about it. But then I said, no. First of all, I can do it in memory of the people, my family and others, who didn't survive the war, and also to give, if the generation wants some knowledge, what was happened.
Of course, you can say you can get it from books and other, but always came to me back that as long as the survivor is here-- and I have to say, the number became quite important. And I felt somewhere we ought to showcase when the kids ask show me your number, show me your number, yes? But that was the impact of it. Yes? And it became more and more [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] in a different field. I noticed that I change. I took out from the Holocaust the things which were unique. Because in the meantime came different things, like Africa, Yugoslavia. So it's change. I-- kids used to come here for interview with tape recorders, or I went to school, or they came to the Center. It varied very, very much, very, very much so. I encourage the students to ask questions. Doesn't mean that I always could answer them. I try my best. Yes, some questions were difficult. Which came all questions of antisemitisms. Yes. Because I remember once being at school, a Catholic school, and there was a question of antisemitism, and it was not very easy to answer. But that carried on for-- for quite a while. And-- and-- and it still-- still is. And it's quite amazing that you get students who are even 13 years old. This depends on the school or teacher. And last year, actually, I had a-- a real big surprise. And one day, in a letter box, I found a letter from the Governor General that somebody proposed me-- proposed me to get the QSM, Queen's Service Model-- Medal. I must admit that was-- I had such a surprise, that I burst to laugh, you know? And I just couldn't believe it. Of course, the question was always is that you-- you accept it. That's done. Of course, I accepted. And last year, in-- in December, came the letter from the Governor General, congratulating me. Funny enough how it works, at the same time, get the letter from previous Prime Minister Bolger. And it was a-- for me, not-- not an achievement. I was actually quite-- if I think about it, quite emotional about it, because I remember how my parents would have been happy. And also not only that. I felt I came to New Zealand in 1949, from the country. And in that world, I-- I felt, in spite of being naturalized New Zealander, that I got it as an ex-citizen of Czechoslovakia, now the Czech Republic. So it was very meaningful for me. We didn't talk about it with our kids. So when you get the notification, they say you're not allowed to talk about it unless it's released to the press, which was actually the same day when our family arrived from Melbourne. Carol and her family didn't know. So when we went to the airport, we talked about it. It was incredible surprise for the both of them. Yes? And then Suzi came from Melbourne for the investiture, which was in May. So I was very pleased for the recognition. Not sort of for the medal, you know, the actual medal, but for the-- for the recognition with. 
INT: Since coming to New Zealand, have you returned to Czechoslovakia? HP: Yes, yes. I returned, actually, three times, I think. But a couple of times was when George was still working. The firm send him overseas, and we managed to go. I remember one story which you might find quite interesting. That was the first time we visited Prague. I can't remember what year it was. George might remember. I [? forget. ?] You can check up on that. And we were staying in a hotel, and it was still under the communists. And my cousin in Prague said, don't talk in a hotel, because, you know, they use a microphone. Anyway, we didn't. And we used to go in a lift. You were never alone in the lift. And there was a man who was wearing the dark glasses. And I don't know if the glasses make it sort of feel insecure. I never talk in a lift. One day, we were in a lift, just him, George, and I. And he said to me, you have been in Auschwitz. And I said, yes. And he took the glasses off, and he said, I have been there as well. Why I'm wearing glasses, the German injured his-- he-- he had some injury. So that was a great experience that I'm-- I went later on. And the last time, we were in '95, in Prague.  INT: Have you ever returned to Theresienstadt? HP: On our first visit, we returned to Theresienstadt. I think I was in Theresienstadt twice. The first time, the visit was strange. I looked at the barracks, and I said, now, that was the barracks maybe where I have been. And there was a soldier. Because the soldier returned there again. And I said to George, I'm going to ask that soldier if it's the name of the barracks. And George laughed, and he said, you're silly. Don't go. But I went there, and I said, now, is that the Bodenbach? [NON-ENGLISH] He looked at me, and he said, lady, I was-- I was not even alive then. [LAUGHS] Yes? And for the second time, we went, and there was a big improvement. Recognition of Theresienstadt. And I think that-- also that George and I were instrumental for the exhibition of the drawings of Theresienstadt in New Zealand contributed to the QSM in-- in one way or the other. 
INT: Now that 50 years have passed since the Holocaust, is there some message you would like to leave to future generations? HP: Look, the message is difficult. And sometimes when I talk, I-- and I look at the kids. Because in New Zealand is a lot of multicultural society. So you can say that message should be actually on tolerance towards whatever, towards the race or religion or whatever. Because once-- especially if the economic conditions are not very good, that can create problems. So the-- the first message would be in tolerance. And tolerance, various, you can get through education. Yes?  INT: Thank you. HP: I like to introduce my dear family, the family who is just living in New Zealand. This is Carol, our daughter. This is Daniella, and this is Niki. I'm sorry that I cannot introduce our family who lives in Melbourne-- Suzi, their three children Daniel, Liza, and Mark. I like to say a few words. I don't know if our daughters realize that they actually didn't have their grandparents. And not only they didn't have their grandparent, but they didn't have any cousins and no relations at all. I think-- I think that Carol can reply to that because our friends, our good friend, so to speak, represented the family. CAROL CALKOEN: That's true what Mum's saying. I always felt that I was different to my friends at school because I didn't have a family. I didn't have grandparents, I didn't have cousins, second cousins. So I missed that whole family thing. A lot of Mum and Dad's friends were our family but were not relatives. I also felt that I was different because we had brown bread sandwiches [LAUGHS] at school. And some of the pronunciation of my English [LAUGHS] wasn't correct. So we did have that feeling or I did have that feeling of-- of being different. And I really didn't know much about the Holocaust when I was young. Mum and Dad didn't talk about it, and they didn't want to talk about it. And it was only sort of in the latter years that we found out gradually a bit more information about the Holocaust. And I remember going to shul on Remembrance Day and thinking-- I had a guilt feeling, why didn't I suffer like my parents suffered? And I still have that guilt feeling. But I'm really pleased that Mum and Dad are here to tell the story. And I have experienced Mum lecturing groups of children, and I'm very impressed with her stories that she tells the children. And she's the living memory of the Holocaust and proof that it was true. And-- so we-- I'm especially thankful that they're here to tell the story. And I'm especially thankful that the girls have got grandparents and family now. HP: I forgot to introduce my dear husband. [LAUGHTER] My dear husband on-- in couple of days, so 51 years of being married. I hope we celebrate our diamond wedding, 60 years. GEORGE PRESSBURG: Well, I'm-- HP: Don't be soft. GEORGE PRESSBURG: --very happy and proud that we managed to transfer and build up a new family here. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] Unfortunately, half the family is in, in Melbourne, half the family here. But still, I'm proud of them all. 
INT: Thank you. Can you tell me about this photograph? HP: This is my grandmother on my father's side. I-- she used to stay with us occasionally, and then she changed and stay with their daughter. But I remember her vividly. But of course, in those times, the grandmothers were different as they are today. I remember her sitting there, just listening to conversation, not, not being a very active grandmother [LAUGHS] compared to today.  INT: And your grandmother's name? HP: [NON-ENGLISH]. No, she was born [NON-ENGLISH] but Schwarz.  INT: And her first name? HP: Her first-- Anna. Now this is my grandfather on my mother's side. And I remember it as a very, very old man. He used to come occasionally. He lived in a small place not far away from my hometown called Rousínov-- R-O-U-S-I-N-O-V. And he used to come with a lady who was looking after him. But in that time, I sort of felt he was very, very old man.  INT: Can you tell me about this photograph? HP: That was my grandmother on my mother's side. But I never knew her. I, I never, never-- unfortunately I never knew her.  INT: And her name? HP: Though actually what I-- was Charlotte. And I think my second name is Charlotte. So it could have been after her. That's my late father, Jozef Svarc. I can't remember him like that. He must have been very young, because he have hair. I remember him without the hair, [LAUGHS] yes. 
INT: How did this photograph survive the war? HP: The photograph survived the war because I have a relation of mixed marriages. And I think that my parent must have given photo to them, and I got some back after the war, all the photographs, yes. That's my late mother, Ruzena Svarcova. Of course, that's a photo when was taken when she was very, very young. My mother was actually taller than my father, just came now to my mind, yes. My father and my mother, Jozef [NON-ENGLISH] Ruzena Svarc. I suppose it would have been their wedding photo. I really don't know, but I suppose so. That's my late brother, [? Karlik, ?] and myself. And I have to comment on that photo. I had a cousin in Prague who had a-- who was a photographer, a professional photographer. And her specialty were children and dogs. And that's one of, of her photos. She was a very, very good photographer. Unfortunately, she died in, in, in concentration camp, I think Auschwitz.  INT: And your cousin's name? HP: Cousin, Olga Freund. This photo is actually for me quite valuable because it reminds me on my home. This is the window where was my bedroom. [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] The people who work there, I can't remember, I can't remember the name. But this is my mother, this is my brother-- you can see he was a child-- my father. And this was my auntie who came from Vienna. And I just remember that looking at the photo. We had here the shop. And inside next to it, what you can't see was an arcade. And the shop window were always there as well, yes. And as you can see, Jozef Svarc written here. 
INT: And which was your window? HP: This was my window, that one.  INT: The window on the right. HP: Yes, the window on the right, yes. And they were the people who were working in the shop, three of them. Well, this is a very valuable photo for me because I can say it reminds me on my childhood. And the people who are standing here, on the right is my auntie who used to live in Vienna and most likely came from for a visit. Next to her is my mother. Here is my brother, the little boy, and behind him is my father.  INT: And your aunt's name? HP: Amalia, but I can't remember her second name.  INT: And what happened to your aunt? HP: Most likely didn't survive. Because at-- from my mother's side was very, very large family. And you know, I don't know who-- it was very, very hard to find out what's happened with them in spite of, you know, trying that after the war, yes. Well, this is my hometown, Rakovnik. And I think that somebody sent me that picture postcard long, long time ago and marked the place where we live. This is the place where we live. As a matter of interest, here next door is my very good friend with whom I went for the bicycle, had the accident. And I'm still in contact after the war with our own neighbor. We visited this place at my hometown last in '90-- '95, and those buildings are now protected. Of course now it looks completely different. This is a very, very old picture postcard. I think that's myself, Hanka. I think the photo would have been taken in 1938, I think in 1938. And next to it is my brother, [? Karlik. ?] And I think the photo would have been taken somehow after his bar mitzvah, because normally he, he wouldn't wear a suit and tie. And yes, he unfortunately died, don't know where and what, yeah. Well, that's the photograph of my first husband, Fricek. We got married on the 31st of October, 1941. And it's on the register office in Rakovnik. And as you can see, we both had to wear the Jewish star to our wedding. I mean the wedding was just a quick wedding on the register office and already under the condition of the Nuremberg laws. 
INT: How did you feel being identified by the star? HP: That time? Well, I, [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] I don't think that I had any feelings about it. It was just the thing what you had to do, and they were no, no feelings about it. There were other thing which were so important that you didn't think about it that you are wearing the star, yes. But I am very pleased that I managed to get the photo back because it's proof what was actually happening under the Nuremberg laws.  INT: And how did you get this photograph? HP: I must got it again back from my late auntie, where my parents gave some material for them to, to store, to keep. What was your question?  INT: Can you tell me about this photograph? HP: Yeah, that's my-- that's my father. I think that would have been taken maybe very close before we got married. But I don't-- I can't remember if it would be connection to our wedding at all. Because the, the condition were already so chaotic, though I think we just got married and that was all. I don't know if we have any special thing to eat or not, not very likely. [LAUGHS]  INT: How old was your father when this photograph was taken? HP: I was trying to work it out. I had the feeling that he would have been 50, 51. If my memory serves me right, I have the feeling that we got married or slowly connected to his 50th birthday. I think so, but I'm not sure about it. 
INT: What else did your parents give to your aunt for safekeeping? HP: Various material-- I mean, I think I got after the war back various glass, which is here, the crystal. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] I think the document, various documents, which I have that I mentioned before, the documents where the German took the shop, yes. And I really don't know-- I mean I got back-- oh, yes, my birth certificate, that I-- that we were a citizen of Czechoslovakia and those, those documents we got back.  INT: Can you tell me about this photograph? HP: I think that must have been taken already quite late, yes. And I'm very happy that I managed to get that photo back. Because I think that is the way maybe how I remember my mother.  INT: And your mother's name? HP: Ruzena, yeah. Well, next month this photo will be 51 years old. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] We married again at the register office. It's not-- it's actually was not the-- it was a, a registration office. But it was in a old palace. The wedding was actually nice, because all the surroundings-- the history of the palace. And was some music, quite well-known music played on record or something like that. But from our family was there my late uncle, his late, late wife, and my cousin and friends and the whole office where I was working. And from George, again, his cousin and his-- at that time, his fiance, all the friends what we manage to get after the war through our work. [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] We had-- after the wedding we went-- there was one delicatessen, so we had something nice there to eat. And I remember in the evening we went to a theater play. Forgot the name, I think the, the author of the play was French. You see, there were no honeymoon, there are no fuss, nothing. Because there was nothing. It was hard to get-- it was black market, it is very hard to get the things what to wear. So yes, that, that, that's, that was it. And I have to mention, which is quite funny thing, last year when we were at the 50-- the, I mean the golden wedding anniversary, George kept his tie, and he was wearing that tie. But then for the golden wedding, then I said you'll have to change it. That looks so horrible. But he just wanted to wear it and he kept his tie, yes. Well, in front of me is the QSM medal, which I received last year for the 1997 honors list. As I mentioned before, I was first of all very surprised, in one way very moved and very happy to, to receive this recognition in the form of a medal. Inside it says, 'Mrs. Pressburg has devoted much of her life to the education of people about Holocaust. She is active in the Wellington Jewish Community Center and was largely responsible to the establishment of the Holocaust Museum at the center.' I like to comment that was not only me who was responsible for the establishment but it was George who put a lot of work into, into, into this particular small exhibition. And I think that also I received the medal in recognition, then George and I managed to bring to New Zealand the drawings of the children of Theresienstadt exhibition, which is still in New Zealand and will be travel through New Zealand and will be still in a year for 1998. The investiture took place on the-- I think on the 21st of May, 1997. Is the Government House. The Governor-General gave the, gave the, gave is the wrong expression-- pin on me the-- [LAUGHS] the medal. And it was a very memorable occasion for us. And it was very, very nice that our daughter Suzi came especially for the occasion of-- for the occasion from Melbourne. 21st of May, 1997, Government House, The Governor-General. Next to him is Carol, our daughter. On the other side is Suzi, who came especially from Melbourne, George, and myself. You remember I mentioned in my talk, that's one of the first things which was confiscated was the radio. So the Czechoslovakia became occupied the 15th of March, 1939. As you can see here on-- already on the 23rd of September, they came and took the radio away. And as you can see here, it's all in two languages, Czech and German. 
INT: Next. HP: Wait until it's bigger, then I can see it.  INT: Can you tell me what this document is? HP: Let's wait a bit and I see it. [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] Actually, I didn't realize in my previous talk because I didn't have the document handy, that actually the shop was confiscated, one can call it, on the 29th March on 1940. This is the name of the institution, Oberlandrat, which is addressed to my father. And it's mentioned it's here [NON-ENGLISH], that's mean he own the place. As you can see, it's all in German. I'm not going to translate it. But it says here that's the shop actually was confiscated or he-- we would-- just a minute. [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] You see, there was a law established in 1939, yes, that's the shops should be actually taken away. And who was installed, it was the caretaker, and this is the name of the caretaker, Ferdinand Mohr. He used to live in Rakonitz, yes, and he was the caretaker of the shop. And, well, in this document it was given a time to sell the shop in one month's time. Of course, in one month's time, nobody would buy it. But the interesting thing, looking back to it, what would have happened with the money? If my parents would sell the shop, he never-- we wouldn't get the money in any case. So it's-- when one look at it, why did you do that-- why did they do that? Because they never would get the money for it. So we had to move out from the shop without no compensation. That's the application of a permit come to New Zealand. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] I like to mention that after the war, when I get back or was restituted back to me our house-- of course not the shop, because there was somebody else already-- we managed to sell the house. And for the money, we paid the passage to New Zealand. Because at that time, everything had to be paid in, in American dollar. And that was done by-- that was done, done with joint, yes. The interesting thing is-- was also getting the passport. You had to pay for it. And we lived in Brno, where George, as mentioned before, work in a textile Institute. We went to collect the passport. And we were sitting there, and we should have paid 25,000 Czech crowns. The person behind the desk look at us, crossed the 25,000 and doubled it for 50. He didn't ask if we have the money or not. So at the end, we paid for the passport 50,000. As you can, as you can imagine, before we applied for the permit, we has to go for medical examination, as-- and you can see here that I was healthy, mental health and physical health all right. Here you see the name of the person who gave us a permit to come to New Zealand, Fred Turnovsky, who died three years ago. And that's the place where we used to live. I didn't know them before the war, but it was George's friend before the war. Well, in front of me, the permit to enter New Zealand. As you can see, we lived in Brno, which was the capital of Moravia. I can see I was 27 year old. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] Now here was my husband was doing, George. He was employed in the textile industry. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] The reason why we came to New Zealand, as I mentioned before, we didn't wanted to stay Europe after the consequences during the war and wanted to start a new life in New Zealand, far away. [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] I knew-- I didn't know English, only Czech and German. And this is issued on the 29th of-- 29th of June, yes, and signed by Mr. Johnston. On the 18th of January, 1947, we celebrated our golden wedding. It was a very memorable and happy occasion. And our family came from Melbourne as well. In-- we have a photo taken, which might be surprising, in a Wilton Bush. Wilton Bush is not far away we are living, and we go there very often, with George, for a walk. So it become for us much more memorable than to take it in a studio photo. The day was very windy, very, very windy. And that the photographer didn't wanted to go, and we convinced him that we find a place in Wilton Bush where it's not going to be windy. And he was very satisfied that we found the place and liked the place where it was. Now as I mentioned before, our family came from Melbourne. So I start with them. This is in the front row is Suzi, our younger daughter, her husband Meir, myself, the youngest grandson, Mark; George, Carol, who lives in Wellington; her husband, Michael. That in the back is Daniella, daughter of Carol and Mike; Daniel, son of Suzi and Meir, Liza, daughter of Suzi and Meir in Melbourne; and Niki, daughter of Carol and Mike, living in Wellington. 
INT: Thank you.