INT: November 20, 1997. The survivor, Mrs. Lidia Vago, née Rosenfeld. The interviewer, Nina Elazar-Wolff. The interview takes place in Petach-Tikva, Israel, in the English language. November 20, 1997. The survivor, Mrs. Lidia Vago, née Rosenfeld. The interviewer, Nina Elazar-Wolff. The interview takes place in Petach-Tikva, Israel, in the English language. Good afternoon. LV: Good afternoon, Nina.  INT: I would like you to introduce yourself, please. LV: My name is Lidia Vago. I was born Rosenfeld. My mother was Dr. Harnick, Jolan. My father, Dr. Rosenfeld, Endre or Andre. Both were physicians.  INT: When were you born? LV: I was born on the 4th of November, 1924, which means that two weeks ago, I was 73.  INT: Mazel tov. LV: Thank you. I was born in the little town, Gheorgheni, in Transylvania.  INT: Can you spell it for me, please? LV: Yes. G-H-E-O-R-G-H-E-N-I, in the-- in the eastern Carpathian Mountains. It's in North Transylvania. [PAUSES FOR 6 SECONDS] My grandparents on my father's side were Katalin Rosenfeld, born [? Rosenberg. ?] [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] She was also from Northern Transylvania and died at the age of-- at the age of 80, in Budapest, in 1948. My grandfather, my father's father, Rosenfeld, Izidor, was also from Northern Transylvania, from the area of Satu Mare, both of them. He died at the age of 75, at home. And I say baruch hashem at home, on the 30th of November, 1939. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] My mother's mother was [? Harnik, ?] Iren. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] She was murdered in Auschwitz on the 1st of July, 1944, deported from Debrecen with the last transport, which, unfortunately, reached Auschwitz and not Strasshof, as all the previous transports from Debrecen. She was 66. She was divorced when the children were young. And about my grandfather, my mother's father, I can tell you only his name, Harnik, Simon, and the fact that he was from-- originally, the family was from Bukovina, and they settled in Transylvania around the second half of the 19th century. He married. He remarried, and he lived in Budapest with his second wife. I met him once or twice in the summer of 1942, and he took a liking to me. It was a very emotional meeting. That's all. He died in the '50s, in Budapest. 
INT: Do you have any sisters or brothers? LV: I have an only sister. I didn't have any other brothers or sisters. My sister's name is [? Anniko. ?] She was 70 years old April of this year, and we organized a big party in her honor. She lives in Holon, and I hope she will come at the end of the interview to be photographed with us.  INT: Can you-- can you tell me please a little bit about your father? What profession, what did he study? LV: Yes. My father was born in 1895, so that during the First World War, he-- he was already a student of medicine. He started his studies at the Budapest University, and he used to tell us stories, events, experiences from the First World War. There is one interesting episode which I might tell later, perhaps. After the First World War, in which he took an active part, but fortunately, not fighting, but treating wounded soldiers. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] He continued his studies at the Cluj University, which was already Romania at that time. And I think he graduated, he received his doctorate, in 1921. And it's very interesting how I-- I probably knew it then, but how I found it out a few weeks ago. A friend was in Gheorgheni and brought a book from Dr. [? Hermann ?] [? Lotze, ?] a physician who was about 15 years younger than my father. And he wrote me a letter that he had found some books of my father's from his medical library, books of Jews that were collected at the gymnasium. And the book he sent me bears the signature of my father, which says, Rosenfeld, Endre, without doctor, 1920. And in Hungarian, the expression says, [HUNGARIAN], which means a medical student just before his final examination to receive his doctorate degree. So I suppose that in 1921, he became a doctor. And he met my mother at the Cluj University, maybe already at Budapest, but I'm not sure. I know that they studied together. My mother also studied in Budapest and continued in Cluj. My mother specialized in dentistry. So in those times, and maybe even today, a doctoral student, a medical student, had to learn everything about anatomy, physiology, et cetera. And after that, he or she had to specialize in whatever. So my mother became a dentist, and they moved to Gheorgheni, because they had heard that the lumber industry was developing, and there was prosperity in that region. And there was a scarcity of physicians. There was no Jewish physician, and my parents were the only Jewish physicians there, in this small town, which numbered about 10,000 to 12,000 inhabitants. 
INT: And how many Jews? LV: At the end of-- or in the middle of 1944, just before the deportation, with the surrounding areas, the surrounding villages, there were about 950, which we know from a list of Jewish inhabitants which was written on a sign born at a memorial meeting in '47 to the Jewish cemetery, where a memorial sculpture, a memorial was erected, and this number is inscribed. We were 952. We returned 900-- 90 only.  INT: Which year did they-- LV: Approximately, which means 10% [INAUDIBLE].  INT: In which year did they move to Gheorgheni, your parents? LV: I suppose they moved to Gheorgheni in 1921 or '22, approximately.  INT: And how many Jews were there then? LV: And then there were very few families, maybe 20 or more. And then their number gradually increased. And from those years, from one year, which was accidentally-- or incidentally, my birth year, I have a very interesting document which I found a few years ago among the papers of my aunt [? Rozi, ?] my mother's sister, who adopted us after the war. It's an invitation, a poster, inviting the public to a football match. And it's in a humorous style, a [? bill ?] against [? bull, ?] a la American style. And what's interesting is the names of the participants, among them my father and my future uncle, who my aunt married after the war, after having lost her husband in Melk, in an Austrian camp there. He was together with my father. And Romanian names, people whom I remember, some of whom I remember. And Hungarian friends of my parents, Hungarians, Romanians, and Jews in 1924. And this is symbolic and representative of the peaceful coexistence in the '20s and even in the '30s between the nationalities in our town. Because the town had been a purely Hungarian town. The Hungarian [NON-ENGLISH], or secular. The area is called, in Hungarian, [NON-ENGLISH]. And we would say in English, secular land. These are, as a matter of fact, Hungarians. And they were supposed to have originated in the Huns. They were their ancestors, supposedly, allegedly. A very proud people. Their language is Hungarian, but with a certain dialect. Now, when the First World War ended, Romanian officials, functionaries, came to our town from the Regat, from Romania proper and from Moldova. And so in my time, after my birth, and in my childhood, there were three nationalities, Hungarians, Romanians, and Jews. And our parents had mostly Hungarian friends, because at the beginning, there were very few Jews, as I said. Later on, more Jews settled in the town, like for example, my husband's family. They came from Maramures, from Sighet. My husband was born in Sighet in 1922. And there was also a very developed lumber industry there. But as this industry started prospering in the '20s, they wanted the Jews, like my father's parents and the others, my mother-in-law's family, the [? Gottlieb ?] family, from [? Viseu, ?] from Maramures, came in order to-- to buy up forests and to-- to install saw mills and to busy themselves, to engage in the commerce with lumber. 
INT: For whom did you father work as a doctor? LV: Now, as a doctor, my father, for quite a few years, was a partner in the so-called sanatorium. That was a-- a hospital, a private hospital. And his partner, who founded the hospital, was Dr. [NON-ENGLISH]. His wife was Jewish. And it was a very good partnership. And I know that it gave a lot of satisfaction to my father. Besides, he was the social security physician of not only our town, but of the whole area, which comprised many villages, surrounding villages, most of which started with the name [HUNGARIAN], in Hungarian, [HUNGARIAN]. But in Romanian, they had different names without this first part, Gheorgheni. But in Hungarian, it was [HUNGARIAN]. And so on. And my father had also a private practice at home. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] First, at first, we lived in rented apartments. I was born in one of the two rented apartments in which we lived, on the square of the city, of the town of the city and then I don't know at what age we moved to another one, which I remember much better, because it was just opposite the primary school, the Romanian primary school. And I don't exactly remember in which year my parents started building our family house, a one-story family house, in which there were many rooms. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] I can figure out that we moved there around '35, 1935. And on the ground floor were our rooms, my parents' rooms, our room, a salon, dining room, living room, kitchen, et cetera. And also more rooms for the maid, servant. That's the way they were called. And we also had a cook, a girl who cleaned, was a cleaning girl, and a cook. And on the first floor, for there was just one floor, were my parents' consulting rooms. And there was a dental laboratory of my mother's. My father had three consulting rooms, of which one was a darkroom for [NON-ENGLISH]. And he ordered [NON-ENGLISH] apparatus, which looked exactly like those I am examining today, or anyone, in-- in hospitals and in clinics, big as a room. And my father, I'm afraid he was not quite aware in those years, in the '30s, how dangerous these X-rays are, because he often-- he-- I don't remember protecting him against those rays. And he-- he and I wanted me to become a physician. So he often called me to this [NON-ENGLISH] room and explained to me what would be seen on the screen. Now, looking back, it's terrible just to think of it. And-- 
INT: What about your mother? LV: Pardon?  INT: What about your mother? LV: Yes. Now, my mother had her own consulting room. Besides, she also had a dental laboratory. And she employed a dental technician, the first one whom I remember well, and he is alive in Gheorgheni, and he works as a dentist even today, at the age of 82, I think. We liked him very much. His name is [? Friedman ?] [? Emil. ?] And he worked with my mother for a few years. And then we had a very nice lady. She never married. And she finished her life not very young life, middle-aged life, in Auschwitz. [NON-ENGLISH]. I am mentioning her name so that her memory should be perpetuated. And she worked there in that laboratory at my parents' home, came in every day. Besides, my mother also employed a young girl, a so-called assistant. And there were several of them as the years passed by. And the last one I remember, a nice, young Jewish girl, [NON-ENGLISH], who is alive and well, here in Israel. And she was about 15 or 16 when she was deported with all the Jews of Gheorgheni, and fortunately, she returned.  INT: How would you place your family on the socioeconomical scale at those-- those times in Gheorgheni? LV: Yes. They were middle class. And I wouldn't say upper middle class, because they were not rich merchants. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] Middle class. And we were always-- I wouldn't say short of cash, but we didn't have a lot of money for-- for luxuries, because my parents saved every penny, so to say. First to build this family house, which cost a lot of money. Although I know that they earned quite well, not only from their patients from our town, but from the neighboring villages. My father used to go to patients with our motorcar which we had. I think it was one of the very few first motorcars, a Chevrolet, which he bought when my sister was born, in 1927. And it lasted till 1944, when the Hungarian authorities put their hand on it but couldn't start it. So they just brought it back to our garage. [LAUGHS] That was our revenge. And [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] I-- I am telling you why they-- they didn't have a lot of money. And we never traveled abroad besides Hungary, [INAUDIBLE] Hungary, because they also built a villa with 40 rooms and furnished it. 
INT: Where? LV: In-- yes, I'm going to tell you. At a fantastic health resort. It was exactly-- called Gyilkos tó in Hungarian and Lacu Rosu in Romanian. 25 kilometers from our town. Such a wonderful place that it was called, justifiably, Little Switzerland. And much more justifiably than the Little Switzerland in Haifa, [LAUGHS] where we used to make excursions when we lived in Haifa for 18 years. It was a wonderful place with a lake. And what was very special about it was that the lake was full of trees, of tree trunks, because the lake was created by a landslide that had happened about 150 years before our time. And some shepherds were allegedly killed, which is very [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] understandable or-- it-- it's not a legend. And that's why in Hungarian it's called Gyilkos tó, which means a murderous lake. So not the lake was murderous, but the landslide, the-- the mountain that slid down. So my parents built this villa [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] in which my uncle and aunt also had some part. I don't remember exactly whether a quarter or more than it. My mother's sister, [NON-ENGLISH], and her husband, Dr. [NON-ENGLISH], was also a physician. Because they wanted to assure their comfortable livelihood for old age. Because pensions were uncertain. And how much pension would my father get after his work as a Social Security doctor, and my mother only worked as a private dentist. Although I may say, I don't remember exactly. She may have also worked for the Social Security institution, but I don't remember that. And besides, my sister had never planned to go on studying at the university, as I always did. Because starting from elementary school, I was always the first pupil, or let's say if there were two first pupils, I was one of the two or three. 
INT: We'll talk about your education a little bit later. LV: Yes. But I wanted to underline here, to stress, that my sister did not want to learn. She was not very eager to go on studying. But she had a special talent for cooking and baking. And my parents planned to send her to Switzerland to a hotel school. You know, that was a la mode. And she would become the directress of this villa. [SIGHS] Now--  INT: Was your family religious? LV: If you will permit me, I would like also to tell something about my grandparents which I omitted at the-- the very beginning, and then I will tell about my primary school and my high school education. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] My mother's mother, [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] [? Harnik ?] Iren, was born on an estate near Debrecen, a big city in Hungary. And that estate was called [NON-ENGLISH]. And the tenant of the estate was my great-grandfather, [NON-ENGLISH] [? Samuel, ?] [? Samuel ?] [NON-ENGLISH]. And my great-grandmother was [NON-ENGLISH], Lidia, and I received her name. Besides me, two other second cousins received this name. But I was the only one who didn't have another name. Although I had a Jewish name, which my grandmother told me about, Libe-Chaya, but that was naturally not used. Now, my two second cousins, whom I would like to remember here, who were also Lidia, but had an additional name. One was [NON-ENGLISH], [NON-ENGLISH]. She was pregnant in 1944. She lived in Cluj, Kolozsvar, in Hungarian times, and was deported and gassed upon arrival. My other second cousin, from Debrecen, [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] was [NON-ENGLISH]. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] My mother and my aunt [? Rozi, ?] who I think I've mentioned already was our adoptive mother-- and she was our mother and my children's grandmother for 40 years, exactly 40 years-- used to tell me that at Seder tables, at [NON-ENGLISH], at that-- on that estate, there were 28 persons. It would be hard for me to figure out who the 28 were, but I could do it. Anyhow, my grandmother, [NON-ENGLISH] Iren, had five sisters-- she was the sixth one-- and one brother, [NON-ENGLISH]. I also want to mention this necklace, which belonged to my great-grandmother Lidia. And I was told that it was very, very long. It was a chain, a watch chain. And they cut it up for different daughters. I don't know who got these, the-- the rest of-- of this chain. But I have reason for mentioning it. Before the deportation, the Jews had to hand in their valuables to the National Bank. And my parents, like all the other Jews, prepared a little parcel with some jewelry. My mother didn't wear any jewelry, so she didn't have a lot of jewelry. But we put this necklace into that small packet, and I don't know how many grams of dentists' gold, dental gold, and a small ring, and my father's wedding ring. I don't remember what other pieces made of gold, probably. And when we came back after the war, to our great surprise, we learned that the Hungarians didn't have time to have all these parcels deposited at the bank in [NON-ENGLISH], transferred to the Central National Bank in Budapest. So the Jews who returned, or their heirs, got back these small parcels. That's how I have my necklace. 
INT: Let's go back to your family. LV: Yes.  INT: My question is was your family religious. LV: No. My parents were 100% secular, so secular that they even ate pork. [NON-ENGLISH]. But I don't have to tell lies, do I?  INT: We've finished tape number one, here. LV: OK.  INT: [INAUDIBLE].  INT: --a religious Jewish [? scale. ?] You mentioned that your home was not a religious one. LV: No.  INT: Could you please describe ceremonies, or holidays in your home? LV: Not in my home-- in the home of my grandparents.  INT: Mm-hmm. LV: When my parents settled in Gheorgheni, they brought my father's parents with them. And for some years, my grandfather also worked in one of those lumber yards as a-- as a clerk-- the largest such lumber yard and saw mill was the Foresta. And my grandparents were religious, observant, but not ultra-Orthodox. My grandfather prayed regularly. He had a prayer shawl and tefillin. And they had a kosher home. They were very tolerant, because I can't remember a single occasion when they made any remark to my parents about the fact that we were not religious, and we-- my-- my parents did not have a kosher home. But for their sake, my father and my mother both had their permanent seats in the synagogue. And I don't think my grandmother ever went to the synagogue, besides the high holidays, and Passover, and whenever there was [NON-ENGLISH]-- that's what they called these-- [? oh, ?] you [? score ?] the prayers for the dead. But my grandfather attended prayers regularly, fairly regularly-- not every day, probably. No, not every day. And my parents also spent Yom Kippur at the synagogue, and my mother and my grandmother had prayer books in Hungarian translation, which were called [NON-ENGLISH]. That was the name of the Hungarian prayer book. And we were invited to my grandparents, who lived in a rented apartment, [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] on Rosh Hashanah Eve. Also Yom Kippar, and Passover. And of course, our favorite holiday was Passover, with all the ceremonies. And it was my grandfather's privilege to prepare the charoset. And I don't have to tell you all the preparations, but what sticks in my memory is the kashering of some of the dishes, because now, thinking back, I understand that they didn't have a change for all the dishes. Maybe not for the cutlery. So they made a fire, and even dug a hole-- I don't know why-- in the yard, and they boiled water in a cauldron, et cetera, et cetera. They had all the dishes and the cutlery kashered. And before Passover, my grandmother prepared for that-- prepared that [NON-ENGLISH] from beet-- we called it [HUNGARIAN] it's borscht, but we call it in Hungarian [HUNGARIAN]. And I want some of these words to be remembered on my cassette. 
INT: Any favorite dish that you remember? LV: It's the [NON-ENGLISH] soup, naturally, which we adored. And it had a special taste, which I'm trying to imitate. And it's the taste of ginger-- which my grandmother always put in the [NON-ENGLISH]. And I'm doing the same.  INT: Do you remember any recipes from home? LV: No, because I was a lousy cook. I was not interested in cooking and baking, so I didn't know any recipes. It was not one of my hobbies. But I liked everything that grandmother prepared. And she even made bread, but she made the dough, and all kinds of shapes for us children. But she sent the dough with a maid to the bakery. But one have-- one has memories of these preparations.  INT: If your home was not religious, can you describe, please, how did you identify with Judaism? LV: Yes. It was taken for granted that we-- we were Jews. And never for one moment did my parents even tend to convert-- not even in the most difficult times. And I'm not-- I don't mean when the Germans entered, because there was no time for anything then, from the 19th of March, '44. But when the Hungarians entered, and it could be felt that horrible times are ahead of us. And we heard and-- about many-- not that many, several-- families, even in our town, who converted. They never thought of it. We were subscribed to the which is a very high level Hungarian Jewish journal, a monthly, which appeared in Budapest. And its editor was Patai József. His son, Professor Raphael Patai, from the Hebrew University, passed away, I think, one or two years ago. Besides, there was a Hungarian Jewish daily, the which is continuing to this day here in Israel. We were subscribed to that newspaper, as well. Besides, we had novels in Hungarian translation, or in German, because our library was made up of Hungarian and German books-- books by German Jewish writers, or Hungarian Jewish writers, poets. Now, I mean the-- the books of Stefan [? Zweig ?] and-- and Werfel, Franz Werfel, and several others. My mother was in the [? Vizo, ?] And besides, all-- there was also a so-called [HUNGARIAN]-- the women's organization. It's a simple word, in Hungarian, two words. 'Noi' means women, and [HUNGARIAN], an organization, which was a social organization that helped needy families, and had culture in-- organized cultural evenings, et cetera. But in the [? Vito ?] organization, [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] participated mostly the middle class women. Because in our town, there was a Jewish proletariat. And all of them, without exception, lived around those lumber yards and sawmills, and there was also a factory for crates-- wooden crates, that belonged to the [? Horbat ?] family. And these Jewish families were simple workers there, and they were needy families. And I knew, even then, and now heard from some of our friends, that my parents treated them naturally without requesting-- without asking for any payment, without fees, or no fees. Similarly, I heard it the day before yesterday, from a friend who is the head of our Landsmannschaft, whose name was then [? Herskovic ?] Bernard, and now he is [NON-ENGLISH]-- [NON-ENGLISH], in [NON-ENGLISH]. And he was the grandson of the ritual slaughterer, of the schochet, that my parents also treated all the personnel, all the staff of the Jewish community. Now, in this respect, when I say Jewish community, I don't mean the Jewish community of the town, but the religious community. But in Hungarian, the word [HUNGARIAN] is used, meaning the staff working in the synagogue, around the synagogue. You understand? All the clerks, all of the shamash, the rabbi, the-- ritual slaughterer, the cantor, all of them. And I called them the other day, and asked him to remind me of some events connected with Jewish life, which I may have forgotten, but that are connected maybe with me, and I don't remember them. So he reminded me of what I'm-- I have just told you about my father, and he said, your father was a pillar of the Jewish community in [NON-ENGLISH]. And there was a hakhsharot. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] It belonged to the [? drawer. ?] And they were leftists. And they stayed in those houses where these proletarians stayed. And they worked in these factories, and prepared for the aliyah. Now, every [NON-ENGLISH] Shabbat, Saturday evening, there were cultural evenings organized by [? Horvat ?] [? Lili, ?] the wife of the owner of the crate factory. And she was an illegal communist. And these cultural evenings had a very strange combination of-- not strange combination, as a matter of fact-- Zionist socialism. And at some of these cultural evenings, I used to recite poems. And I also remember having read-- performed, but in reading, novels [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] in general about the needy people who get organized, which means leftist-- 
INT: Have you-- LV: --ideology. Now--  INT: Have you been, yourself, also a member of a youth movement? LV: Yes, as a child. There was a youth movement-- the name of which was, in Hungarian, we said, [HUNGARIAN]-- [HUNGARIAN]. But it was Habonim--  INT: Mm-hmm. LV: But that's how I remember it, [HUNGARIAN]. And our leader-- we had two leaders-- a young lady, maybe seven, eight years older than myself, [NON-ENGLISH]. And [NON-ENGLISH], the young man. I don't remember his first name. And they made-- made Zionist propaganda to us-- now propaganda in the very best sense, of course. We read the Bible-- they told us Bible stories, and they told us about Palestine, about the [NON-ENGLISH], kibbutzim. I don't remember kibbutzim. I remember the word [NON-ENGLISH]. So-- and about Yemenites, Hungarian, they said, [? Yemenite ?] is the way we came to Israel. We didn't know exactly what the-- who the Temanim were, so we understood that they were identical with our legendary Yemenites. And we saw their pictures. And besides our Habonim, and these other cultural evenings, Bernard, whom I mentioned, the head of our Landsmannschaft, used to organize Shabbatot with a very, very outspoken Zionist tendency, and without the socialist tinge in it. And I remember Hanukkah evenings-- Hanukkah, Purim. The children from these proletarian families used to come to our houses dressed up at Purim. And of course, they received lots of presents, sweets and money too. So there was a prosperous Jewish life, with a beautiful synagogue, which was built in 1927. And-- 
INT: Do you remember the name of the rabbi? LV: Yes, first we had Rabbi [? Krauss, ?] whom I remember from my childhood. He was a-- a highly intelligent and a real learned man-- a middle-aged learned man-- who [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] enjoyed the real respect in the whole area, and-- and was considered a very erudite person, and a highly educated person. And when he left-- I don't remember why-- in-- if I'm not mistaken, in '38, a young rabbi came to our town, [? Moshe ?] [? Freund, ?] the son of the rabbi from Sasregen. He married the daughter of a rabbi from Hungary, and they had, I think, three very sweet little children. They were deported, and they perished-- even the rabbi. I say 'even,' because naturally the Rebbetzin went to the gas with the little children. But the rabbi did not return, either. And fate willed it that his brother, the young rabbi, who returned from Auschwitz, became the rabbi in Sasregen, where the ghetto was. And my father-in-law, who had returned from Dachau, from Feldafing, from the DP camp, invited him to celebrate our wedding in [? Gheorgheni, ?] on the 21st of October, '45.  INT: Did you have any hobbies or activities? LV: Yes, I loved to collect everything. And unfortunately, that stayed with me. Now, I am saying it smilingly, but as I am talking about myself, I know now that it's a disorder. And it's called obsessive compulsive disorder-- and it's hoarding in my case, because it can be manifested in different ways. Now hoarding-- not riches, not money, but especially papers. Which means old letters, whoever wrote them. I never throw them away. And so I even found some very interesting letters and papers. And-- 
INT: What was your hobbies in this [? turn? ?] LV: --then also newspapers-- interesting newspapers, many articles from the [NON-ENGLISH], because we were subscribed to that too. That was a Hungarian newspaper from Russia, not Jewish. And picture postcards, the basis of which collection-- the base of which collection was my mother's very rich collection of artistic reproductions on postcards. And when she was a young girl, she used to receive them from her friends, and from especially her boyfriend, and another friend, Dr. [? Balaj ?] [? Loti, ?] and another friend. And I liked reading those postcards.  INT: You mentioned before that you were-- LV: From the 19-- from-- from the Second World War, 1916, something. My mother was born in '98, on the 16th of February, '98. So--  INT: You mentioned before that you were reciting. Was it a hobby? LV: Yes, now that was my hobby-- drama, acting and reciting. And I developed this really as an art in our Jewish school, in our Jewish high school, in Kolozsvár. But first let me say a few words about my elementary school, because it's also interesting, as concerns the peaceful coexistence of the three nationalities. Jewish children had to go to the Romanian state school-- primary school. The Hungarian population also had denominational religious schools, because there were Catholics and Protestants in our town. So they had also their own primary schools. But in that state primary school, there were Romanian children, Hungarian children-- whoever wanted to go there-- and Jewish children. But all the Jews went to that school. There was no discrimination whatsoever. And we were happy there. I'm talking about the years between '31 and '35, because elementary school started at the age of seven. And I want to give two examples. I think both-- both events were in-- were-- were related to the fourth class, which was fourth grade, in '34, '35. There was a performance-- I don't remember on what occasion, but there was a national Romanian holiday-- it was either [NON-ENGLISH] Marii-- 10th of May-- the [INAUDIBLE] of the Romanian royal family, or the unification of the principalities. And there was a child, a pupil, for every province of Romania. And I played Bessarabia. Now in '35 it belonged to Romania. But in 1940 the Soviet Union invaded Bessarabia and annexed it to the Soviet Union. So it was quite natural that the Jewish children participated in these plays. It was a kind of a drama acted out. And I had a tricolor ribbon here-- I remember it. Tricolor mean the three colors of the Romanian flag-- red, yellow, and blue. And of course, I had to recite what they were-- my part was, which I don't remember. The other event, which is even more significant and very interesting is contest-- a composition contest, a national composition contest-- organized for selected-- oh, I don't like the word 'selected'-- for pupils whom their teachers recommended from all over Romania. And our teacher came with us to Brasov. The contest was organized in Brasov. And she took with her-- and we lived in a hotel-- very interesting memories from that, I don't know, a week or three or four days. [NON-ENGLISH] [? Adam, ?] a Jew; Rosenfeld [? Lidia, ?] a Jewess; [NON-ENGLISH], a Hungarian girl; and [NON-ENGLISH], a Romanian boy-- only one Romanian boy. And the title of the composition that we had to write was, in Romanian-- [SPEAKING ROMANIAN]. 'What is the homeland for me, and what do I have to do for it?' And all of us, to the pride of our class teacher-- [NON-ENGLISH], was her name-- received a prize. I received a [? mentionare ?] onorabila, which meant [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] an honorable decoration, something like that, and a diploma-- which was put on the wall, hung up on the wall in my room. And [NON-ENGLISH] [? Adam ?] received even a higher prize. I don't remember if it was the first or the second. So you can imagine what it meant for us to be not only equal citizens in '35, but even to be recommended to participate in such a contest with such a composition. 
INT: Which was the-- LV: A patriotic subject.  INT: Which was the next school you went to-- LV: Yes.  INT: --once you finished in the primary school? LV: For three years, in the first, second, and third gymnasium classes-- that's what it's called, because the children who-- the pupils who went on to secondary school in our town could only be private pupils, and could pass-- would sit for the examinations and hopefully pass them, in the boys' [NON-ENGLISH], lyceum, or gymnasium. Those who were-- who didn't go on, especially the poorer stratum, learned-- went on for seven classes of elementary school, in that school where we started and learned only four classes. Now, some teachers from the boys' gymnasiums-- Sfantul Nicolae-- Saint Nicholas-- was the name of our gymnasium, a very impressive gymnasium. And I think it really had a-- a high level-- organized a private school for these girl-- Romanian, Hungarian, and Jewish girls, who had to sit for the examination. And it was a very pleasant school, in a rented-- there were some shops-- shop premises which they rented in town. And we had a time table, like every other school, and we learned about four or five hours a day. And that went on for three years. What's interesting to note is-- and it fits into the picture which I just drew for you, in connection with the peaceful coexistence-- something really exaggerated and unbelievable. Our director, the director of this small school, who was a teacher-- history teacher at the gymnasium-- was [? Josef ?] [? Duma. ?] And his wife also taught there, and several other teachers. [? Duma ?] was a Legionnaire leader. Legionnaire was the Iron Guard-- the fascist party, one of the two big fascist parties of Romania. And he was the patient-- he and his wife, they were the patients of my parents. They had a white-- a little white dog, whom they called Trotsky. [LAUGHS] And they liked us. And our parents were very satisfied with this arrangement, that this Legionnaire leader, whose ideology was rabid antisemitism ideology. But I say only ideology, because there, in our area, they didn't beat up anyone. So that's how it went on. And a very interesting episode. In the summer of '37, this [? Josef ?] [? Duma ?] organized an excursion to the Black Sea-- first Bucharest, and the Black Sea, and Galati, and some other parts of the country. And my parents, and the parents of our friends, Bela, my husband, was one of the pupils at the gymnasium as a boy. And [? Edith, ?] his sister, who learned with me at this private school-- took part in this excursion, and our parents let us with them. And the funniest thing is, which I remember with horror now, that when we stayed in a tent at the seaside in [NON-ENGLISH], Legionnaire boys guarded the tent. Whether they knew or not that there was some Jewish children whom they guarded there, I don't know. [LAUGHS] 
INT: What was your next school? LV: A funny episode, yes.  INT: What year did you finish this little school? LV: That was in '38. Now, '38 and '39, [? Duma ?] and his school did not exist any longer, [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] because, if I'm not mistaken, it was towards the end of '38 that there was an anti-Legionnaire campaign on the part of the king and of the government. And he was shot-- allegedly while he tried to escape, after having been in prison. That what they told. Then we went on learning with a private teacher, a very nice Jewish girl who had already matriculated. You know, we had-- she had already passed her matriculation several years before. And she busied herself giving private lessons. And we went to Targu Mures, to the uniria, [ROMANIAN] uniria. That was the name of the gymnasium, to be-- to-- to be examined there, instead of the-- the boys' school in Gheorgheni.  INT: Where is Targu Mures? LV: Targu Mures is the biggest city, at a distance of about three hours by train, three or four hours by train. The largest city in [INAUDIBLE]. Targu Mures in-- and in Hungarian it's Marosvásárhely. Now, I have to-- to tell you that we knew about the political events going on in the world.  INT: Can you wait a minute? We have to finish tape number two and-- LV: Yes.  INT: --we'll go on in the next tape. LV: Yes. 
INT: What was your mother tongue? What language did you speak at home? LV: Yes. In my early childhood, we spoke two languages at home-- Hungarian and German. We had three Frauleins-- governesses. You have to know that in Romania, in Transylvania, there were Saxon and Schwaben-- which were German tribes that settled there in the 12th century, and they kept their language and culture. And it was very important for my parents to have us learn German, and to learn also about German culture. So I remember even their names, and from which villages they came.  INT: Come on. LV: [NON-ENGLISH] came from Medias; [NON-ENGLISH] from Sighisoara; and the last one, [? Aranka ?] [? Lessel. ?] We didn't like [? Aranka, ?] and we called her [? Hilde, ?] because [? Aranka ?] was a Hungarian name. So it's also significant that some of these Germans were partly Magyarized-- Magyarized which means [INAUDIBLE] Hungarianized. And some of them had the Hungarian names. And the second one was very important for us, because [NON-ENGLISH] was born in Pennsylvania in the United States, when her parents emigrated to the United States from Transylvania. And they came back. So she had two mother tongues-- German and English. And that was good for us, because she parallelly taught us German and English. And I remember Red Riding Hood, and Rotkappchen, which she taught us parallelly. So the Fraulein had a room upstairs.  INT: Till what year did they stay with you? LV: I'll tell you exactly. They were very nice, three of them. And I don't know what happened to-- with them after the war. And then we thought, how come that-- not one of them is interested in knowing who is alive from our family. But then we understood that they were evicted from their homes-- the Germans, this-- most of-- hundreds of thousands of Schwabs and then Saxon, and they were deported to Russia, et cetera, et cetera. And they had their own troubles after the war. Why? Because most of them were Volksdeutsche-- and they were Nazi Volksdeutsche, most of them. So-- 
INT: Till what year did they stay? LV: Oh, yes, yes-- in December '37, a-- the first fascist government came to power in Romania. It was the Goga-Cuza government. These are two names. And the-- the Jews were not allowed to-- to have Christian employees. So we had to send home the maids and the Fraulein. We could employ only Jews. And we also had to-- to move with the lodgings-- with our lodgings-- upstairs, in cramped circumstances-- because somebody-- I don't remember who-- some high official wanted to move into our ground floor-- our ground floor. So that lasted for some months. And this government, fortunately, was very short-lived. But it decreed several anti-Jewish laws. Now, I couldn't tell you which of these laws remained valid after the government failed, but I think that none of them. Because after this government fell, and the so-called royal dictatorship came to power again-- King Carol II-- everything was OK. But the question was in connection with the two Frauleins. Of course, we didn't need Frauleins any longer-- governesses any longer. At that time, I was already nearly 14 years old. So that was that. But in connection with these languages, I want to stress that my parents also wanted us to learn French. So that-- there was a so-called [? Madi-- ?] we called her [? Madi-- ?] Madame. Schindler was her name, [? Emma ?] Schindler. And she was from Basel. And in 1977, I spent a day with my husband in Basel, and I looked through the phone book because I wanted to find her relatives and tell them about our [? Madi, ?] how we loved her. But the phone book was full of Schindlers-- I think there were about 100 Schindlers. I wonder whether they were related to the famous Schindler. 
INT: What did you know at the time, or felt, about the rise of Nazism in '33 in Germany? LV: I don't remember '33--  INT: '33 and onwards. LV: Yes, yes, yes, I know-- I know that Hitler came to power. So I couldn't pinpoint the date when we started-- we children, I mean, started being aware of what's-- what's happening in Germany. But I have some concrete memories--  INT: Is were-- is what? LV: I have a terrible dream, which accompanies me to this day, I remember it. Our family of four are standing somewhere, [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] [SIGHS] and we are being executed. A squad is standing in front of us, and they execute us. I don't know how I remained alive-- I survived-- but I remember that it happened. And it was in my dream, and I can never, never forget this dream, as we are standing-- standing, the four of us, and waiting for the execution. I was a collector of stamps. I don't know whether I mentioned it. I said, I have this disorder of collecting. And I was a serious collector of stamps-- serious, you know how children, how serious they are. I exchanged stamps with Bela-- who was two years-- my husband, who was two years older than I was. And in '35, I remember having got a German stamp with a picture of a mother and a baby. I've never seen that stamp since, but I remember it. And there was an inscription on the stamp-- I-- the stamp was 'Die Saar [GERMAN]'-- 'the Saar returns home.' And it was the area called the Saar area between France and Germany. And there was a plebiscite in 1935, because the majority of the population was German, and they voted for Germany. And that area-- a very rich area in, I think, iron ore, if I remember well-- anyhow, the mining-- the mining industry; it is, to this day, very developed there-- returned to Germany. And my parents explained to me-- sometimes one remembers such things from childhood in connection with a stamp-- that Hitler's expansionism is on this stamp. He wants to conquer the world. And I don't know whether they said it's the first step, but I remember that. Then-- 
INT: When did you really first felt the influence of the rise of the Nazism? LV: Not yet. I want to tell you something emotional. My father's 43rd birthday was on the 29th of September, '38-- because he was born in '95-- 1895. And on that day, was the Munich conference, and the dismemberment of Czechoslovakia. And I wrote a poem to my father. And I was only 14 years old in '38. And in very rudimentary translation, it sounded like this-- [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]--  INT: Just tell us what was it about. LV: Yes, yes-- the fate, the destiny of the world will be determined on this day-- I wrote it a few days before, the 30-- the 29th, or maybe one day before it-- the fate or the destiny of the world will be decided on this day. And my dear father came to this world on this day, 45 years ago, this day-- something like that. Which means that we children were also aware of the historic significance of that day, because our parents explained it to us. Otherwise we couldn't have known. And no-- not otherwise we couldn't have known, because I was reading the newspapers. At the age of 14 one reads newspapers. And as I told you, we were subscribed to two dailies-- the [NON-ENGLISH] brasserie and the [NON-ENGLISH]. So--  INT: When-- LV: --we knew what was happening in the world. And my parents and their friends were talking politics all the time. So we overheard it. 
INT: When did you first experience antisemitism? LV: It was only-- I can't remember anything during the Romanian era. It started only after the annexation of Northern Transylvania to Hungary, which occurred at the very beginning of September 1940, after the so-called Vienna Diktat. It was Hitler and Mussolini's diktat. Because at that times, it seems Hungary was more favorable to Germany than Romania. And there were negotiations at [NON-ENGLISH], which ended in this diktat. And it ended in our being annexed to Hungary, which had, as a result, that the lot of Northern Transylvania Jewry were thrown in with the lot of Hungarian Jewry proper. At that time, I must mention, our difficulties-- family difficulties-- because my grandfather died in November '39, on the 30th of November, '39. And approximately one week after his death, my father was called to the Romanian army on reserve duty. And I want to mention, as a continuation to what I told you about the non-discrimination against Jews, with the exception of those few months, and some partial-- some events that took place here and there-- for example, while my father was a student, there were fascist-- Romanian fascists who beat up the Jewish students. And my uncle was very severely beaten up in '22-- '21 or '22. But when my father was called up for reserve duty in Moldova, in the town-- in the village [NON-ENGLISH], he was an officer-- a Romanian officer. And I have his picture, one picture, in which he sits at a table, at a desk, with another officer, a Romanian officer, working at some papers. And he has his uniform, and his degree-- his rank. And his officer friends, or comrades, liked him very much, and called him Dr. Bácsi. 'Bácsi' in Hungarian means 'uncle.' It's not a Romanian word, but they knew that my father came from Transylvania, so they were so kind to him that they called him Dr. Bácsi. 
INT: Let's go back to you. LV: Yes.  INT: What-- what do you remember, if at all-- or how did influence, any influence on your life, the 1st of September, '39? LV: Yes, it didn't influence my life at all. But there was a very funny episode. I thought I was a big girl, and I was a serious girl, but I wasn't. Because on that day, I went to my friend, Rosenfeld [? Mogdi, ?] no relative-- with the same name, [? Mogdi, ?] who had been my friend since kindergarten, we went together to-- to the Romanian kindergarten.  INT: Mm-hmm. LV: So we spoke three languages parallelly, simultaneously, even at that age-- you see. I didn't mention that we went to Romanian kindergarten, so Hungarian, Romanian, German. I went to Rosenfeld [? Mogdi ?] because she had a bicycle and I didn't, yet. [? Well, ?] my parents bought us bicycles later. And she taught me how to ride a bicycle. But we also heard the radio-- her parents were listening to the radio. So we heard about the events that were going on. But regrettably, I might be mistaken, because I remember that it was a Sunday. And I am not able to figure out whether that-- that Sunday was the 1st, or already the 3rd of September, because at 6 o'clock in the evening on the 3rd of September was the expiration of the ultimatum by Great Britain and France to Germany to withdraw from Poland. And I think it was that event, the ultimatum on that Sunday-- because I remember that it was a Sunday. I was very happy that [? Mogdi ?] taught me how to ride on her bicycle. I came home, and I was full of joy. And I said, I know how to ride a bicycle! And my parents looked at me with consternation. Don't you know that the Second World War has broken out? Oh, I forgot! That were exactly my words. That's how I remember that day. But I think we children could not grasp the significance of the day. And of course, not that it was the beginning of our end. I don't even know how much our parents could be conscious in those first days that it was-- it meant our end. But very shortly after that, when rumors started spreading, and naturally reaching even Romania then, in '39, they-- they understood what was going on. But it was already impossible to escape. They couldn't. It wasn't possible. 
INT: Did they try? LV: No, they didn't even try. But we did not hear of any acquaintances of ours who-- who may have tried to emigrate. And in the good old times, why should they have emigrated? So the writing was on the wall all the time, let's say since '33. But our family house was just rising up, then the villa. [SIGHS] It's horrible-- they didn't contemplate that any longer. Oh, I just want to say one sentence in connection with your question about Jewish consciousness. The [NON-ENGLISH], that money box was in every Jewish house. And we knew what it was, we knew for what purpose. We put in-- from our pocket money, as well. So our Jewish awareness, consciousness, was also developed through our knowledge of buying land in Eretz Israel.  INT: When was the 'big change,' in inverted commas, in your life? LV: Not in inverted commas. It was a big change, because change can be for-- for the good and for the bad. And we did not feel to what extent it was evil for us, because exactly in 1940, as I was telling you, that my father was not at home. And that was already nearly one year, or let's say 10 months after he had been called up, and he hadn't been released from the army yet. In those days, exactly in those September days, in Romania, a fascist government came to power. And the Jews were being persecuted already. And we were in Romania, and in Hungary, like rats or mice on a sinking ship. And we felt it in our closest family, because my father's younger brother lived in Bucharest with his wife. His older brother, Vili-- Vilmos-- lived in Budapest. And [? Lotsi, ?] the younger brother, from Bucharest, came from his wife, in those first days of September, when it was still possible for people who wanted to-- to move from one country to the other, it was that period of transition when the Hungarian administration hadn't settled in yet, and the Romanian administration hadn't quite left yet, but they were preparing to leave. And then suddenly, because there was no correspondence and no telephone in Bucharest, suddenly my uncle appeared. But after a few weeks, the Hungarian authorities simply deported them-- and thousands of Jews who had somehow infiltrated into Transylvania in those critical days. They deported them-- in our case, it was through the-- through [NON-ENGLISH], [NON-ENGLISH], which was near the [NON-ENGLISH], this health resort place. And from there, that was a pass-- the [NON-ENGLISH] pass, [NON-ENGLISH], from there, back to Romania. So they were horrified. It turned out that they remained alive, because from Romania proper-- and why I say Romania proper, because the exception was Bessarabia and Bukovina, from Romania proper, and from Southern Transylvania, the Jews were not deported to Auschwitz, nor to Transnistria. Which did not disturb the Antonescu regime to eliminate about 250,000 Jews in Bessarabia and Bukovina, in Transnistria. So my uncle survived in Bucharest. 
INT: Let's go back to you. LV: Yes. Now, the first law, which we felt was directed against children, against pupils-- schools were not ready to accept, to register Jewish pupils. Bela, who had finished the seventh class, gymnasium class in Gheorgheni, in that Sfantul Nicolae-- [INAUDIBLE] Sfantul Nicolae-- would not go on to the eighth class, which started already under Hungarian regime. So what to do? I, who had finished the fifth class as a private pupil, as I told you, with my examinations in Targu Mures, couldn't go on to the sixth grade. And so my sister, too. My sister was lucky, because there was a convent school-- a Catholic convent school-- in our town, near the Catholic church, with nuns. They were the patients of my parents'. And not only my sister was accepted, but some other Jewish girls, as well, but only up to the fourth class, because there were no more classes than four classes there at that time. So she could go on at home. But there was a numerus clausus law, which means that the number of pupils in Hungarian high schools, secondary schools, was limited to a bare minimum. It was nearly numerus nullus, but not 100%. I wouldn't say that. Because some of my friends went on in Hungarian schools in Kolozsvár. But let's say, one or two pupils in a class of about 35, 40. To our luck and happiness, [PAUSES FOR 5 SECONDS] Jewish secondary school gymnasium was opened in Kolozsvár, which was the continuation of the Tarbut school that used to function in Romanian times. And you know that the name Tarbut is a fantastic name all over Eastern Europe, in Poland, and in other countries. Where Hebrew was taught, Jewish culture, literature, history-- everything connected with Judaism. 
INT: So how was your school-- LV: And the best teachers who were thrown out from the best schools of Hungary were candidates as teachers in that new school that was founded by Antal Márk, the famous mathematician, who became the director; and also the Neolog Rabbi of Cluj, who was Moshe-- Dr. Moshe Weinberger. And of course, the well-to-do Jews of Kolozsvár, the leaders of the Jewish community, [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] also together with the Orthodox leadership, set up the school-- which was inaugurated in October, 1940. And all the Jewish children from Northern Transylvania whose parents could afford it-- first of all, the pupils from Kolozsvár proper, naturally, and from the other towns, and very few villages, of course, whose parents could send them to Kolozsvár, were sent to Kolozsvár to-- to this new school. And I was in the sixth grade. There was another Jewish gymnasium in Nagyvarad, which in Romanian times was Oradea Mare, also in Northern Transylvania. But I think our school was much better, on a much higher level. And we were under the supervision of the Hungarian inspectorate, who often came to attend classes-- not often. I wouldn't say often, but from time to time. And we also organized cultural programs in their honor. And at one of them, I recited a Hungarian popular ballad, [HUNGARIAN], 'Julia, the Beautiful Girl.' It was an ancient-- ancient, I don't know how ancient it was-- a Székely ballad. And I was dressed up in such a costume. And it was a huge success. And the inspector was very satisfied with it. We have-- had to prove our Hungarian patriotism, of course. So the curriculum was twofold. Parallelly, we were educated in-- in the spirit of Judaism, Zionism. But that had to be done in a very subtle form, because it was not illegal to be Zionist-- although, I don't think there was a legal Zionist party in Hungarian times, in that period. But we had to be patriots. Now, there is a paradox here, of course, because Hungary aimed at eliminating the Jews from economic, cultural life, from every field of national Hungarian life. On the other hand, they expected us to be patriots. And that had to be done not only in our school, but all over. So the Jews of Transylvania put together a golden album, as they called it, with pictures of all the veterans who had fought in the First World War, to prove how they had fought for the Austrian-Hungarian monarchy, and how-- how they loved Hungary. 
INT: Till what year did you study in the school? LV: Three years, till the matriculation, which was in '43. [INTERPOSING VOICES]  INT: And where did you live during your-- LV: I must tell you that it-- it was the happiest period of all my life, and the richest, from a cultural point of view. And I want to thank my teachers. [INTERPOSING VOICES]  INT: Where did you live during this time? LV: At first I lived at my aunt [? Anush, ?] and her family, her husband, Dr. [NON-ENGLISH], also a dentist, and my two dear first cousins, [NON-ENGLISH] and [NON-ENGLISH], [SOB] who perished in Auschwitz.  INT: You mentioned you wanted to tell something very important about your school life in the Jewish school. LV: Yes, yes.  INT: What was the name of the Jewish school, by the way? LV: Its name changed several times. But it was the Jewish Co-Educational Gymnasium. Because there were boys and girls, but we were not in in the same class. They were parallel classes. The orthodox leadership wouldn't have permitted that.  INT: Mm-hmm. LV: So we-- we were naturally on very good, friendly terms with the parallel class. And we had all kinds of cultural circles in the afternoons. Naturally, my circle was the drama-- drama and literature. And in-- in the seventh grade-- well, the seventh, secondary school grade-- we performed by Racine. It was not a children's play, because it was from beginning to the end. And it was beautifully performed. I was Esther. And I have such beautiful pictures of it, which were seen by many, many people at our reunion, in 1990, about which I will tell later, when we come to that point. 
INT: Let's stick to-- to the point. LV: OK, yes.  INT: Would you please continue telling about the years between '40 and '43? What were your parents doing? Did your father work? LV: Yes. My parents went on working as usual. And there were no restrictions. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] But antisemitism could already be felt in our little town. I was there only periodically during the holidays. Of course, there were three holidays. And in the summer holiday, I was usually not at home-- but once in Budapest and once in Debrecen. So I don't know about many details. I only remember that some owners of stores put out signs, even before the Germans entered Hungary. And the signs sometimes said, for Jews and dogs, the entrance is forbidden. Or it said-- [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] it's an untranslatable word in Hungarian-- [HUNGARIAN]. It sounds really funny. It's ancient Christian shop. So not [? stamp, ?] not just Christian, but ancient Christian. Which means, in that lingo, that they had no Jewish ancestors in the family. So they were pure Aryans.  INT: What was the economical situation of your parents at that time? LV: [SIGHS] The economic situation, it was tolerable. We were not rich. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] They rented the villa at the-- at the [NON-ENGLISH], to a Christian, to [NON-ENGLISH], so they received rent for it. And they had their patients. But I remember that we-- I didn't receive too much pocket money, so I also gave private lessons. And it sounds funny-- that in one of the holidays, I don't remember which one it was, I taught Hebrew, even Hebrew, to pupils-- little children-- who perished in Auschwitz, who were preparing for the private examinations. And I was some lessons ahead of them. But our [NON-ENGLISH], who was the director, together with [NON-ENGLISH]-- she was the director of the girls' section-- taught us Hebrew. And she had been to Palestine once. And her Hebrew was only several lessons ahead of ours. But anyhow, we learned Hebrew, and we learned Bible, and the Jewish-- Hebrew literature a little bit, and Yiddish literature as well, although we didn't speak Yiddish. But once, I remember, I prepared a lecture about Morris Rosenfeld, and I don't know Yiddish. Because I forgot to tell you that my-- not only my parents didn't know Yiddish, nor did my grandparents. I think they did not know, because they never spoke Yiddish, nor did my grandmother from Debrecen. 
INT: Did-- did you still participate in Habonim in that time? LV: No. No, no, no. That was over. That was only in our childhood, in the Romanian era.  INT: Did you-- LV: And I did not take part in any youth movement when I was in Cluj, in Kolozsvár, because it's Hungarian time.  INT: So you lived in Kolozsvár with some members of your family? LV: Yes. And after, I think, one year, I moved over to my other aunt, who was alone-- [? Rozi-- ?] to Aunt [? Rozi. ?] Her husband was called up to forced labor. Most Hungarian young men, young and even middle-aged men, were called up to forced labor service in the Ukraine, and also in different parts of Hungary. And tens of thousand perished in the Ukraine. So I went to live with my aunt. She was a dentist, like my mother.  INT: Did you meet, during all this period, any refugees who came to Kolozsvár? LV: I didn't, but I know of Polish refugees-- isolated cases, of course-- not in groups-- who came to [NON-ENGLISH]. And I heard about it from-- from my sister, even in-- in the last few weeks, when I asked her something in connection with it. And she told me that once, a Polish-- Jewish refugee, came to our house. And when he came in, my parents asked her not to disturb them. And they went into my father's consulting room, and they whispered something for a long time. They talked there. My sister was not allowed to listen. And they didn't tell her anything about what they talked-- had talked about. And then they, naturally, gave him to eat and money and helped him. And he went away. But I-- I-- I think I can imagine what he told them about. We heard the word lime pits. No concentration camps-- at least I, as a younger, not a child anymore, never heard the word concentration camp or any type of camp, [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] only executions, mass executions of Jews on the Eastern Front. And the word was, as I said, in lime pits. We just couldn't imagine what that was, and didn't ask him many questions. 
INT: What did you know about ghettos in Poland? LV: Nothing at all. I. I didn't know anything at all. And thinking back, we didn't know dates, events. But thinking back of the spring of '43, when I and my friends were learning for the matriculation, which was in June '43-- and we started learning. And at the same time, we also went to dancing parties. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] And at the same time, young boys and girls our age were fighting, were struggling and fighting with weapons in their hands, and grenades, and with their bare hands, against the Nazis in the Warsaw Ghetto Uprising, about which we did not know. And I don't even remember when we first heard about it. I suppose from our new friends in Birkenau.  INT: Hmm. [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] Can you please describe what happens once you finish your school in June '43? LV: [DRINKS] In June '43, I passed my matriculation exam with an Excellent certificate. But there was no hope whatsoever for being admitted to any faculty of any university in Hungary. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] So my parents didn't know what to do with me. It had to be something connected with my interests. And one of these was language, language learning. Because I had taken private lessons, even at home, before going up to Cluj-- I say up, because that's what the word used in Hungarian, to go up to Cluj, and then you're to go up to Budapest-- where I had taken private lessons in German literature from a professor from the gymnasium, and French, as I told you, and in Kolozsvár-- very intensely-- all these languages, especially English and French, and also German. And they decided to send me to Budapest to attend-- as an external student-- there was no convent-- the Notre Dame [NON-ENGLISH]. The nuns were very, very nice, and they did not discriminate against us. To tell you the truth, I think most of the pupils were Jewish. We didn't talk too much about it, but we realized-- those pupils, like me, who had matriculated and couldn't go on to the university. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] At the same time, I went also to the home of a famous actor, one of the most famous Hungarian actors, [NON-ENGLISH], who had a private drama school at his home. And I did not know that he was Jewish. I learned it after the war. And I learned about his tribulations and-- and how he received false papers from the highest, highest places in the ministries, apparently, so that he could-- could escape, in the end, from-- from the most terrible humiliation, through which all the Jews went. But he wanted to escape it. Yeah, so-- 
INT: Yeah, but please-- and so what happens? LV: --I went to this drama school, but it was for a very short time. I must tell you about my first shock of antisemitism against me personally. And it was really the first one. I wanted to give private lessons and to earn a little more pocket money, because somehow, my parents couldn't send me enough pocket money. And I read an ad in a newspaper. The address was [NON-ENGLISH], which was the most elegant main street in Budapest, where the aristocracy lived. And I was really very foolish to have gone to that address. They looked for a person who had matriculated with a good matriculation exam, to tutor a young girl. I don't remember in which class she was, but it was children's play. It would have been children's play for me. And I remember, I was very elegantly dressed. My mother bought me a-- a fur coat when we went to Budapest. And I was really-- I-- I looked well-- well-dressed and neat. So they saw that I was from the-- at least the middle classes. The first question was, naturally, where did you matriculate? In which school? So I had to say the truth. I said, from the Jewish Gymnasium in Kolozsvár-- did an excellent matriculation. And I brought my certificate. And they immediately showed me the door. [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] I don't remember the words, but there was no explanation. [PAUSES FOR 5 SECONDS] So. That was all. 
INT: Do you remember your feelings? LV: You can imagine. I was so humiliated. It was really the first personal slight, the first offense that I felt. Because with an excellent matriculation examination in-- in a Hungarian school, which was recognized by the ministry and by the inspectorate, everything, and they heard my pure Hungarian accent-- no Yiddish accent-- which they would have despised and made remarks on-- but a beautiful Hungarian language, which I speak to this day, they humiliated me. So it's out of the question. But they did it somehow. This [INAUDIBLE] is out of the question. So they didn't even ask me to sit down or to have a glass of water [LAUGHS] or something. It-- it-- it was very sad. It was--  INT: Did you get another job afterwards? LV: --it was traumatic. No, no, no. I didn't even look for one. It-- I didn't look for a job-- some private lessons for a few pengo. Pengo was a currency in Hungary. But--  INT: Where did you live while being in Budapest? LV: Yes. I didn't live with my aunt and uncle, but my parents paid for lodging at a Jewish family-- [? Ardes, ?] the [? Ardes ?] family. The head of the family was a teacher, a Latin teacher, at the Jewish gymnasium in Budapest. And it was a very nice family. The woman was [NON-ENGLISH]. And in brackets, I would like to mention there were also two boys there from a village, from-- from the countryside. And I met one of the boys on our way home from our last camp, after the Liberation. And he told me that his brother-- they were brothers-- was murdered by an Ukrainian-- a Ukrainian haftling-- inmate of a camp-- on the day of the liberation, for some food which he had acquired. And that Ukrainian wanted to have it from him, to get it from him. There were many such cases. 
INT: Till when do you stay in Budapest? LV: I stayed in Budapest until the very day of the German occupation of Hungary.  INT: Please describe. LV: Sunday, the 19th of March. The week before, on Sunday, the 12th of March, I went to a cultural Sunday morning, in the so-called [NON-ENGLISH]. [NON-ENGLISH] was a Hungarian poet. And a-- a club-- attached to the club was named after him, which was attended by Hungarian progressive elements and by Jews. And there was a poem contest, a reciting contest. And there I met an acquaintance from Kolozsvár, a famous-- famous-- by those standards-- a famous poet-- but even more famous reciting actor or artist. He was really well-known in all the cities of Transylvania, and also in Budapest. And he was in a labor service near Budapest. And he came there, and he asked me whether I had given my nomination to this contest. I said no. So he immediately ordered me up to the stage, and I was praised for my performance. And then I was asked, who is your meister? Now, you know, in Hungarian, it's [HUNGARIAN], your teacher, your instructor. And I said, here he is among us, [NON-ENGLISH]. And there was an applause, and he had to-- to come up on the stage and to recite. And it was a beautiful evening-- a beautiful morning, cultural morning. And I didn't think then of the word [HUNGARIAN], but later on, I remembered it in Auschwitz, where we had meisters in the factory, in the [? union ?] factory. Now, in connection with the 19th of March, I wanted to tell that I had a rendezvous with him. It's a long story. He had fallen in love with me in Kolozsvár. And I was 17. He was 28. He wrote some beautiful poems for me, which I printed in a volume, which appeared in Kolozsvár, in 1971 or '72. And we took a walk on the bank of the Danube. And he told me that he wanted to tell me something very, very important on the following Sunday, which was the 19th of March. And I think I know what he wanted to tell me. Because there is one poem which, from circumstantial evidence, I understand, from that volume, that it was written for me, to me, after he had not seen me any longer, and he was in the labor service. And the title of the poem is 'Inextinguishable.' 
INT: Were you in love as well? LV: The love was a one-sided-- only on his part, because I also told him. And it was 1,000% platonic.  INT: [LAUGHS] LV: He-- he never even touched my hand. So I wanted to say this too. And I told him I loved only Bela.  INT: [LAUGHS] LV: And I will always love him. That's what I told him. Anyhow, I think that he wanted to write down this poem then, and to bring it to me on the following Sunday. I am 99% sure of it. And on the morning, Sunday morning, the 19th of March, we heard on the radio that the German Army had crossed the border. They were allies. You have to know that-- that Hungary and Germany had been fighting together against the Russians, since the 22nd of June '42. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] And [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] '41-- I have a lapses. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] And the-- Hitler was dissatisfied with Hungary, especially because of the Jewish question. Because Horthy, it seems, was not so willing to solve definitely and finally the Jewish question. Besides, he was-- Hitler was also anxious, lest Hungary should jump out of the war-- should make a [NON-ENGLISH], which happened in Romania later on, in-- on the 23rd of August '44. It really happened. And that was March the 19th, when Hitler wanted to prevent it-- something like that happening. That happened later.  INT: So please go on and describe-- LV: So-- 
INT: --the 19th of March. LV: --yes. My parents phoned me, because their-- the telephone lines were not cut, even for private conversations. And there was panic, panic in-- in our-- my uncle's house. So what to do? My parents phoned me to go to my grandmother's, to Debrecen. Because three old sisters were living together, and the fourth old sister was living separately with her husband. And my mother wanted me to help them, so they shouldn't be left alone there. On that evening, a relative, a distant relative, a first cousin of my father's, was getting ready also for this reason-- to go home to Satu Mare. She perished in Auschwitz. And we went-- we went together to the station, and there are, to this day, two stations in Budapest for passenger trains-- the Eastern and the Western station. And I don't remember to which one of the two we went. And there was no raid-- razia, they called it-- which meant checking the identity cards. Because we had identity cards. And naturally, the word Jew was written in the identity cards. And we didn't have false papers at that time. We never thought of it. And up to that date, people generally don't-- didn't think of it. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] And nobody searched us or asked us any questions. And I reached Debrecen and stayed until the 26th of March. My grandmother and her sisters were afraid from the German soldiers. They didn't like me being there. You can understand their anxiety. But at the same time, my parents also wanted me to be with them. And to tell you the truth, I looked for a postcard-- card-- here among my old letters and postcards, which Bela found in our garage. And it's a postcard written in the train, in Debrecen, on the 26th of March. I wrote it to him, to the army address, because he was doing forced labor service. And I wrote him that my mother called me home, because they want me to be together with the family. So I learned from this postcard the exact date, because I hadn't remembered it. I went home, and terrible news awaited me there. My parents didn't tell about that on the phone. That the ground floor of our family house was occupied of, no more, no less, the General Headquarters of the Aryan Ortskommandantur, it was called-- the local commandment, which mean-- meant the local-- all the neighboring villages too-- German officers and their soldiers. I think there were only the soldiers who helped them-- of the Wehrmacht-- were staying in our family house. And there was a German guard in front of our house. 
INT: Where did the family stayed? LV: Upstairs. And we were very frightened. You can imagine. It's not just the fact that the Germans are in our town. And we-- we had to put on the yellow star, the yellow badge-- yellow Star of David, we called it-- from the beginning of April. And as I told you, I came home on the 26th. So it means a week after my arrival, we had to sew these yellow stars and put them here on our clothes. We could go out at the time, because it was April-- one month-- while there were only all kinds of restrictions-- but very serious restrictions-- but no ghetto yet. So the month of April passed for us with the following the restriction. My parents were not allowed to treat Christian patients any longer-- only Jewish patients. And as I told you, we had many patients from the neighboring villages as well, not just from the town. My father was called to the gymnasium-- the gymnasium was just the location-- for a course in first aid, to many women-- maybe there were 100 women from the town-- how to administer first aid. Because everyone feared that the front was nearing, and air raids could come at any moment. Now, while we were at home, there were no bombardments. But the house opposite ours was bombed, and the fire broke out after we had already left. Now, a first aid station was installed, arranged, in our basement. We had a basement which was used for laundering, and when we had birthday parties. Then a woman would come to make, to prepare, [NON-ENGLISH], we called them. The [NON-ENGLISH]. We called them [NON-ENGLISH]. And all kinds of such household works were performed in that basement. Now it became the central first aid station of the town in case of a bombardment of an air raid. And as my parents were not receiving any more patients, they had their medical equipment-- not the [NON-ENGLISH], of course, and not the [? quartz, ?] but any necessary equipment in case of a-- let's say, a mass emergency. All this was in that basement, and my father, and also my mother, as a physician. Because she had, as I told you, she had graduated, had her doctorate. She was not a-- the-- the technician. So she was also called upon to be-- I don't know exactly what functions she had there-- but to be ready for any eventuality. Now this help-- 
INT: Can you describe the relationship between your parents and yourself and the German soldiers who were in your house? LV: Now, the Germans behaved very, very politely. And we understood that only later on, after the deportation, that they left the dirty jobs, in our town at least, to the Hungarian Gendarmerie. And they had their hands clean, and they were gentlemen. And I swear that they called my father Herr Doctor, my mother, Frau Doctor, and me and my sister Fraulein.  INT: Did they employ the-- the word [NON-ENGLISH] or the [NON-ENGLISH]? LV: [NON-ENGLISH]. Only [NON-ENGLISH]. Because [NON-ENGLISH] doesn't go with Fraulein, only [NON-ENGLISH]. [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] And they sometimes called me to translate for them, to act as an interpretive-- interpreter for them, with the Hungarian peasants who came to the house with all kinds of problems, especially requisition-- requisition of horses, of cattle, of food, anything-- wood-- anything. And I had to go down to the lion's den to translate for them.  INT: We'll finish here tape number four. LV: Yes. I wanted to say, my parents were horrified. You can understand that. LV: --to tell you--  INT: Just, will you finish-- LV: --a very sad episode.  INT: --will you finish just describing-- LV: Yes.  INT: --the relationship between your family and the German soldiers? LV: My father often talked with the German officers. And there was one German corporal or sergeant, and-- a middle aged man-- who was disgusted with the war. And I don't know how he dared talk to my father sincerely and openly. And he said he was fed up, and he hoped for the war to be finished very soon. And he let him understand that he knew that the war was lost for the Germans. An interesting episode-- in that month-- no, that was already in the month of May. So I want to tell you that on the 2nd of May, my mother's best friend, [NON-ENGLISH] [? Irén, ?] phoned us that she had heard-- and we knew from whom-- from a very high placed person who lived in their house-- that during that night, the Jews would be taken away from their homes. I mean, the Jews-- us, we. We didn't know where. And get ready. So we packed our belongings-- one or two suitcases. And we waited. And my father called me and my sister in the living room. We had only two rooms, where one was our room, one our parents, the upstairs. And he said, if we don't return, you should first go to [NON-ENGLISH], because he was our family's lawyer. He keeps all the documents about the house and the villa in his office. We became nervous. What-- what do you want with the house-- with the documents of the house? And he says, if we don't return. And he added, and then you should first go-- no, he said, first, go to Uncle [? Villi ?] to Budapest. So it-- it's a very strange thought that he said that, because that's how it happened. First, we arrived in Budapest and went to his brother, because he survived in the ghetto. [SIGHS] Now, this is-- is very special story about [NON-ENGLISH], the lawyer, because in the end, it turned out that he had received many valuables from my parents. But we didn't know that. They didn't want to tell us. Very much dental gold, which had been hidden in our [? quartz. ?] And suddenly, when the Hungarian authorities took it away, and it had an empty-- [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] what would I say? A-- not a column, but it was empty inside. A pipe, a kind of pipe. And there my parents had hidden dental gold, and we knew that. But then they had to give all the appliances, the medical instruments which were not in the basement, to the so-called Green Cross. And we never thought of it. Only [INAUDIBLE] myself-- what happened with the gold? We didn't ask questions. So this [NON-ENGLISH] refused to return our valuables after the war. When we found out about it, only about two years after the liberation, from a certain [? Rosenberg ?] [? Shomer, ?] a medical instrument salesman, who looked us up two years after the liberation, that he had a message for-- for us from Ebensee, from our father-- 
INT: Oh. LV: --to go to [NON-ENGLISH] for the valuables they had left with him. And then he said, lies, lies. I have nothing. OK. So--  INT: Let's go back to-- LV: Yes, yes, yes, yes.  INT: '44-- May '44. LV: My father-- my father wept. For the second time in my life did I see my father crying-- for the first time, when grandfather had died on the 30th of November, the-- in '39. And now we were standing by the window. And we're waiting for our turn to come, when we saw our neighbors, Dr. [? Santo ?] [? Jula, ?] our good friends, whose daughter [? Kato ?] was my sister's best friend. And they were loaded onto a cart. And we knew that now, now, now, this very moment, it's our turn. It was dark. It was in the evening. And then my father wept silently. Nothing happened. We thought we had been forgotten, because of the Ortskommandantur in our building. Something must have happened. They forgot us. In the morning, a policeman or a gendarme-- I don't remember-- came and notified us that we would be staying at home in our house, in house arrest-- that we would not be allowed to leave the house. It was until then we were allowed to leave the house. We had to stay inside. But I must tell an episode, which is a-- a near-tragic episode that happened in April. The mother of my friend, [? Marguerite, ?] whom I mentioned that I learned to ride her bicycle, phoned us in panic. German soldiers had requisitioned a room in their home. And something terrible is happening to the German officer, or soldier-- I don't know. He had convulsions, and they didn't know what to do. And they asked my father to come quick-- quickly to the German soldier. I simply don't understand. Retroactively, I don't understand my father. He immediately went. And I don't know why he did not consult the German officers in our house. But [? funnily, ?] and he said there is no other soldier here. Come quickly. My father went there, and we were in a mortal fright. We knew he could not come home alive. He would be shot. It turned out that he had an epileptic seizure, and nothing would be done. My father just did what a-- a doctor do-- does in such circumstances. And he came home, and nothing happened to him. But it was such a fright, that we knew at least 80% that he wouldn't come home. So back to that month of May, which I call the month of grace-- that we were under house arrest. Fortunately, our telephone was not cut off. I don't understand it to this day. We could order food-- anything we wanted from the grocery. And peasants from the neighboring villages were brave enough to come into the house with the German guards staying-- standing with his weapons in front of the house. And they brought us whatever they could bring-- eggs, chicken, butter, anything-- milk. So we were not hungry during that month of May. 
INT: Did you have enough money? LV: We didn't need any money. They didn't ask for any money. And one of the peasants asked us-- but now I don't know whether it was in May or in April, but it didn't make any difference from the point of view of the German soldiers standing in front of our door, of our entrance, because it was not a gate. It was a door in the building-- whether we would like to hide in the mountains where he had a hut. But my parents didn't dare. And it was in April, not in May. Because in May we were not allowed to leave the household. The soldier knew that. In April, we could leave the house.  INT: What was the-- LV: And my parents were afraid, because they could have said that we-- [? Anikó ?] and I-- should go with this peasant and should hide in the mountains. And that is how we could have done it. Yeah. It simply didn't occur to them. They didn't want to do it. Now--  INT: You mentioned a gypsy-- LV: Yes.  INT: --on the 2nd of May. LV: Oh, that was-- it was in that month of May-- I don't know on which day it happened-- while the Jews were either in the school building, concentrated there for about a week. And then from there, they were taken to the Szászrégen ghetto. And we knew it from telephone calls, from different people, and from those who came and brought us food. It happened that the sewage pit in our courtyard became blocked. And whenever such a thing happened, once in several years, there was a [? Rafi ?] tzigane. His name was [? Rafi, ?] like my sons. It was a-- a [? tziganer ?] name-- [? Rafi. ?] And that was his job. He was a specialist in unblocking the sewage pipes. And he came and did his job-- a very unpleasant job, I suppose. And he started philosophizing with my father. And he said, [NON-ENGLISH] [? Shylock, ?] are the Jews not human beings just like us? And it sounded so funny, so to say, that [? Rafi ?] tzigane somehow wants to comfort us-- that we are human beings like himself. And that's true, really. But he couldn't have any idea of what was in store, what lay in store for his people in Auschwitz-Birkenau, and in other camps. It's just an episode which I wanted to tell you. Something else. In that month, a young boy who had been [? Anikó's-- ?] my sister's-- schoolmate, had the insolence of coming to us and asking for [? Anikó's ?] accordion. And he said, you won't need it anymore. Why wouldn't you give it to me? Why should it be taken from the-- by the Germans? But Anikó refused. Now I really have no idea how that accordion got into the hands of a German officer, who was playing it while we were being taken away on the 2nd of June. But I remember that he was playing it, sitting in a Liegestuhl, which is, in English, a deck chair, in our garden, in the backyard-- it was also a garden-- while we were being led away. So our month of grace was over on the 2nd of June. We had hoped for-- for a miracle. Because there were very few Gentile doctors in the town. They were called up to the army. There was really a shortage of doctors, beside the very important function that my parents had in that first aid station. But on the 2nd of June, when, of course, we were packed up with all the necessary things-- but food stuff, because that was the last thing, naturally, to pack-- two gendarmes came and ordered us to get packed immediately-- to put some clothing into whatever we wanted to put them in, and food for a few days. So mother already had everything ready, what to put into the suitcases-- maybe two suitcases. And before we left the house, one of the gendarmes ordered my mother to take off her wedding ring. It was a traumatic experience for me-- certainly for my mother. But my mother had a much stronger character than I had. And I started weeping. And my mother stared at me and just said a few words-- so maybe she whispered them. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] Don't let yourself be humiliated before them-- before the two soldiers. And she tried to take off her wedding ring with soap. So that was the moment when I started to cry. Something interesting that I have to tell you is, my letter to a-- to the German soldier. I'm ashamed of that letter, because I shouldn't have been so naive at the age of 19 and a 1/2, under those circumstances, but I was. There is no date on that letter which I wrote to a German soldier. And I didn't know whether it was one of those soldiers in our building, or another German soldier. And I wrote to him-- 
INT: Just anonymous. LV: 'Deutscher soldat--' German soldier. '--you who open this box.' Now in Hungarian it's-- in German, [NON-ENGLISH], like, [NON-ENGLISH]. It was a nice box in which young girls keep their letters and diaries, such things. 'I have a big request to you. Please don't disturb the contents of this box. If you think that there is something valuable hidden in it, you can, of course, search it through; or if you think that there is some secret writing in it that shouldn't be there, you can, of course, read everything through. Or you can get someone to read it to you. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] I have only one request from you. When you have already searched everything through, or have read everything through, please, do not destroy the contents of this box. Put the box back. For you and for all the people-- for anyone besides me, the contents of the box are entirely valueless. You don't gain anything if you keep it or if you destroy it. But for me, all these letters and notebooks are very, very valuable. In this box lies all my so-called past.' And I put it in inverted commas. [GERMAN]. 'I am a 20-year-old girl.' I wasn't 20 yet. 'My name is Lidia Rosenfeld. When I was 7 years old-- 7-- not 17--' I put it into brackets, '--I fell in love with one of my friends who was 9 years old then. It's comical. It-- it's ridiculous, isn't it? Who-- he loved me too, but he didn't admit it. Only after 10 years have I learned about it. And for 3 years, we have been best friends. But we are very rarely together. And that's why we correspond. I have kept his letters in this box. And all the letters which I wrote to him, I copied into these notebooks so that later, they should be like a diary, and I can read them like a diary. And when I am already a mother or a grandmother, [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] I would like to read these letters [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] and relive my youth. And I want to tell about it to my children and grandchildren. That's why I ask you, Deutscher soldat, [GERMAN]. Leave my box alone. I thank you, Lidia Rosenfeld.' I am ashamed of myself. How could I have written such a letter? 
INT: Did anybody found it? LV: Well, I found this letter with several notebooks, these diaries, which were thrown about-- discarded in our garage, when he came home in December '44 already. Because he escaped on the front-- of the Hungarian front in-- already, on the 18th of October '44. And he was at home in December. And he found these letters, and what's even more valuable, our family photographs-- among chickens-- in the garage.  INT: So let's go back to June the 2nd. LV: Yes. Now the two gendarmes accompanied us through the backyard-- not through the front door, not through the front entrance where the German soldier was standing-- but in the other direction towards the police station. And that day was the day of the most severe bombardment of Kolozsvár, and of all the track-- the railway track-- between Kolozsvár and the [? sacred ?] [? land-- ?] our area. Now I don't know, of course, in which areas the railway lines were hit, but we had to wait for a few hours until the-- they repaired the railway lines, because it was very, very urgent for the Hungarian government and the local authorities to have us deported, and to have my mother murdered, and my other--  INT: OK. So where were you taken? LV: So for a few hours, we were at the police station. And a neighbor, whose name I want to mention, [? Gasper ?] [? Neni ?] [? Ante. ?] [? Gasper-- ?] a good friend of the family with whom my father and mother stayed at the very beginning when they moved to [NON-ENGLISH], and they rented a room in their house-- brought over some cakes for us. Because a policeman let my sister run over to them to say goodbye, and to tell them that we were leaving. And then she came over. But the policeman was very angry, and chased her away. If you don't go away immediately, you will go with them-- something like that. She was an old woman-- about 70, or maybe even older than that. Then, I think one gendarme took us to the railway station, where we met a woman who later married a Jewish doctor. And they bought the ground floor of our house. She had just arrived from another town. And stupidly, although she saw us with a gendarme, with the armed gendarme, she said, where are you going? No answer. They took us to Szászrégen, and we spent the first night in an office of the local police station. 
INT: Can you spell Szászrégen? LV: It's very hard by heart.  INT: OK. So leave it. LV: But I know. I will. I will. S-Z-A, with an accent, S-Z-R-E, with an accent, G-E-N. And the word [NON-ENGLISH] means [? Saxish, ?] because it was a German center of the-- that tribe, the Saxon.  INT: How long to-- how long took the trip? LV: The trip-- oh, a very short time. But we looked out of the window. And the gymnasium was the tallest building in the town. And when my mother saw it, she said, we are seeing the gymnasium for the last time. Then, after about two hours-- I think two or three hours-- it was a passenger train, of course, and only we were the Jews accompanied by this gendarme. So, as I said, we were in the police station. And we had to sleep on the floor of that office. I don't know the reason why they didn't take us to the ghetto right away. It-- the ghetto was, of course, at some distance in the brickyard, as all the ghettos were in-- in Hungary-- Transylvania and Hungary. Just imagine being told, coming from home, from our own house, being told to sleep on the bare floor-- our highly respected family. That was the second terrible shock. Because the little shocks went unnoticed. And by little shocks, I mean previously having to hand in our motorbikes-- our bicycles, the motor car, the radio set. I don't know when. All these were minor shocks. But the robbing of-- of my mother, of her wedding ring, and then having to lie down on the bare floor, was just horrible-- as if it had happened to someone else. I-- I don't think we cried. I don't remember having cried, because the shock was too strong. We even slept on that floor, and we had our clothing. I don't think we had a blanket. But we were able to sleep. 
INT: What did you have in your suitcase? What did you take from home-- personal effects? LV: We took some changes of clothing-- natural-- and even bed linen, and food. But what food could be taken? Three bag, probably-- toasts and perishables. And I remember what we ate on the train, on the journey to Auschwitz. Most of the time, biscuits with quince jam. And why quince jam? Because it was hard, and it could be cut up in pieces, and it was not messy, like any other jam. And probably sausage-- dry sausage-- which would not-- which was not perishable. It could last for a few days. I want to tell you about an episode in the morning, when we were allowed to take some exercise in the courtyard of the police station. Suddenly, a police officer stopped in front of us and greeted my parents politely. He was-- he had been a patient of my mother's. And my mother asked him what would happen with us. Tell us. Can we hope that we would be let back to the first aid station? Of course, he didn't know about that first aid station. But my mother wanted some help, and she thought maybe he could intervene and do something. And so in a few words, she explained to him that they were in-- they had been in charge of that first aid station. But the officer gave only basic answer. And he greeted us politely-- at least that. He didn't humiliate us. So we were taken to the ghetto. And I don't know why. Even before they took us in, we had to sit either on a rock-- it was like a rock, a piece of huge stone. And we have-- had to wait for hours and hours on end. And with us was a converted Jew from our town. So we again started hoping. Why these few hours of waiting? Maybe we would be sent home with this converted Jew. Well, nothing happened. Oh, I must tell you an episode at home during that month of May, because it's very important-- very significant. We had a neighbor. I remember it now because of this converted Jew. He was converted. [? Levkovitch ?] was his name. And his wife was a Hungarian woman. And one day, in that month of May, they came with a package. And they opened the package. And on top were some Hungarian bank notes-- pengos. And our parents told us very quickly, we had given some money for safekeeping to the [? Levkovitch ?] couple. But after what we had heard-- and that was the inquisition in the ghetto-- we heard, either from people who brought us some food-- or I don't think on the telephone-- what was going on in the ghetto. And a very sad case-- one of our friends-- I don't want to say his name-- man and wife-- were terribly tortured, beaten up in the ghetto, to disclose where they had hidden valuables. And under duress, they blurted out the name of [? Shaska ?] [? Bondi, ?] a friend of my father's as well, a very honest man. And he was arrested. And then [? Levkovitch ?] brought that package with money, and my parents threw it into the kitchen stove and set it alight. After the war, [? Levkovitch ?] came over, brought us some thousands of pengo, and told us that only the upper layer was made up of bank notes, and the rest was paper. Here is your money-- unlike our lawyer friend [NON-ENGLISH]. 
INT: We're coming to the end of tape number five. LV: And when we entered the ghetto, there was a midwife, a so-called midwife-- maybe that was her profession, but I'm not sure at all-- whose job it was to examine the Jewish women, and even Jewish girls, in their private parts, whether they hadn't hidden diamonds, or who knows what. But fortunately, they only cursorily examined us, searched us, but didn't do anything of the sort. And it was probably due to that letter which my father's colleague, Dr. [NON-ENGLISH] had given to him. Dr. [NON-ENGLISH] was the leader of the Hungarian party, and it was a fascist party and an antisemitic party. But he had probably compunctions about what was going to happen to us. And before that month of May-- even-- I think it was in April-- he gave my father a letter, which my father didn't ask for, and I never read that letter. But my parents told us about it. He wrote that I guarantee for the truthfulness of the Dr. Rosenfeld couple. And my father should give the letter to the commander of the ghetto. They probably mentioned it at the entrance, where that small hut was standing for this horrible, humiliating search, so that they-- that so-called midwife didn't do anything to us. And we reached the buildings, which were sheds, brick for brick, because it was a huge brickyard. And we were allocated a very small place, because everything was already occupied. And we didn't find there our closest friends anymore, those who had been deported to Auschwitz a few days before us, 90% of the Jewish population of our town. 
INT: Did you know at that stage what is going to happen? Where are you going to be deported? LV: No, we didn't know anything at all, because nobody told us anything. There was one rumor that was persistent, and it was a strange name, [HUNGARIAN], a Hungarian name, which nobody had heard about. And the rumor had it that we would be taken in that area somewhere in western Hungary for agricultural work. But nothing about being taken out of the country. Now the inquisition started. Fortunately, the inquisition for my father and mother was no inquisition. But looking at some of the men and women who had remained behind from out of town, we could see what they had been doing to them, how they had been tortured and beaten. And that-- I don't know what it was, because I didn't go there, I wasn't asked to go there-- that place where the inquisition took place was called Pénzverde, which is a Hungarian pun, which means money battery. But Pénzverde in Hungary-- in Hungarian means mint, where money is minted, coins are minted. But in Hungarian, the same word, [? verde ?] also means battery, beating. So that was the inquisition place. And my father--  INT: Where as it located? LV: I don't know. I, I may have known it then, but I don't know now. And my father was called there, and stayed for much longer than half an hour, because after about half an hour, my mother started being very, very anxious. And, and she was already seeing horrible sights in front of her [? soul's ?] eyes. But fortunately, my father came back, and that letter worked. Then my mother's turn came. She was also asked only questions. And probably they had agreed between themselves what to answer to each special question. And nobody touched them. And they were the only well-to-do people who were not beaten. We found [NON-ENGLISH] two daughters in Budapest a few years ago, and since then, we are always taking gifts for them. And once, when [NON-ENGLISH] told them about this letter, which they didn't know about, Eva and Katie, Eva or Katie turned to her sister and said, oh, do you remember who the ghetto commander was? Our father's good friend. They were not ashamed of, of uttering this in front of my sister. So we understood, which we could have guessed, that he was a good friend of his. 
INT: What was his name? LV: I don't know, I don't know. But of course, it's-- the name is known. And I hope he was punished.  INT: After four days in the ghetto, you were taken? LV: After four days in the ghetto, when we were told that we would be moved out of the ghetto, and before the last transport. And only the population, the Jewish population of the neighboring villages, [NON-ENGLISH] and [NON-ENGLISH], and maybe some other villages had remained, plus what I mentioned to you, those battered, poor Jews, who were loaded into our wagon or cattle car, or whatever name I should give it, which was the sick car. In that sick car, only my parents and the two of us were healthy. We had to leave nearly everything behind. And the ghetto was strewn with coats, dresses, anything you can imagine, even food. And it's very interesting, thinking back, I never stepped on one piece of clothing, although I knew that the Hungarian vultures would swoop down on the ghetto the moment it had been evacuated. But I skipped over these clothing items. And my association is that, half a year later, I skipped over dead Jews on the death march. I wanted to pick up a book by a famous Hungarian poet, [NON-ENGLISH], but then I let it lying there on the ground. We went on foot to the railway station, which was a few kilometers away. But if I remember well, some of these older people, and these poor women-- mostly women, who had been beaten very cruelly-- were allowed to, to climb onto carts. Now, in the ghetto, the old-timers already knew that it was very practical to leave their suitcases behind, because there wouldn't be a place for them, and the gendarmes had already given us all kinds of hints that it's better to have rucksacks, knapsacks, and the like. So everyone was sewing [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] bags, shoulder bags from sheets, bed sheets. So the strap was here in the middle, on our shoulder, and on both sides, in front and at the back, there was one huge bag made of very strong linen, bed linen. And we filled it with whatever we could. But they told us, don't take more than you can carry. And so it was, because our packages were not carried on the carts. We had to carry ourselves. 
INT: What did you take? LV: The minimum what you can imagine-- a few changes of clothes.  INT: Any personal effects? Personal-- LV: Some photographs, which we didn't leave behind in the ghetto. But fortunately, we left many, many pictures at home. But it was natural for everyone to take pictures of, of our beloved ones. Not of ourselves. I took Bela's picture from the seventh class graduation. I don't know why that, but I remember it. And food, as I told you, food that would last a few days. Nobody knew for how long it should last, and nobody knew how long the journey would last-- would, would take.  INT: Did they tell you the destination? LV: Nothing at all, not even the fact-- naturally, especially not the fact that we would be taken out of the country. And they, the gendarmes, did not tell us about that [NON-ENGLISH] legend, or whatever, that fantasy, because such a place didn't exist. Or maybe if it existed, how could the-- I don't know, 600,000 Jews be crammed in one area, small area.  INT: At that stage, since the Germans came in to Hungary, and you were under occupation, did you know already the name Auschwitz and what it means? LV: No, nothing, not what it means. We had never heard that name, no, no, no. It was completely unknown to us. It was new to us. So we were loaded onto that train. And there was no room, not enough space to sit down on the floor of the cattle car, because it was a cattle car, as I told you, with legs outstretched. That was impossible. So we used these bags, which were really very handy, and it was a good idea, we used them for seating, cushions, so to say. So we sat, sat on these bags. And we were so cramped for space that it was really a problem, the hardest problem, to reach the toilet bucket, which was situated in the middle of the car. Not in a corner, discreetly. Can you guess why? Of course you can. Because it had to be reached from the four corners of the car. So it was the nearest, the relatively nearest place, for all the corners and all the sides of the cattle car. 
INT: Did you put any sheets around it? LV: The, the unfortunate persons who had their seats just there, near the bucket-- because somebody had to sit near the bucket-- were holding up some sheets. Because after all, we were civilized people, and we needed some privacy. Now, my father was the wagon alteste, which means he, as a doctor, was in charge of the car. And as I told you, the, the passengers were either those men and women who had been beaten, or some old people who had stayed behind. For example, the parents of my friend [NON-ENGLISH], [? Martha, ?] with her two-year-old baby. So lucky for her, she was sent away with the transport of our town, and her parents were with the baby. So she remained alive. She remarried after the war, and she has children here in Israel-- children, grandchildren. There was a woman with about four or five bawling, weeping, crying, screaming little children. All of them were young, and she was pregnant. And she was a very simple woman, no husband. She was alone. There was no one with her there on the train. And that was the most horrible sight. That woman with several children-- I don't want to say a lie, so I don't know whether there were three or four of them, but she was pregnant. And there was an old Jew who went crazy. [? Arthur, ?] from our town. I could never find out, 100%, if he was the house painter, or an other old [? Arthur ?] whom I knew from our town. It doesn't make any difference. He was old, about 70 years old. He started shouting-- take the key from Dr. Rosenfeld! Kill him! Kill him! Because he keeps us locked in here. Take the key, let us go out. And he kept shouting, and shouting, and shouting until he died in the train. [PAUSES FOR 5 SECONDS] And I don't remember where it happened. I don't know whether it was in Hungary, or already in Slovakia or Poland. But we were not allowed to let his dead body, his corpse, be taken away somewhere. We had to keep him, him, his body, in the car with us. Horrible for his family members who were near him. My father had to take the bucket, and to load it-- but he was not-- I don't think he was allowed to get out of the train, to get down. And we-- I think we heard later that somebody in another train, not from our area, wanted to escape. And then a collective punishment was inflicted on all his car, or his relatives, or friends. I don't exactly know the detail, but we heard something like that. So in our case, I think I remember correctly when I say that my father wasn't let down. He, he didn't have the permission to get off. And he also received a bucket of water to give it out. You can imagine, a few sips to everyone. A few drops of water. Each of us had a glass or a cup. And the quantity, I think he, he got used to it after the first distribution, how much water he had. And he was a very honest man. He, he, he never gave us more than he gave all the others. But it was very hard to distribute that quantity of water, which was probably one pail of water. 
INT: Did the train stop somewhere? LV: We were thirsty-- we were thirsty all the time. The train stopped several times, not in cities, not at big stations. But we, we-- my father, especially, who was standing by the opening-- it was not a window, it had iron bars-- was looking out, and he saw some stations. And he was horrified when we crossed the Hungarian border. And it was the Slovak border at Kosice. We just crossed it, and at that station, we were handed over to the Germans. And it took a few hours till they handed us over. And a fantastic episode happened then. A soldier, a Hungarian soldier, a very nice person he must have been, he ran along the train and shouted, Dr. Rosenfeld, Dr. Rosenfeld. And then, at that moment, my father and my mother were elated. They, they hoped for a minute that maybe they got an order to send us back home. Now, it was our best friend, who had-- the [? Smook ?] family, I mentioned them before, my mother's best friend, [? Elaine ?] [? Smook, ?] who had been allowed to return to our town, Gheorgheni. Maybe it was the only case among the Hungarian deportees who was left-- who, who was given the permission to go back home, because he had been a hero in the First World War, and he had been wounded. He was an invalid, and he had some very important decorations. And he had the-- the courage to go up to the German officer, and in a few words, he told his story of the First World War. A miracle happened. He, [? Shandor ?] [? Smook-- ?] [NON-ENGLISH], and their 16-year-old son, [NON-ENGLISH], were sent back home. And they heard that a train from Sasregen was just coming. And they just thought maybe they had taken us with this last transport, because we hadn't been on their transport that they arrived on the 5th of June. Now it is-- and we around the 10th of June. And they gave this soldier their food to give it to us. And he gave us the food they sent us. It's a very strange story, and a heartwarming story, also on the part of that Hungarian soldier. Anyhow, it was Kosice, as I told you, the Slovak border. And when we crossed it, and then my father already saw that we were heading towards Poland-- because they knew the map. I forgot to tell you that they had a map of Europe, especially Eastern Europe, and all the fronts. And my mother was marking the fronts on the Russian front with a drawing pin, or some other pins, so they knew exactly where the fighting was going on, where the Germans had started retreating, et cetera, et cetera. So they knew very well where we were heading, that it was in the direction of Poland. And then my father said, why did I let my morphine to be taken away? I want to commit suicide. And my mother calmed him down, chidingly, gently, but severely. I remember her tone. How can you talk like that? You have two children. We were not children-- my sister was 17, I was 19 and 1/2. How can you talk like that? Two, two days later, my mother was dead. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] I must tell you an episode which has a historical significance. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] Here, at one of the stations, a passenger train was in front of us, it was standing. And the passenger looked out of the window, and made a sign to my father, as if he wanted to say something. And he somehow leaned out of the window and put his hands on his face like this so that he could whisper something-- but he couldn't whisper. He only made or formed a word with his mouth, with the lips. And it was [INAUDIBLE]-- invasion in German, and my father immediately understood it. Now, we had no idea that the invasion of Normandy had taken place on the day when we were loaded onto the train. And this man wanted us to know that there was some hope, that a second front was just opening in Western Europe, for which Hungarian Jewry had been waiting for a very long time. And this man also shook his own hand, but it was as if he was taking my father's hand, encouraging him. And he also made the V sign of victory, Churchill's victory side. He was a mensch, whoever he was, a Pole or a German. And then my father turned round, and he tried to explain it. But there was nobody to whom he could have explained it besides my mother and the two of us. 
INT: Did you-- did you notice how long was the transport? How many wagons, how many cars? LV: No, no, no. We have no idea to this day. But I know something, that when we got out, and we stood in a row for the selection, suddenly we noticed my mother's friend, [NON-ENGLISH] from [NON-ENGLISH], from [NON-ENGLISH], so we understood that when we reached [NON-ENGLISH], which was farther away, a train-- we don't know how many cars-- were attached to our car. So we arrived together.  INT: How long was the journey? LV: The journey lasted four days. We arrived at night, on the 10th of June. It was Saturday.  INT: How did you know the date? LV: Then we knew the dates, because it was just a few days after we had left our house. So we knew that on the 6th of June, we were loaded on the trains. And I especially knew it, because it was Bela's 22nd birthday, the 6th of June. And now we learned, and the world learned, that it was also the invasion of Normandy. So we arrived at night, and we had to-- had to wait for several hours.  INT: Where did you arrive to? LV: We arrived at a very strange place. When it dawned, we saw barbed wire. I don't remember that it was lit up. Maybe, it may have been lit up. Or we may have seen what I am telling you only when it dawned. Barbed wire, and behind the barbed wire we saw women-- no men. And the women were bald. They had no hair. They had shaven heads, as if they had been inmates in a mental asylum. They looked like that. And they had shabby clothes. But even these miserable creatures somehow [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] gave some hope, especially to my mother. Because in the wildest, pessimistic [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] thoughts or fantasies, we could not imagine so-called extermination. The word is a terrible word, let's say annihilation. Because extermination means, and very fitting insofar the German ideology, extermination of vermin, you know. 
INT: Which camp was it? Which camp was it? LV: It was no camp, it was just the rámpa, the rámpa.  INT: In where? In where? Tell me the name. LV: No, no, it was the ramp-- the Auschwitz ramp-- it was Birkenau. Ah, you wanted Birkenau. [LAUGHS]  INT: Yes. LV: It was the ramp of Birkenau. And there were many sub-camps, the subdivision sections, which were-- we were to-- were to learn later. It was the railway, but not a station, though the station was Auschwitz. And the Germans extended the railway line [INAUDIBLE].  INT: Just tell me, you arrived in Birkenau at night of the 10th of June. What was the first thing you saw when the doors were opened? LV: And then when they opened the doors at last, then we saw men, as well not only those miserable women. And these were men in striped uniforms, which was, we supposed-- and rightly so-- were also inmates, prisoners. Because they looked like prisoners with the striped clothing, uniforms. And naturally, a lot of SS officers. And then shouting, and confusion, turmoil-- [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] unimaginable what we would call in Hebrew, [HEBREW]. And the shouting was in Hungarian and German. Leave everything behind! Don't take off anything! Get out! Quickly! Quickly! Schnell, schnell, in all the languages-- in all these-- two languages, only two languages. And then some orders, which I remember. The doctors, male doctors, the men, should stand aside in one special group, and they should take with them their first aid kit with all their medicines and medical instruments. Now, you can imagine that it was not for the purpose of letting those doctors work in their respective profession, but it was for the purpose of not leaving all those medical instruments and medicine mixed up with the food and all the dirt and everything, so they can sort them out quicker. That was the reason. Then we saw our father for the last time, standing in a group of men-- doctors, all with their first aid kit. And we were happy. I remember that we felt happy, our father would be working as a doctor. 
INT: What did you tell him before? LV: Nothing, nothing. We didn't take leave, nothing. And we stood-- we put on as many clothes as we could, but it was June, although it was cool in the morning. But we couldn't put on four or five dresses, but-- and I don't even remember which dresses we put on. I just remember that my mother put on either my or [? Annika's ?] ski boots. And it gives me a good feeling that he did not envisage her being murdered, because he thought she would have to walk, to march. And that's good. So we stood, the three of us-- my mother, [? Annika, ?] and I. And if I remember, were two German officers stood in front of us, and the women were standing in a separate row, and the men in a separate row. And a strange question was addressed to, to us, to me and my sister. [SPEAKING GERMAN]? Are you twins? I, I don't think we look alike-- maybe we resemble a little bit. And I, stupidly, I started conversing. I mean, I asked, why? Do we look alike? Something like that-- do we resemble each other? Or course, he didn't answer. And another question from my mother-- [SPEAKING GERMAN]? Now, in our German, [GERMAN] only meant to run. It didn't mean to go on foot. And my mother said, [SPEAKING GERMAN]. She was very exhausted as we all were, after four days being crouched, sitting in one place in the camp-- in the cramped car. 
INT: That will be the end of tape six.  INT: So we-- you described when you arrived in Birkenau, and the separation from your father-- standing together your sister, your mother, and yourself. Please go on. What happens next? LV: And because of a semantic misunderstanding, I think, my mother was sent to the right. At that moment, it was the right, which was the bad direction. And we were sent to the left. Because my mother said that she couldn't run so well, [GERMAN], when the officer asked if she could run. But [GERMAN] meant to go on foot. So we didn't even kiss her. We didn't say goodbye. But there were shoutings on the part of these inmates, that you will meet in the evening. The old people will go by truck, and you will see each other, and all the belongings will come after you. So off we went with young girls and young women. We noticed that. And we arrived at the place which was called the sauna, through a little forest, a little wood. And the sauna was a red brick building, the bathhouse. There, our hair was shaved and we were bald. We looked horrible. We looked at each other and hardly recognized each other. And that was a horrible degradation. We were dehumanized, defeminized. And we were naked in front of the German soldiers who were walking about as if we were not women. And then at that moment, I decided that I wouldn't feel ashamed, and I would just look through them as if they were no-- not men looking at women. And they were really not interested in us, I can tell you. Then [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] we were shaven everywhere, on every part of our body. And that was even more humiliating than being bald-- as we looked at each other. There was no mirror to see oneself. Then we took a shower. And of course, we had no idea, fortunately, we had no idea that there was-- there was another sham shower, a fake shower, where my mother was taken. After the shower, we were given some shabby items of clothing, which was a, a pair of underpants and a dress, each of us. And of course, there was no consideration for size, but we could exchange the dresses between ourselves. And I got a black evening gown. I don't know who could have been so foolish. But it was no problem to, to tear off the bottom of it. And we were led into one section of the camp, which was BIII, nicknamed Mexico-- probably because it was a poor section of the camp, which we found out later. Contrasting, probably, Kanada, which was the richest section of the camp-- well, not a section, but it was a work place with all the storehouses of, of all the wealth of European Jewry. And of course, I won't tell about it because it's not my camp, and I-- not my work place. 
INT: No, it's OK. LV: Yes, not my work place. So that camp was a makeshift camp, which started to function only a few months before our arrival. And it was meant for Hungarian Jewesses-- like the camp opposite us, in another section, which was the [NON-ENGLISH]. That was the BIIc, and we were the BIII. Conditions were horrifying. It was the quarantine camp. We slept on the floor, on the bare floor, without blankets. But after some time, we got a blanket each. And the roof was leaking because the blocks were not ready yet. The blocks had two wings, and in both wings were Hungarian women. And we found many friends from Kolozsvar, and also two of our teachers. The blockova was [? Hela, ?] a Polish girl, and her cousin was [? Annie, ?] who helped her. And she was cruel, but only in words. And when she noticed that I am reasonable, she told me the truth, because we started inquiring, what's going on? What's that smoke? Where are our parents? And these two things were connected. So she said, up they go in the flames and smoke, just now, just now. And I believed it, but many of my friends didn't. And--  INT: In which language did you speak to the Polish girl? LV: German, German. And there was a lager German-- I spoke German very well, but not everyone knew German well. And so a, a kind of a basic German started developing in the camps, using the infinitive most of the time for verbs. And Yiddish, naturally-- many Jewish women and girls from Transylvania spoke Yiddish, and they knew Yiddish very well. And once she showed me some pebbles, which were not pebbles, but pieces of human bones. And that was this-- in Hungarian we say, [HUNGARIAN]-- like burnt [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] coal-- pieces of burnt bones, human bones. She showed that to me. And the most horrible thing was the lack of any sanitary facilities. Of course, no washroom, and there, there was a big open air latrine, which was used a few hours a day, but not at all times. And the same applied to a very small latrine at the end of the block. And we were not allowed to use it all the time, when we needed it, especially at night. I can't figure it out, why we were not allowed to do it. And something terrible had to be done-- and I must tell it. We had a bowl for soup, or something that was called soup, some horrible liquid. And I don't remember why it, it was with us, with me and with my sister, but five women had to sip the soup from that bowl.
And we had to, to count the [NON-ENGLISH]. And at night-- all of us had diarrhea-- and at night, after about two weeks, because I was constipated for two weeks, but when that horrible thing started, a dysentery, and I thought I would die, [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] we used that bowl. There was a ditch of dirty water-- it was sewage something. And there was a sign, [GERMAN], which means, danger of epidemics. My sister washed that bowl in that dirty brown water, of which some girls drank. [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] And she also washed my pants in that water. [PAUSES FOR 5 SECONDS] The girls and the women didn't want to eat, and I tried to convince them that if we want to survive, we have to eat whatever they give us. They gave us a small piece of bread and either margarine or jam, or bloodwurst, and that was very suspicious because we didn't know what it was made of, the bloodwurst, and I did-- I never touched it. So my sister was really happy-- she ate it. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] And I knew that it was better for us to be realistic and to get used to the idea that all those from whom-- the women from whom we were separated at the rámpa were dead. They were killed, and we knew how, because then the blockova told us. There were no other Polish girls in that camp. It was only for us, for Hungarians, and only the blockova would tell us. And one day, I was so foolish that I went up to the German soldiers, and-- soldier, and I say up because there was an embankment between our camp and the neighboring camp. I think it was the [NON-ENGLISH]. And I struck up a conversation with him. I don't know why he didn't shoot me, why he didn't beat me up. I don't know. And I asked him, where are our parents, our children? I already knew. I was curious. He was a human being. He said, in another camp. And he asked me a few questions, small talk. And he let me go away. [LAUGHS] I didn't know then that we were not allowed to address German soldiers. We were not given these rules. We were not told these rules at the very beginning. We had no idea. After several weeks, there was a cursory selection. We only had to lift up our dresses and show our knees. And we knew already that was their method, because a transport had already left from that quarantine camp. And we stood there in front of the German officer, and we knew he wanted to see whether we are strong enough for work. And that other transport disappeared, because then, I decided with my sister, that we would be fatalists. And we were asked to volunteer for that previous transport, but we, we decided no, only if we are called to that-- to a certain transport. And now, our turn had come. I forgot to tell you something very important, just in a few words, that sitting on the seat of that latrine, I suddenly saw my history and literature teacher sitting near me, [NON-ENGLISH], Dr. [NON-ENGLISH]. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] And she-- oh, the word, I can't remember the word in English-- oh, my god. Her two legs were not equally long. Anyhow, she-- her body was not perfect. She had some-- 
INT: Limping? LV: Yes, she was limping. Yes, she was limping-- she limped. And I said to myself, oh, why wasn't she selected on the ramp when we arrived? Because then, she wouldn't have known what would happen to her. But now she knew what would happen to her in a few weeks. Anyhow, she was fantastic, because she organized literary-- what shall I say-- circles, lectures, she and her colleague, another literature teacher from our school, and I recited poems. In that horrible Mexico, yes we did that-- lectures on literature and poems. So the time came that we are going on transport.  INT: Excuse me, before that-- were you tattooed? LV: No, now I am telling you about it. And it was the 8th of July, a Saturday, exactly four weeks to the day of our arrival. I didn't remember it. I know it from the Auschwitz [? calendarium. ?] Because I checked my number-- and my number--  INT: Can you tell it? LV: --was tattooed on that day, and it's [SPEAKING GERMAN]. And I'm not exaggerating, when I have to say it quickly, I know it only in German. It's 9618. [PAUSES FOR 5 SECONDS] We were taken to the sauna, probably the same building, maybe another one. It didn't resemble the first one, but that's not important. And in a large hall, we stood by a table, and we had to be registered. And it was a good sign. We were very happy. We didn't think for a moment that they were taking us to be killed. We felt that we were going to work. And we had to give our name, birth date, birth place. And then we were given the number, and also told that our second name is Sarah. And in camp, we would only be Sarah. My sister's number is 17-- I mean, the same number, 9617. Now, my number ends in 18, which in Hebrew means, chaim, life. [SIGHS] And the, the number 18 is a very important number in my life, because on four events, the date of the 18th saved me somehow. The first was the evacuation on the 18th of January. The second was the 18th of January, '78, I had a cancer operation. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] The third was the first scud bombing in Israel. And the fourth was this January the 18th, when in the morning, I opened the fridge, and it was black, burnt out completely by a, a short circuit. And the fire didn't spread outside. Four dates of the 18th, and I stayed alive. I survived. And it's owing to this 18, which means chaim. So we were taken to another camp in new clothing-- not uniforms, but disinfected clothing. And as we marched towards another section, called [? R lager ?] B1a, R lager, the frau lager, which was a work camp, we had to pass-- to walk very close to crematorium number two and three, but we didn't know it then. We only knew the direction, because from a certain distance, we saw a convoy of old women with children. We didn't see men. There were probably men, too. And I will always remember a type of a grandmother with a little girl. She was holding her by her hand. And we knew where they were heading. We arrived in the [? R lager, ?] and there the blocks were different-- not these makeshift blocks, but made of stone. And the kojes, or the bunks, were in the wall. And it was very cramped. I don't remember how many women were sleeping in that koje, but it lasted only for a short time, because in a very similar section, the [? B lager, ?] conditions were better, slightly better. In that camp, we worked only for a very short time-- just a few days, [NON-ENGLISH] kommando. We had to dig out slabs of grass, squares of grass, and had to take them in a wheelbarrow to the gardens of German officers far away. After a few days-- yes, I forgot to tell you that bed bugs started eating us, eating us up. And we wondered why we had no bed bugs in the first camp. Probably because there were no beds and no kojes, probably. Anyhow, it was terrible. We could hardly sleep at night. 
INT: Did you get any blankets there? LV: And-- I think we had a blanket each, yes. And I don't even remember if there was some straw on-- in those kojes. There may have been. Then one day, just a few days after our tattooing and after moving us to [? R lager, ?] there was a big zahlappell. I forgot to tell you, but everybody knows about those endless roll calls called zahlappells. And in the Mexico camp, we had to stand hours and hours on end. And it was cold in the morning and warm during the day. It was a kind of a torture to break our-- don't know what, to break our moral strength. Now, suddenly there was a zahlappell. All of us-- we were only Hungarian women there-- had to stand up. And we saw a delegation of civilians who were picking out workers for the [? union. ?] And we already knew what the [? union ?] was, because we envied that those whom we had seen from a distance who were wearing pretty blue-- navy blue-- dresses with white dots. And we were told that these were the girls who work in the munition-- ammunitions factory in Auschwitz. And we also saw the red-- road [? captains ?] who were wearing red kerchiefs on their head. And the German civilian, an engineer or a manager, looked at each of us individually. We had to stand in rows of five. And when he came to our row, he said aloud, he thought aloud, hmm, [SPEAKING GERMAN], which means, hmm, I have something here. Which means he took a liking to me and to my sister. And he picked us out. Now, there were-- was crying, weeping, horrible scenes when mothers were separated from their daughters, and sisters from each other. And some of them were really separated forever. But in some cases, I don't know why and how, for what reason, these German civilians relented and let some relatives go together. And then we were moved over to the [? B lager, ?] which was the real steady work camp. And there were two [? union ?] blocks. 
INT: Where was it located, [? the B lager? ?] LV: It was located north of the [? R ?] lager, and it was on the-- if, if we stand inside the camp, from the gate, inside the gate, it was on the left, the part on the left. Because on the right, on the other side of the rámpa-- so we were near the railway line-- on the other side was the man-- men's camp, and also the [? C lager. ?] And beyond all that, our Mexico. So we were very close to the-- to crematorium number two. And the Polish girls told us how they had seen the Hungarian transports coming and fueling all the crematoria of Birkenau. I won't tell you general stories, because these are well-known stories. Now, in the-- in the [? union ?] block, we were together in the same koje with two girls from Warsaw-- Stella and Bella, I don't know their surname, I have never found them, regrettably. I don't know what happened to them. And they told us the horror stories of the Warsaw ghetto uprising. They had taken part, and they were hidden in bunkers, and then in the sewage canal. And they were taken from there to Majdanek, and their families were exterminated there.  INT: In what language did you speak to them? LV: German, German. And they were very pessimistic, and they told us from the very first day, and that was terrible for us, you should not hope to get out alive from here. And it was bad for us that instead of somehow encouraging us, they, they were in such a terrible mood that we had to believe them. And watching the smoke and the flames all the time, especially when we got up early in the morning to go to work, at about 4 o'clock, we had to get up so early, we saw the flames, all the chimneys belching flames and smoke. And besides, every night, it was terrible to hear the whistling of the trains coming in, because we were just there near the ramp. And so sometimes we heard what transport had just arrived. 
INT: What-- how many people were you in the block? LV: I don't know. I have no idea. Now, in that koje, as I told you, we were only four women, which meant more comfortable accommodation. But the bed bugs were eating us all the time. And that was terrible, that we couldn't sleep well at night. Although, we were very tired. We had to walk, to march, to the factory, which was in Auschwitz proper, at a distance of about 3 or 4 kilometers. And we were in the day shift. And after we moved over to Auschwitz proper, into the small new [NON-ENGLISH] lager, which was a really fantastic camp, so to say. But it was a [NON-ENGLISH] for the Red Cross, for all these delegations to see how we were accommodated, in normal conditions. So until then, we had been working the day shift. And from that day on, after the very severe selection, and it was our first serious selection in the nude, we were transferred to that new camp. Now, that was a [NON-ENGLISH] selection. In English, it's a scabies. So it looks like eczema on the body, but it's caused by small creatures that can't be seen in the bare eyes.  INT: How long did you stay in the [? B lager? ?] LV: In the [? B lager, ?] I-- till the end of September. It may have been the 1st of October, the 2nd of October, or the 30th of September. I don't exactly know the date. Anyhow, it was after Yom Kippur-- a short time after Yom Kippur. Because I remember it was-- we were in the day shift, and some girls were fasting in the factory. I wasn't. And it was so sad to watch them, fasting and working. I worked by-- yes, I, I was telling you, my sister was nearly selected because she had some eczema on her arm and on her body. But when her turn came, and the German so-called doctor wanted to select her, and to send her to that group where the selected women were, the German overseer, the [NON-ENGLISH], as we called her, said to the-- to the German officer, [SPEAKING GERMAN]-- these are not scabies, but so-called oil scabies, because she worked with such pieces that were greased, and that she was allergic to it, and it looked like scabies. So she came running after me. When I was stupefied and panicked seeing her being examined by the doctor, of course, not with his bare hands, with white gloves, because how could he touch these dirty Jews? Anyhow, we were moved over for-- [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] until the end of-- until the 18th of January, into that new camp, which was near the factory. So we didn't have to march such a long way. I must tell you-- 
INT: How far was it? LV: From the factory? Maybe a quarter of an hour's march. But in September, when we were still walking to and fro the factory, one evening in September, we saw a train, which just stopped in front of the entrance to Birkenau-- the, the large red brick gate made up of some buildings. And we were parallel on the road, entering the Birkenau camp, through the gate where all the workers entered and left. And the train stopped, and for a few minutes, it stood just opposite us. We saw only, only children, with those typical caps that you can see on the pictures of the ghettos. And it was the period of the Lodz ghetto evacuation, or deportation, liquidation. And we knew where all these children, who were looking with wide open eyes, looking around, they wanted to understand where they had arrived. And we knew where they had arrived. That was just an episode, a horrible episode. And then I read in the Auschwitz [? calendarium, ?] that in those days arrived a train with children and very few grown-ups.  INT: Could do tell please a few words about your work in the [? union. ?] LV: Yes, I worked in the so-called [NON-ENGLISH] near a milling machine, making-- producing some small pieces that looked like drawing pins. I, I didn't produce them. I had to sharpen them, or to cut their edges to a certain size, which was determined. And I had to stand 11 and 1/2 hours each night, because-- I said 11 and 1/2 because at midnight, we had half an hour's break for soup. And that was an extra portion, which was really welcome. And so we had some strength to go on working. But my ankles were always swollen. And if I remember well, once in two weeks, we had a free Sunday night. Some of my friends tell me that I'm not right, I don't remember well. We, we received those nights off only once a month. I think it was every two weeks. And only then did my feet, my ankles, return to their normal size. Because otherwise, they looked like this. 
INT: Who worked together with you-- Hungarian, Poles? LV: Now, there we were mixed. I was near the [? controller ?] there. There were some Belgian Jewish girls, some Polish girls. And quite a few [? Salonikian ?] girls, whose lot had been terrible. Because there were also some who had been in block number 10, which was the experimental block. And when they ceased the experiments, they were transferred to the [? union. ?]  INT: Any non-Jews with you? LV: Only the meisters were non-Jews, and the personnel. Now, these meisters were civilians.  INT: We come to end of tape seven. LV: [SPEAKING NON-ENGLISH] I mean it's tiring.  INT: November 28, 1997. The survivor, Mrs. Lidia Vago, née Rosenfeld. The interviewer, Nina Elazar-Wolff. The interview takes place in Petach Tikva, Israel in the English language. This is the interview part two. Tape number eight with Mrs. Lidia Vago. I would like you to describe, please, the conditions in which you lived in Auschwitz once you were transferred to Auschwitz from Birkenau at the beginning of October '44. LV: Yes. The exact date is unknown to me, but from the so-called Auschwitz Kalendarium, I learned that the-- our new lager, our new women's camp, which was a widening of the so-called Schutzhaftlager, was given the charge of Auschwitz I, the main camp of Auschwitz, on the 1st of October. So I suppose that it must have been the 1st or 2nd of October when we were moved over. After that, kratze selection, the for scabies, which ended probably in the gassing of hundreds of women, because I also read about that big selection on the 3rd of October, in which about 900 women were selected and gassed. When we were transferred to that new camp, my sister and I were transferred to the night shift, which meant 12 hours at night, from 6 o'clock in the evening till 6 o'clock in the morning, with half an hour's break at midnight for a soup. Now that camp was also called a Musterlager, which was probably meant for show for the Red Cross, and other delegations that might have come there to check the living conditions of inmates. The buildings were not blocks, but we called them blocks. They were brick buildings. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] If I remember well, one-story buildings. And they were modern, equipped with everything needed in a normal house, which means washrooms-- of course, not private small washrooms, but several wash basins. And the toilets were normal WC toilets, but, naturally, not in small cubicles, but several in a row in one room. Now the large halls in which we were accommodated were supplied with beds-- three-story beds-- and not so-called [NON-ENGLISH] in the brick walls, as we were used to in Birkenau. Only two persons-- two women-- slept in one bed, which was very comfortable. And there were straw mattresses. And to our amazement and really great joy, we received quilts. Of course, these quilts from transports, second-hand, not brand-new filled with maybe wools or some other material. But anyhow, they were real quilts, which were in poor condition so that they could not be sent to the Germans who had been bombed out of their houses, and they needed lots and lots of clothing, and the bed linen, et cetera, which, from time to time were sent in great-- great transports to Germany. We knew about this. Now what was also a very welcome innovation was that we received clean underclothes from time to time. I couldn't tell you whether it was once in three weeks, or once in two weeks. But we had no facilities for washing. So-- so it was very welcome that we received these underclothes. And from time to time even the dresses were changed. Now-- 
INT: What kind of dresses were you given? LV: We did not have the striped uniforms. I heard that before we arrived, probably the year before, there was a period when the women had this-- these striped uniforms. But during the summer, we saw, when we had not been working in the Union yet, a Kommando dressed in dark blue dresses with white dots. That was really very nice. And we had these dresses during the summer. Now to tell you the truth, I don't remember my dress in winter. I want to tell you a very shocking, revolting experience with one of the changes of clothing that we had in the new camp. I received underpants made of a tallit-- tallis, we called them. And it was unmistakable from the fine weave of the cloth and the border stripes. And it was just horrible the revulsion we felt, and the deep sadness. It was the most horrible sacrilege. And I was secular. But naturally it hurt me deeply. And I could imagine how the religious girls felt about it. It must have been even more horrible for them. Because I looked around, and I saw several women wearing those underpants. Now life in the new camp began with a speech by the Lagerkommandant, or Lagerführer, Franz Hossler, who was hanged-- baruch HaShem-- after the war. And he pretended to like our Kommando very much. We were his pet Kommando. And he received us in the courtyard of the camp. And his main concern was the cleanliness and keeping our new buildings, our new blocks, in-- in good condition, and not to soil the toilets, the washrooms, and our rooms. We had-- when-- when we entered the rooms, we had to take off our shoes. So the Kommandant said-- of course, I can't repeat his words exactly, but approximately-- if you don't keep the toilets clean-- now I'll say it in German. [SPEAKING GERMAN]. 
INT: Meaning? LV: Which means, if you don't keep the toilets clean, I will exterminate you. I will annihilate you. And I have never heard the word ausrotten before-- only vernichtung, et cetera. So it's very strange. And now I'm really smiling that I felt a kind of intellectual joy that I had learned a new German word, ausrotten, which I would guess, and it was unmistakable. Now in that new camp there was a new order concerning Zahlappells, because Zahlappells were a specialty of Auschwitz-Birkenau, and all the other camps of course. In the first camp, in Mexico, we had to stand for roll call-- that Zahlappell-- hours and hours on end. And I am sure that one of the aims of these Zahlappells was to bring us morally, to-- to break our-- our strength, our spiritual strength, and to see who can survive. But now the new order was good for them, and it was good for us. As soon as we had returned from the factory, it was allowed to go to sleep. And there was no Zahlappell at all. Already in the B Lager, in Birkenau, when we were picked out to work in the Union, the time of the Zahlappells was curtailed. I don't remember exactly how long it lasted, but it had to be. Now here, something very strange and unusual happened. While we were sleeping, the German Aufseherin came in tip-toeing so that she shouldn't wake us up. And she made her head count-- I call it a head count. Now, of course, not all of us were sleeping, so we sometimes watched as she was walking over to one bed or the other and was counting whether there-- everyone was there. Now the only time-- the only occasion when I was able to organize some food, which I even-- couldn't call organizing, and I tell you why not-- was I don't remember how many weeks or how long it lasted in this new camp-- somehow we became aware-- some girls-- not all-- became aware of the fact that at noon the food was given out in the rest of the camp. And we heard that some girls-- a certain Kommando that worked for the SS-- I don't know exactly the type of work they did. I-- I know that they also had to-- to wash and iron their clothing, and their own uniforms, and to look after cleanliness in their blocks, et cetera-- did not like the Lager food very much. They probably received leftovers from the SS. And officially they got their [NON-ENGLISH], the large buckets or cauldrons with their daily, horrible soup. But anyhow, it was soup. And they left it just there. And so some girls-- I don't know how-- awoke-- we had an inner clock-- awoke at that time. And fortunately, the Aufseherin had already counted us. We slipped out of the block, and went over to that other block, and ate as much as we could. Now I regret to this day that with the one or two exceptions I did not dare bring soup into the block for my sister, because I was afraid that if the block of our-- the [NON-ENGLISH] noticed it-- had noticed it-- she-- she would have locked the blocks. But so the blocks remain unlocked, and we could slip out. Now, I said I didn't use the word 'organizing,' because organizing meant stealing from whomever. In general, it was good-- a good feeling when one could organize from the Germans. But in this case it was just left there for us to take as much as we wanted. Now I want to tell you an episode in connection with the soup. I noticed that there was a fence without electricity. And some men were loitering at the other side of that fence. And it could have been some work site for them. Probably I knew it then, but I don't know it today. And some men looked at us while we were eating from those cauldrons. And I took some soup and went over to give them. To pour-- it was possible through a hole in the fence to pour soup from my bowl into a-- a man's bowl. And suddenly, to my surprise and to my joy, I discovered that the man there-- one of the men there-- was [NON-ENGLISH], first cousin of Bela's mother. And he was so happy. And this went on for some time. I can't tell you for how long. But I was really, really happy. So he came every day, and he received from my soup. So approximately that's about the new block. 
INT: How many people were you living in the block? LV: There were two Union blocks. And as we were about 1,100 women, which I know from the, again, from the Auschwitz Kalendarium, the number is mentioned for December '44, I suppose that we were 500 in each block.  INT: Were you ever sick while you were in Auschwitz? LV: Yes, I was. But I would like to tell about that a little bit later on, because it was the end.  INT: OK. LV: I was evacuated from the Revier. So first I would like to tell you about our work in the Union. [PAUSES FOR 5 SECONDS] [DRINKS]  INT: Go ahead. LV: And then-- the meisters were German civilians who had been brought to Auschwitz from different parts of Germany. And my meister, fortunately, was a very kind man called Meister [? Jupp. ?] I thought it was his surname, but after the war I heard that [? Jupp ?] was a first name. So regrettably I don't know his real name. I knew then that he was from Westfalen, because I asked him and he told it to me. So I-- I tried to find him after the war. I mean, here, from Israel. But it was impossible to really. He was approximately 40ish. And he came to my work to see how I was working, what I was doing, to help me, to explain to me how to do that simple work, which, unfortunately, I could not do perfectly, although I tried to. To tell you the truth, I did not want to sabotage, because I didn't know how to do it. Maybe if I had known exactly how to do it without being discovered, I would have done it. So he explained to me how to do my work with those small pins, or whatever they were. And one day he became angry at me. And he said, why are you so awkward? [SPEAKING GERMAN]. And I answered very naively, [SPEAKING GERMAN]. I have never done this in my life-- a foolish answer, really. So his question was, what did you do with your life? Or what did you do in your life-- something like that. If he asked me, I answered him. I told him that my parents were both doctors, and I would have liked to study medicine as well. He was very surprised. And to this day I don't understand why he was surprised. How could he have thought that the Jews who were haftlings, internees in the camp, prisoners, were criminals, because among the Germans he knew that most of them were criminal elements and prostitutes naturally, besides the political prisoners, whom he would recognize from the [NON-ENGLISH] from the triangle, depending on the color.
The red ones were political prisoners. So he was surprised. And from that day on he was very, very kind to me and brought garlic nearly every day. Now we know the importance of garlic, because I read recently on the subject, but I have known it for years. It's not just vitamin, but there are very precious substances in garlic. And he called me Fraulein Knoblauch. He gave me a nickname, 'Miss Garlic.' And I gave some of my garlic to my sister, and she shared it with her so-called boyfriend, [? Viktor ?] [? Beja. ?] In connection with Meister [? Jupp, ?] I would like to tell another episode which was very, very important. I don't know the date. And again, I found out the approximate date in the Kalendarium. He came to my machine, and he whispered something into my ear. He was very cautious, lest someone might hear him. He said, [SPEAKING GERMAN]. And I remember these words exactly, which in English mean, 'See to it that you get home. There are no chimneys any longer.' Now chimney was, of course, a euphemism for gassing, and the crematoria. And I found out from the Kalendarium that the gassing was stopped on the 2nd of November. And it was a fantastic birthday gift for my 20th birthday two days later, which was on the 4th of November. That's where I celebrated my 20th birthday, in the Union in Auschwitz. There was another meister who was very cruel. And he was Meister [? Klein, ?] the Meister of the control department, which was adjacent to my [NON-ENGLISH]. He had a dog's face, a pug's face, [NON-ENGLISH]. And the girls called him like that, [NON-ENGLISH]. He was [NON-ENGLISH]. He told on the girls to the management of the factory, and especially to the SS, when he suspected some sabotage going on. And there was really sabotage going on in that department. And naturally, all the girls hated him. So I can tell you that I was very lucky. Now I remember several kapos, Union kapos, who were-- I don't remember exactly-- either criminal elements or prostitutes. And one of them, Kapo [? Hansi, ?] was released from Auschwitz while we were there. And I can tell you the scene as I vividly remember it. She was outfitted with some very nice [NON-ENGLISH]. She received new clothes. And I don't have to tell you where they came from. And she was allegedly released to work in the town of Auschwitz. To work in what quality? Probably in her previous occupation, the oldest in the world. Then there was Kapo [? Maria ?] and Oberkapo [? Erika. ?] They sometimes gave not just slaps on the face, but beat up some girls whom they didn't like, or with whose work they were not satisfied. Fortunately, I did not receive any beatings from them-- only once a slap on my face from-- that was from a block of a-- a Jewish girl from Belgium. And it was because I had bought a head kerchief. At that time we were not allowed to wear kerchiefs, but it was just an association that she gave me. Maybe not just one slap on my face because of that illegal piece, or illegal property that I had acquired for bread or for something else. Now there were toilets in the Union. And the toilets were in cubicles. And sometimes we just went there for three minutes' sleep. And I'm not exaggerating. One could sleep for three minutes. And once I may have overslept, because the German Aufseherin, the overseer woman in uniform, on the part of the SS-- but I only found out recently that those women whom we called SS women were not SS women, because the SS did not have women-- only men. So anyhow, they were in the employment of the SS. Was waiting by my machine. And the when I came back, she gave me some slaps on my face, and was very furious that I had been too long in the toilet. Now that same woman also saved my fingers when I dozed off, which often happened, because it was very difficult to switch from one state of awareness, and working awake from the day shift to the night shift. It was a whole switchover of our biological functions. And although we slept during the daytime, probably we couldn't sleep all the time at-- especially at the beginning. So it happened that we dozed off by the machine, which was very, very dangerous for our fingers. 
INT: What people did do after they came back from work and went to sleep? Did they talk about things? What did they speak about, if at all? LV: I can't remember any concrete conversations, especially not in the new camp, because in Birkenau, when we were in [NON-ENGLISH], after coming home from work, in the evening, after we left the factory after 6 o'clock in the evening, we had a few hours left before we went to bed, to the so-called bed, to the [NON-ENGLISH]. And then we talked. And naturally the subject of our daily talk was the transport that had just arrived, because the ramp was just near our blocks, and crematorium number 2 was also very, very close. And we heard from the kitchen girls what transport had arrived. And sometimes they told us that they had prepared so-called coffee. It was not coffee. I don't know what. Chicory or some other substance, plus naturally the bromide which they put in the coffee, had remained untouched, because most of the transport went into the gas. And-- and that was really horrible to hear from the kitchen girls. But in Auschwitz proper, in the new camp, we were so tired after the night shift that we went to bed. And especially I had to wake up at midday, at noon, to go for that extra soup. So I don't remember having had conversations or social [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] contacts with other girls, other women, than those who were in my block, and with whom I worked In the factory. I forgot to tell you something important in connection with sanitary conditions. That to our great luck and really joy, there were showers in the factory. And I can't tell you exactly whether we could take a shower every morning after work, or twice a week. But even if it was not every day, it had a very sanitary effect, and we were very happy. 
INT: Did you have soap? LV: Yes, and at that time, you know, as even after the war, there were rumors that that soap was Rein Judisches Fett. And we really didn't know the truth. But now we know that it was not true, because the J wasn't even a J. It was an I. So it couldn't have been Rein Judisches Fett. It meant 'industry' or something else, the word-- the letter I.  INT: We come to the end of tape number eight. LV: Yes.  INT: --if you were aware of any sexual relationship or romances in Auschwitz. LV: Yes. [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] At the beginning, in the horrible Mexico, we heard about some women who used to go to the fence. There was a fence without electricity. And men were on the other side. And one of the women whose name I remember, and-- she survived, so I don't want to mention her name-- undressed herself. And just for exhibiting her body, she got some food from those men. Now in the-- in the Union, there were some romances. And two of them are really very nice. And I would like to tell about them. One between my sister and her so-called boyfriend Viktor Beja from Saloniki. Viktor was about 28 years old. He was silversmith or jeweler, which was a very common Jewish occupation in Saloniki. And I don't remember why he often came to the department where my sister worked. Probably he had some job there. And he spoke French with my sister. The Salonikians knew, beside Greek and Ladino, also French. And he fell in love with my sister. I don't think my sister was very much in love with him, but he liked him. He was a very good-looking young man. And once he made her a medallion from some not very, very precious metal. But he was not the only one who made such medals and medallions or so-called pieces of jewelry. [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] After that-- and also a necklace. And somehow it was found out. Probably somebody told on him. And he didn't come to work for several days. And my sister heard later from him that he had received 25, which meant 25 whip lashes as a punishment. But he never betrayed my sister, and did not betray to whom he had given this medallion and the necklace. And he also repaired the sole of my sister's shoes, boots, which was really very important because without these boots she wouldn't have survived the death march. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] We learned each other's addresses by heart. I know it to this day-- Rue-- I say Rue because we spoke in French-- [? Santa ?] [? Amalia ?] 36 in Saloniki. And my sister and Viktor corresponded after the war. Viktor wanted my sister to emigrate with him to Palestine. But my sister didn't want to leave us. So he disappeared from our life, and I wrote to, to the rabbi or to the community of Saloniki in the '60s, and found out that he had emigrated to the United States. And in '78, I tried to find him in New York. And I found out that he had died there in '74. The sad story in connection with him is the fate of his brother, [NON-ENGLISH], with whom they went on the death march. And he was shot on the death march. Now, another-- 
INT: The second romance? LV: Yes, the second romance was much more serious. It was between Simi Fuchs, who was the mechanic who repaired my machine from time to time, and between Hertha Ligeti. Simi was a Hungarian Jew, as a matter of fact, from Transylvania, as we were. And he had a library in the [NON-ENGLISH]-- Hungarian [NON-ENGLISH]. He was an illegal communist, and he told me that he had been in prison under the Romanians and under the Hungarians for his illegal communist activity. And as he had a library, he also told me about his love for literature. And he was very pleasantly surprised when I told him that I-- my hobby was reciting poems. And for the matriculation exam, which had been a year before, in '43, I had learned over 100 poems by heart, by the famous Hungarian poets. And he brought me paper and pencil. Now, you must know that possessing paper and pencil was the most extreme-- was an extremist act of, of sabotage and anti-German, anti-Nazi activity, because it was really dangerous to have-- dangerous for them, for Jews to possess paper and pencil, because it was a means of communication. And I knew that. I knew the danger that it entailed. He asked me to write down as many poems as I could remember by heart, because he wanted to take these poems to the man's camp, and read them aloud to the men, which was part of an activity to raise the morale, and to, to upkeep, or to keep up the Jewish, Jewish culture alive to which we had been used everywhere in the [NON-ENGLISH]. And I wrote down several poems. I don't remember which, but the poems I wrote down I think were mostly so-called revolutionary poems. But there may have been others. And later I found out that he had given the poems to a girl to somehow tie them to-- tie the pages together and make a kind of a booklet. And another girl drew some nice illustrations on the cover. I didn't see the booklet after that. But-- now I will skip a few years-- after the war he became my husband's colleague at the University of Cluj, at the [? Bolyai ?] University. And then we met again. He had already married Hertha, Hertha Ligeti from the Kontrolle department, with whom he had that very nice romance. And then he told me that it was part of his illegal resistance activity, because he was one of the members, and of course, in the secret cell of the Auschwitz Jewish Underground. And he had received that task to organize raising the morale of his fellow Hungarian inmates in this way too. And I was very glad that I had taken part in the Underground movement, although I didn't know about it, which is a shame. 
INT: [LAUGHS] LV: And Hertha--  INT: Were you involved in any other clandestine activity? LV: No, nothing, because nobody approached me. And I don't know if somebody had approached me, I can't say now if I had accepted it or not. But probably, because I did not do anything besides writing down these poems, the-- I was one of those who contributed most to the erecting of a memorial sculpture in honor of the four martyred Jewish girls who were hanged in Auschwitz on the 6th of January. And in my short address at Yad Vashem on that occasion, I said that I was not privileged to have known any of the four heroines. But they also fought and died for me and for my sister too, and instead of us, because we wouldn't have had the courage to do what they did. And I, I think that it's true, what I am saying now. I wouldn't have done anything so dangerous that it would have cost my life.  INT: Can you describe this event, please? LV: I can't describe the event, because fortunately I was not there. I was sick. I was in the revier on the 6th of January. But we knew that after the revolt of the sonderkommando, which took place on the 7th of October, 1944, some girls were arrested in the Union. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] The girls were Ala Gertner, Regina Safirsztajn, [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] and Estusia Wajcblum. The atmosphere was terrible, because several other girls were also beaten up at interrogations. And [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] somehow, luckily, they escaped, because the girls who, who were caught did not disclose their names. But the knowledge itself that the girls were being held in the bunker of Block 11, and were being tortured there. And there were rumors. And everybody knew that it was true. That was horrible. And it created an atmosphere of panic in the fact that it-- nobody dared talk to, to anyone. Of course, they were in small cells so that nobody knew more than one or two girls who took part in the smuggling operation. Because that was the activity that connected our Union factory with the revolt of the sonderkommando. That as it turned out after the war, quite a few women and men took part in smuggling out explosive powder-- the so-called Schwarzpulver or black powder-- in the most ingenious ways-- in their armpits, small-- in small bags sewn in their clothes, or in double bottom bowls of food. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] About 15 years ago, I met a man at a wedding. And we talked-- a man from-- a man from Transylvania. And naturally, where were you during the war, et cetera, et cetera. I worked in the Union. And so it turned out that both of us worked in the same place. And he told me, which was then a novelty, because nobody talked about that, about 50 years ago-- maybe more than 50 years ago, he said, very simply, matter of fact, I smuggled out some explosive powder from the factory. Somebody gave it to me. And I had to give it to a man called Yehuda Laufer. And I didn't know Yehuda Laufer at that time. But shortly after that, he found out that Yehuda Laufer, who unfortunately died about a year ago, was also living in Haifa. So they met. And he told me that he was smuggling this powder, once he said in a-- in his portion of bread, making a hole in it; and once in a double-bottomed can or bowl, or-- in which he, he received his soup. 
INT: Did you know anything about the activities of the girls while on-- LV: No.  INT: --at the same time? LV: I did not know anything. I only knew that they were suspected of having smuggled out explosive powder, but nothing more. Once I watched a terrible scene. And I don't know to this day if it was connected or not with this activity. But the reason for the 25 lashes received by a girl in front of our Nachtshift was some sabotage. We had to watch as the girl received these lashes on her naked bottom. And it was just horrible to watch. I, I don't know how it is possible that some other friends of mine, whom I asked about it, could not recall it, but I remember it as if it were today. I want to tell you about an episode not connected with this, but it just occurred to me that only once did I have the feeling I and our kommando, in the building of the Union, that we are going to be gassed. I don't know why we were taken one morning or evening. I can't even recall if it was in the time that we were living in Birkenau or in the new camp. Before starting our work, we were taken into a large hall. And we had to wait for several hours there. And suddenly we felt panic, because there were some signs that were ominous. We felt that we were [? horded ?] into that hall to be either gassed in some strange way, or killed, all of us. And we started shouting. It lasted for a few moments. And suddenly the door opened, and we went, as usual, to the [NON-ENGLISH], where we had to leave our coats, or whatever we had. I don't exactly remember when it was and how it was. But I will never forget the few moments of panic. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] [SIGHS] I want to tell you about the rumors in connection with sexual encounters. I am sorry that I am-- sometimes-- I remember sometimes something, and I turn back because I want to mention something. I'm sorry that my story is not really 100% continuous, but that's how the human brain works. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] Under the floor of the work halls of our factory there were some canals. And they were covered with rectangular slabs of, I don't know, stone or whatever, cement, whatever material they were made of. And sometimes these slabs were removed. And underneath were the canals. When there was an air raid, which sometimes happened, especially during the big bombardment, which I remember-- we were then in the day shift. And it happened during the day, on the 13th of September, as I learned it afterwards. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] The Germans-- all the staff and the [? Aufsehrenen, ?] and the meisters, and I think also the kapos, were allowed to go to the shelters-- underground shelters. But we were not allowed to go anywhere. It was horrible when we heard the windows being broken and the noise of the bombing. And we simply could not escape. But there were these canals under which we could hide, because there were holes where we could get into-- underground into these canals. And where we moved forward, we had the slabs of stone or whatever above our heads. So we supposed that they could protect us. Now, there were rumors that during these raids, which sometimes lasted for quite a while, love encounters were happening. I don't know, but something very nice. I was-- in that factory, I visited the factory on the 7th of October, 1994, when I took part in a delegation on the 50th anniversary of the Auschwitz revolt, and also the dedication ceremony for a memorial plaque in honor of the four girls. And no visiting group from anywhere, anywhere in the world had ever been allowed to go into that Union factory. In general, the guides don't even know where it was, or which building was our factory. But with the help of the leader of our group, the Robota Foundation and [INAUDIBLE], the Roza Robota Foundation, arranged a visit to, to our factory. It was a very moving experience for me. You can imagine. Although I could not recognize the work halls, but it was the same building, with all the changes that had occurred. But suddenly I saw the canals. And I told our group, and some persons from the management who had remained there to receive us, whatever I remembered from those times when we were working in the Union. And a video film was made of that visit. And when I showed the video film to my family here, and my sister saw it, suddenly she said, oh, Viktor kissed me in those-- in that canal once. 
INT: [LAUGHS] LV: So it must have happened during one of those air raids. But it was an innocent kiss.  INT: What, what did you know about the outside, the events which happened outside all this time towards the end the '44? LV: [DRINKS] One event before the end of '44 was the 20th of July. It was the attempt on Hitler's life, and we heard about that. I don't know how the news filtered into the Union. Probably through the meisters, but not the meister told me about it. I heard it from the girls that, unfortunately, Hitler is alive. He was wounded, but nothing happened and we were not liberated.  INT: What did you know at that time about the war, about the front? LV: We heard rumors that the Soviet Army had stopped on the other bank of the Vistula. And we were deeply saddened by it, because as the months passed by-- and I'm talking about November, even December-- we did not know concretely that the front was approaching us, and was really, really coming here. [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] By mid-December it was already clear that the Russians were approaching our area. But when and how this would take place was unknown to all of us. And there was kind of a fear. I couldn't say panic, but a, a general atmosphere of anxiety. How would this great, fateful event take place? Would it bring our end, the liquidation of Auschwitz with all the inmates, or would it bring our liberation? Nobody could foretell it. But now I know that the liquidation of all the inmates, with all the killing installations, had been planned by Otto Moll. And I read about it in several books. And all the details, what ingenious plans he had for the liquidation of all the inmates. 
INT: What did you know at that stage about what's happening in other camps? LV: We did not know anything, and we didn't even know names of other camps. We only knew about former ghettos, as I told you, about the liquidation of Litzmannstadt, or Lódz, and what the girls told us, the Polish girls, about their own ghettos where they had lived before they were deported to Auschwitz. But of the existence of other concentration, concentration camps, no one had any idea. And I knew the word Plaszów, because back in August, one afternoon when I returned from work, the girls told me that Vago, [? Fritzi ?] and [? Eddie-- ?] Vera's mother and sister-- were looking for me. And I was at the factory. But other girls who were working in the aussenkommando were in the camp. And they met them. I had never met them before. And they had been in Cracow, in Plaszów, for about two months. They had been brought back to Auschwitz. And then in August, by the end of August, they received their numbers, because when they had been first taken to Cracow, they didn't have numbers. Then they were being taken to another place. And they wanted to see me. And they told these girls that they wanted to meet me before being loaded onto the trains for a transport. They didn't know where they were going. So when we came back from the factory we didn't find them any longer. But so we heard about the existence of some concentration camp in the vicinity of Auschwitz, just near Cracow. 
INT: Tell me. You said that you will come back being sick in the camp. Can you describe-- LV: Yes.  INT: --what happened, please? LV: It could have been [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] in the second half of December when, one night, I ran a very high fever. It could have been about 40 degrees Celsius. And I simply was unable to stand by my machine. I was falling and, and fainting. And I was allowed to go to the infirmary. Now, I had never been to the Union infirmary before. And it was a very, very small place. It probably served only for emergency treatments when somebody got injured during work. You won't believe me. The size of that infirmary in the factory was about 2 meters by 2 meters-- not larger than that. And a very kind middle-aged woman doctor examined me. And to my joy, she was Hungarian-- a Hungarian Jewess. And not only that, she was from Transylvania, from a small town not very far away from our town, but I have never been there. She was from [NON-ENGLISH]. And she was very, very kind to me. And my first words to her were, my mother was also a doctor. And she was sort of angry. She said, well, why, why do you say, 'was.' And now I was angry at her, because it was already December. And I only said, because I know. She had me [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] hospitalized. I say hospitalized, but the revier couldn't be called a hospital. It was a sick ward. Because the main hospital, where operations were performed, was in the main men's camp, about which I will tell you in a few minutes. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] Now, I want to, to give the name of this kind doctor. She was [? Gisel ?] [? Laboum. ?] Because I was to meet her again during the death march. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] The revier was one block. It was the revier of those few blocks in the new women's camp. There were three-tiered beds, or bunk beds, as usual. And they were very close to each other so as to accommodate as many patients as possible. But in one bed there was place only for two women. And conditions were fairly normal, I should say. We had the same conditions as in our block. 
INT: We have to finish tape number nine, and we'll go on in a minute. LV: I don't think I received any treatment there-- maximum, some aspirin-- but nothing else. But there were some women who had undergone operations. For example, one woman had been operated on, with appendicitis. And a very sad episode is the case of a Belgian Jewess, who was my partner in my bed. And when she was brought there, while I was on already on the revier. She had her breasts bandaged, and it was a very strange sight. So naturally, I asked her what happened-- what had happened to her. And she told me that when she arrived in Auschwitz, she was pregnant, but it couldn't be seen. And when it started showing, she was, of course, frightened to death, because she knew that she wouldn't be allowed to live. But her aufsherin in the [NON-ENGLISH]-- she was from the [NON-ENGLISH], because on the revier, there were many women from other kommandos. I didn't know her from the [NON-ENGLISH]. The aufseherin was satisfied with her work. And she promised her that she would not be sent to the gas. She would be delivered of the baby, and-- but the baby wouldn't be left to live. And she gave birth to a girl. The girl was taken away and killed-- she knew that the-- she was killed by a phenol injection. And she said, obsessively, I didn't want to see my baby! I don't love her! I didn't love her for a moment! I don't love her! I will meet my husband. I will find my husband again. And I'll have more children. Regrettably, I don't know what happened to her. I can only hope that she survived the death march and returned home and found her husband. 
INT: What was your sickness? LV: No, I had bronchitis. And I spent several weeks on the revier. I think I had been forgotten and left there. And I had no ambition to return to work-- although, I think I could have after about 10 days. But I stayed more than 10 days on the revier. So to this day, I have no idea why I stayed for such a long time. One day, a very strange event happened. Some women from the revier were called to be taken over to the men's camp, to the hospital, to be X-rayed. And because I knew that my condition was not terrible-- that I was not in such a state as to be-- to be killed, to put it simply-- because I was already feeling better-- and there were other women around me who were more seriously ill-- somehow, I was not panicked. I did not think that it was a-- a diversion, it was a trick to kill us. We were accompanied over-- on foot, because the men's camp was nearby-- to the men's camp. And we were waiting on the lagerstrasse, which means the road in the camp itself-- was made up of just a few brick blocks. And there were some men loitering about. And to my surprise and great joy, I met a group of men from my small town. Just imagine. It-- it was really unbelievable. And I told them quickly, in a few words, that I and my sister were working in the [NON-ENGLISH], that my mother had been gassed, and I didn't know where my father was. Now, it turned out after the war that, I think, two of these boys were taken to Mauthausen, and to a sub-camp of Mauthausen, either to Melk, or at the end, to Ebensee. I don't remember where they met my father. And they told him that they had seen me and [? Anikó, ?] and I were alive and well. And my father was happy. And from that, he understood what had happened to our mother. And they really had taken us over to be X-rayed. 
INT: What for? LV: For my lungs, because I had bronchitis. Who can understand the illogical logic of Auschwitz, so to say-- the aberrations and the irrationalities of Auschwitz? A few weeks before the Russians liberated Auschwitz, before we were taken on the death march, they were curious to see my lungs. But anyhow, [LAUGHS] that's what happened. Now, I remember New Year on the revier. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] I was allowed to attend a New Year Eve party, which the girls had organized, and had prepared shows, and it was dancing and singing. You can imagine how they felt, why they were performing. And the ladies, the aufsehrin were there, the kapos, the blockovas, the [NON-ENGLISH], the so-called secretaries of death, the girls who were in all the offices. And the performance was really quite interesting. I remember one line of a song some girls sang. And it sounded like this in German-- just one line-- [GERMAN]. And they sang it so joyfully, which means, also to come to the concentration camp. And the gist of it was that it was such fun to be here, that somebody-- I don't know who-- would like to join us there. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] And once, I think it was also while I was on the revier and getting a little bit better, I was allowed to see a film. To this day, I don't understand how it came about, and why there was a cinema. And the film was a Hungarian comedy with actors-- some of the actors, or at least one, [NON-ENGLISH], a Jew. I suppose that the SS didn't know that he was a Jew. But that was also one of the very strange and not tragic experiences of our camp life. 
INT: Till when do you stay in the revier? LV: Before answering that question, another very nice episode-- reading. The first book, and the only book, I had ever seen during my whole camp life was on the revier. Somehow, a book with Polish short stories had been smuggled into the revier-- probably from the so-called Kanada kommando. And the girls, the patients, were passing the book on. Bed-- it went from bed to bed. And I don't remember how many minutes each was allowed to read from that book, and so it made the rounds. And when it came to me, I hoped that nobody would notice that I didn't know a word of Polish. But I read it avidly-- such was my thirst for reading, for the printed page. I was looking for words which I knew, which I had heard spoken, and I was curious to see how those words were written. But of course, I couldn't understand any sentence. By the way, I learned one Polish song, which I could only recite, because the girls liked to sing it in Polish. And it's the equivalent of [NON-ENGLISH], which is the graduating song after the matriculation. And it sounded like this. It went like this-- [SINGING IN POLISH]. And I also know what it means, but I won't translate it now. But--  INT: Please do. LV: Oh, boy. Life runs by-- passes by very fast. [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] In a year, in a month, in a day, we won't be together again-- something like that. Anyhow, I enjoyed reciting it in Polish. So the book went on, and I kept the book as long as anyone else had the right to keep it. [LAUGHS] And I enjoyed it. Now, [? Anikó ?] was not allowed to visit me. But I think she came nearly every day, and we could meet in the toilet-- secretly. And once, she received a premier [? shine, ?] some kind of a bonus, for which one could buy something in the canteen. And that something was a bowl of bouillon, or mustard-- I don't remember why just mustard. But she brought me hot soup. And I still remember how-- how happy I was that she brought me that soup. [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] On the 6th of January, my sister came crying, and she told me the horrible experience of having watched the hanging of two girls. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] Four girls had been condemned to die by hanging, and the gallows were erected in the courtyard of our camp. And this horrible murder [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] was performed by twos-- two girls in front of the [NON-ENGLISH], and two girls in front of the [NON-ENGLISH]. And my sister was standing in the first row. And she closed her eyes. The aufsehrin slapped her and shouted at her-- open your eyes! [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] I did not know that [? Estutia ?] Weisblum's sister, Hanka, who is a good friend of mine, she lives in Ottawa now-- Hanka was 16 at the time. She was hidden in the revier by a doctor, so that she should not be obliged to stand there and watch the hanging of her sister. It seems that it was kept in secret, because-- I simply don't understand how I, who was in the revier, didn't know about it at the time. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] [SIGHS] It was just horrible. After the hanging, when the guys went back into the blocks, they received an extra portion of sausage-- [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] something-- a food [NON-ENGLISH], was the word, a surplus-- something extra, a plus. [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] It was just horrible. And because I did not attend it, I-- I don't want to tell anything about it from hearsay-- only what my sister experienced by being slapped on the face because she closed her eyes. 
INT: So till when were you in the revier? LV: [SIGHS] What I told you now, the hanging, took place on the 6th of January. On the 18th of January, I was already feeling much better. I'd gathered some strength. Because this period of-- of my rest in the-- on the revier, was-- had a very salvatory effect on me, because I don't think I could have survived the death march without this-- these weeks of rest. On the 18th of January, it was on a Thursday afternoon, somebody-- I don't know who-- announced, all those who are able to march should immediately go back to their blocks, because we are leaving Auschwitz. But even the day before, my sister had told me that there were rumors that the evacuation would take place very, very soon. Of course, nobody knew the exact date or hours. And as I was getting ready to leave, a woman whom I had not known before, simply [SIGHS] grasped my feet. And she lay on the ground. It was terrible. She grasped my feet and my legs, and she shouted and implored me. I don't know why just me. Grab-- drag me with you! Drag me, drag me with you! Because somehow, it was taken for granted that all of those who remained behind would be liquidated. And there were such plans, even for the revier-- for the revier in Auschwitz, and for all the reviers in Birkenau. They didn't have time to carry it out. And I ran out, with many others who were able to walk-- not all of them. And [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] as I passed by the door of the pharmacy-- the revier had a pharmacy-- I saw that it was open. I ran in. And I don't remember if I was the only one there, or if there were some other girls, but there was not-- there was no one in charge. I simply grabbed what I could. And that was some handfuls of aspirin, and rolls of paper bandage-- because paper bandage was used for wounds, for everything-- not real bandage. And quinine-- why quinine? Because it happened to be there. And I saw it. I grabbed it. I sold it after the liberation. And I even brought home some of the aspirin I took. I filled my pockets, and I had a small satchel-- [INAUDIBLE] satchel, which I have kept to this day, made from the striped cloth for uniforms. And I ran out to the block where my sister was waiting for me. She supposed that I would be coming over, because she knew that my condition had improved. And then we heard that the so-called [NON-ENGLISH], the clothing stores, had been broken into-- either had been broken into, or they may have been opened by the SS, in order to allow us to get well-dressed for the march.
Because now, it was announced, and everybody knew-- without knowing the-- our destination-- that we would leave Auschwitz, which the word being the evacuation of Auschwitz. And we ran to the basement. That's the basement of one of the blocks was the clothing storeroom. And my sister and I went to the farthest end of that huge, [NON-ENGLISH]. And we put on whatever we found that was suitable-- several sweaters, [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] all kinds of stockings, warm, woolen stockings. I found a long flannel shirt, a gray shirt that was so long, [LAUGHS] that it was hard for me to walk. But it saved my life, I can-- I can say, because it kept me warm. And I had my coat over it. Then we took some blankets. And we found some string-- so we could tie them together-- and armfuls of all kind of clothing-- whatever we thought we would be able to carry. But I can tell you that we had to throw them away during the death march. Regrettably, we couldn't find any knapsacks, or-- not knapsacks, but any ready-made bags in which we could have put the reserve clothing. And as we were amassing all these pieces of clothing, suddenly, there was a-- an alarm. The alarm sounded. And the lights went out. That's how it usually happened, when there was a [NON-ENGLISH], an air raid. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] In most cases, there was no real air raid-- only the alarm. And there, I was with my sister at the farthest end of that huge, [NON-ENGLISH], in a corner. And I said to my sister, what if-- she guessed what I wanted to say-- which meant we would hide here under these clothes. Because really, nobody could find us there-- there were so many clothes. Everything was thrown. All the place was a mess. You can imagine. But outside, the guards were already shouting, [GERMAN]! All out! Out! Fall in line, [GERMAN]. Fall in line! And their German Shepherd dogs were barking menacingly. And then, I don't know if my sister or I said, the dogs can sniff us out here. And it was quite probable and logical that they would send in their dogs to find us, to find those who wanted to hide under the clothing. So we came out. We were also afraid, naturally, that before leaving the camp, they would blow up the buildings. Why should all the buildings fall into the hands of the Russians? And not only the buildings, but everything amassed in those buildings. So we were simply afraid. And came out. And the lines were formed-- the [NON-ENGLISH]-- hundreds. That's how we were-- we were marching always to work-- hundreds-- 100, the second hundred, the third hundred. I don't exactly remember how many hundreds we were, but that's how we were always organized for marching. And it was getting dark. It was around-- it could have been around 7:00, or 8 o'clock in the evening-- dark, of course, because it was January the 18th-- winter in Poland. And we, with the other kommandos from our small camp, were marched out of our camp. The gates were probably left open. And as we were marching in the dark, [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] we saw Stalin candles, as they were called. They were Katyusha rockets-- flying. And we heard detonations from a distance. So we knew that the front was very near. And I heard from a friend, who has a very strange story to tell-- which is true-- that there was a radio station built into her machine-- [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] probably with the help, or by, the late Professor Irving [NON-ENGLISH]-- one of the resistance fighters-- well-known [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] for his activity. But I don't want to tell about him. And a man, who used to come to her machine and talk into that radio, [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] said, on that day, when they were dismantling the machines, Kraków has fallen. And Kraków really fell on that day. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] So-- Kraków is very close to Auschwitz. She knew. I didn't know this, but she already knew and was getting ready to leave the camp. We did not receive any provisions for the march. We found out later that some other kommandos had received some food. We only had first day portion of bread, and whatever we got with it-- maybe a piece of margarine, or a piece of jam. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] So, we left the camp with just my small bag for bread, and nothing-- and what I told you-- the organized articles of clothing. We tied a blanket to my sister's hand over this piece of string. And it cut into her flesh, and it caused an abscess, a boil, which got infected during the death march. And the thought itself was horrifying-- that she would run a fever during the march. And what could we do about it? Now, of course, we had to throw away everything, because we couldn't carry it-- these things which we thought would be very important and-- and lifesavers on-- during the march-- the warm clothing. But we couldn't carry them. 
INT: How and when did you get any food? LV: Not yet. I want to tell you about it. So we were leaving Auschwitz behind. And they drove us away from the lights and sounds-- I mean, the Katyusha rockets and the sounds of the cannons, the artillery fire, which came nearer and nearer, which could bring our salvation, our liberation. They drove us away from all of it. And we passed through some villages. In one of the villages, the people threw molded, green bread, either at us, or to us. I will never know whether they wanted really to help us, and they didn't have anything better to give away-- because probably they, themselves, didn't have too much food to eat-- or whether it was simply out of scorn for these Jews. But we ate that green bread, which was to be our daily bread later on in Neustadt-Glewe-- mold-- just green bread. And I remember having divided it, not only with my sister-- I-- I divided it and shared it with my friends-- three sisters from a neighboring village, the [? Freid ?] sisters. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] We were very, very hungry. And as we were marching in that turmoil-- because we got mixed up with women, and even with men, from other kommandos and from Birkenau, who had joined us. There was no [NON-ENGLISH] kommando any longer. Suddenly, we met that kind woman doctor who had send me to the revier-- Dr. [? Gizella ?] [? Burm. ?] She was with her daughter, whom I had not met before. Her daughter was about two years older than me. And just imagine-- a fantastic act of charity, of humanity-- I can't find words to describe it. She gave me and my sister about two sugar cubes each. But sugar was more precious than diamond, because what could she have done with diamonds on the death march? Maybe later on, somewhere. And even if she-- they-- mother and daughter-- had a huge quantity, which they didn't, they were sure that in whatever camp they would be later on, they won't-- they wouldn't get a coffee with sugar. So [SIGHS] I-- I feel an admiration and appreciation and gratitude for that magnanimity. And once again, after sometimes, we bumped into them. And again, she gave us a few cubes of sugar, which I can really tell you-- they saved our lives. [PAUSES FOR 6 SECONDS] Starvation was horrible, because the suffering without being so hungry would have also be enough. As we say-- it's-- that they-- they say, [NON-ENGLISH]. It would have been enough. But hunger was the most horrible-- hunger and thirst. One night we-- 
INT: Let me finish-- LV: Yes.  INT: --tape number 10 here, and we'll go on in the next tape. LV: Yes.  INT: --march. How long was it? Where did you sleep? Where did you get the food, if at all? LV: No food. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] I don't remember how long it lasted. It could have lasted about three days. As I found out later, the distance between Auschwitz and-- I think the place, the railway station where we were loaded onto the trains-- in German it was Leslau, but in Polish it's Wloclawek. And most of the transports were loaded on freight cars on-- in that rail-- at that railway station, into different directions. Now, I remember only two nights. The distance is about 65 kilometers. But it could have been three nights. [SIGHS] One night we were in a stable, which I remember with a-- [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] a happy feeling, [LAUGHS] relatively, naturally. Because [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] some women were milking cows. And we received a very small amount of milk. But it was life-giving, like mother's milk. It was just fantastic. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] And I think we slept there. Another night which I remember was in a barn. We had to climb up on a ladder. And there was straw, soft straw like a bed. It was just fantastic to sleep there for a few hours. And in the morning, or whatever time it was when the SS guards shouted to get up and to get out from wherever we were-- because only a small group could sleep in that barn-- we-- we had simply a fleeting thought-- maybe we could hide under the straw. But it was very dangerous, because the guards made the [NON-ENGLISH]. They simply stabbed into the straw to check whether there are people hiding there. And we heard of several cases that some people who hid were shot on the spot. 
INT: Who-- who supervised you during the march? LV: They were not our regular SS men, but middle-aged Volksdeutsche. Some of them were even Transylvanians. And I say even, because we come from Transylvania. And the ones I remember, some of them, spoke Romanian. And we thought-- and when I say we, in most cases, I mean my sister and myself, or I mean the group of women with whom we were marching-- tried to strike up a conversation with these soldiers, because we thought that there was some affinity between us, the common language. But we were disappointed. They didn't want to-- to talk with us, and didn't tell us anything about our destination, which was the-- the main thing we would have liked to know. But on the way, during the march, [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] SS officers passed us by. They caught up with us, either on motorcycles-- mostly on motorcycles-- or motor cars. And they shouted something to these guards, probably giving them information about the directions to take, or they asked their superiors how long it would take to reach a certain place. And a very interesting psychological observation-- as long as we had no idea how long we were going to march on and on and on, or where we were heading, we felt that we could not survive any longer. We would die on the spot. But the moment we overheard an order or an answer, the name of a place, whatever it was-- naturally, we didn't know those place names-- or a number of kilometers, which meant a target, an aim-- we have to reach that place for whatever reason-- but who knew why-- we felt that we must hold out. And we can live, and we can really reach that place. And so it was. I want to tell you about a sight that every survivor who-- [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] who took part in those death marches-- because there was not just one death march-- can tell about-- [SIGHS] the bodies-- the corpses lying on the road-- because no one had the strength or the will to push them aside into the ditches somewhere, to-- to let this mass of humanity pass on, move on along the road. I will never forget [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] a young boy lying just in front of my feet. I don't know how the others who had gone before me didn't trample him. He-- his eyes were open. He had blue eyes. It was just horrible. And on the two sides of the road were the discarded pieces of clothing. Because nobody could carry all the blankets and-- and items of clothing they had taken with them. So we, too, had to throw away practically everything. 
INT: Did you meet any local population? LV: No, we did not, and never talked to them. I-- I want to tell something else. When we were allowed to rest for a few moments to relieve ourselves, we were told, now you have 10 minutes rest. We crouched. And there was a terrible danger of freezing to death. Because I found out later that the temperature was about 20 degrees minus-- Celsius. Maybe it was even colder-- the Polish winter. It was January, towards the end of January. And [? Anikó ?] and I remembered something our mother used to tell us, having heard about it from Jewish labor servicemen who had come home for a leave, and who told about friends who were frozen to death while relieving themselves-- because they fell asleep. So in these situations, [? Anikó ?] and I kept saying to each other, like a cracked gramophone record, do you remember my mother used to say? Don't fall asleep. Don't fall asleep. We will freeze. We will freeze. And so we tried to awake each other, because we were really dozing off. Now, everyone was struggling to get ahead of the others, because straggling behind, remaining at the end of the convoy-- I don't know how many hundreds of women were in such a huge contingent of-- of-- of women marching-- but disorderly, mixed-- no [? union ?] any longer. Anyone who remained behind was shot. So it was not only a threat-- don't stay behind. Don't lag behind. You will be shot. It's true. [SIGHS] My friend from Cluj, [? Ference ?] [? Noemi, ?] was there-- I didn't meet her there, only after the war-- with her mother and her 16-year-old sister, Vera. They dragged her along, because she couldn't march any longer. And then they realized that they couldn't drag her any longer, because they were endangering the lives of the three of them. The mother decided to leave Vera behind. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] They left Vera there. And they heard the shot. But the mother and [? Noemi ?] returned. [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] [SIGHS] [DRINKS] We finally arrived at the station. There were enormous masses of people from all over, from all the subcamps. There were probably several railway stations, but this was the main one. 
INT: Only women? LV: We also saw men, but we were loaded on the trains, only women-- the transports of women, yes.  INT: Were you told where you're going to? LV: Nothing at all. Now, they were open freight cars. We heard from other groups that they were loaded onto coal cars and were black. I am smiling, but it's really no laughing matter. They-- when they got off, they were black with coal. Ours was just a freight car, but roofless. Now, this journey to Fürstenberg, the railway station of Ravensbrück, was even more horrible than our journey, four-day journey to Auschwitz in the locked cars. Because there, at least we could sit on our knapsacks or shoulder bags. And we could also munch on the biscuits and the quince jam, which I remember. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] In these cars, we were standing [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] like sardines, but sardines are not standing. We were standing sardines. And we were snowed-in sardines, because there was heavy snow from time to time-- terribly cold, and no food at all.  INT: Water? LV: No water. I don't remember where we could lick some snow-- probably during the death march. But there was no clean snow. I don't-- I simply don't remember. But we must have licked some snow, because otherwise, we couldn't have survived. And if there was something to eliminate from our bodies, we had to do it on the spot there, standing upright. We were so cramped for space, that it was impossible to fall. So when we arrived, even stiff, dead bodies tumbled out of the car. 
INT: How long was the ride? LV: I don't know. We lost our sense of time.  INT: Was it day time or night? LV: It could have been three day-- day and night. It could have been two days. It could have been three days. I have no idea. I and my sister were standing at one of the sides of the car, exactly at the side of the car, very near to the front of the car, where there was a bench. And our guard was sitting on the bench. And his dog was lying near him, his fierce shepherd, German shepherd, as usual. At one moment, I noticed that the dog stood up-- stood up. And there was an empty space under the dog. And I felt an irresistible urge to crawl under the dog. I did it. I crawled under the dog, and I felm-- felt the animal warmth. It was just fantastic. And I don't know how it happened that the dog did not bite me. And I think the guard may have dosed off, because he didn't notice me. But at a certain moment, he awoke, and he shouted out at me. [NON-ENGLISH]! Get up, you Sarah! My dog has no space, or place-- whatever he meant. And to this day, I don't understand how he didn't order his dog to tear me up in pieces, how he didn't even beat me up for this really-- for the crime I had committed. Now, something very happy-- a happy event happened during that journey-- that we got something to eat. Probably the Red Cross had given out-- I don't know how, in what circumstances-- cardboard boxes with all kinds of food, canned food and sugar. I don't know what. I really don't remember. But we got very, very tiny amounts of this food-- whatever it was-- probably bread too. And the most horrible thing was the fight that was going on in the car for anything that somebody could snatch. And then somebody else wanted to snatch it away. I never attempted to snatch away anything from others, but others did. Others tried to snatch away whatever I got and my sister got. But whatever we ate then, the-- that small amount kept us somehow alive, until we got to our destination, which was a railway station. And I'd-- naturally, I didn't know where we had arrived. It was Fürstenberg. And there is a lapse in my memory. I have no idea how we hobbled along that road to the camp, because the camp has no railway station. We struggled. We hobbled. We-- we were somehow in a lethargic swoon, I can tell you-- half conscious, half asleep. Because I don't remember that we walked to the camp. But we were not taken by bus or by-- in trucks. I know that we marched. 
INT: Do you remember how long did you walk? LV: No. I don't know. It's a lapse in my memory. I don't know anything about it. But because, somehow, we had to reach the camp, and we were not-- I-- I-- I am sure that we were not transported, because we were thousands and thousands, and it couldn't have been organized. It was like the continuation of the death march-- something like that. Anyhow, we were somehow awakened from our half-conscious, slumbering state, by bright searchlights as we arrived in front of the camp, whose name we probably heard then for the first time in our lives. And it was Ravensbrück. Now why search lights? We saw from a distance, the women who had reached the gate before us, that there was some kind of a selection going on. But it was not a real selection, because real selections were made in the nude. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] We reached that point where it was taking place, and we had to discard everything that we were carrying in our hands. We kept the small [NON-ENGLISH]-- the bread satchels. We could keep that. But we still had some items of clothing-- very few. But I don't remember what we still had with us. The main problem for me and my sister was how to hide the abscess here on my sister's left hand, because we feared that she would be selected. And we had no idea in what ways people were being murdered in that camp, whether there was a gas chamber, or by shooting. As we later found out, both, plus many other-- [SIGHS] all kinds of ways of killing. In front of me, I saw something really pathetic, which I can't forget. An elderly woman-- when I say elderly, she could have been 40-ish, because no elderly women were kept alive in Auschwitz-- not Jewish women-- only Aryans-- was smearing something red-- lipstick-- on her lips and on her cheeks. And it reminded me of a very ugly, also elderly-- middle-aged woman-- by a [INAUDIBLE]. The poor thing was very ugly. And she continually feared selection. So she had her lips red all the time, and her cheeks too. And I'm sure she didn't want to-- to get a [NON-ENGLISH] for herself. [NON-ENGLISH] was the Polish word for lover. So she had different reasons for doing it. Now-- 
INT: How did she get the lipstick? Do you know? LV: Lipstick could be bought. There was a black market in Auschwitz and in-- especially in Birkenau-- but in Auschwitz too. And all these very precious items came from the Kanada-- Kanada, where the huge, huge storerooms were-- from all over Europe, the best things one can imagine-- food and toiletry and everything-- especially items of clothing. Now we were really afraid-- panicked-- because of my sister's boil. In Auschwitz we called this-- and in Birkenau-- [NON-ENGLISH]. But it's an abscess with pus. And it was already infected. So she managed to hide it under the sleeve of her coat. And also her [NON-ENGLISH], her satchel covered it. And luckily for us, that selection was very cursory, very superficious, because-- superficial-- because there was such a huge mass of the women arriving in, those hours with our transport-- probably several thousand. They didn't have time to do a proper selection. But we imagined that there would be proper selections inside the camp. Now, at that time, we were already utterly exhausted and so hungry-- starved to death, I could say, to near death. And that evening, that first evening in Ravensbrück, was the most horrible evening in all our camp life-- without exaggeration-- more horrible than the first day in Birkenau when we learned the significance of the smoke and the flames, and of our mother just going up in flames.  INT: In what way was it the most horrible? LV: Because then, in those hours, we felt that we could not survive another hour, or let's say another day. We were very, very close to death, to real, physical death, especially from starvation. And we heard that there were some [NON-ENGLISH], these cauldrons, with soup, somewhere in the distance. There were no rows of five, as we usually were-- stood up-- when the guards were always shouting, [NON-ENGLISH]-- nothing of the sort-- a mass, an-- an amorphous mass of women fighting, struggling to get nearer to those cauldrons, which we couldn't see from a distance. But there was some kind of a stampede. We could sense the direction from the swarming masses. And the two of us had one small bowl or cup. I don't remember what it was. But fortunately, it was tied with a string. It was tied to my waist with a string. Because there were two things without which there was no life during the death march and after the death march-- shoes or boots, which we had from home, and a bowl or a cup-- something to get some soup or whatever. Some soup could we got. So we were somehow driven along in the direction of these buckets or cauldrons of soup. And we had to pay attention to [? Aniko's ?] wounded hand, injured hand. And I also gripped very firmly the bowl, even with a string attached to it, [LAUGHS] as so to say. Because we could have been lost without it. So at long last, somehow, we got there. I-- I don't remember the happy moment when a ladle of soup was splashed into that bowl. And I am sure that we could not get another bowl of soup for the other one, for me or for my sister, because there was no time for it. We had to-- to go along and to-- to leave our place for-- to other people. So we just got one-- got one portion, which saved our life at that moment. 
INT: Can you describe the camp, the-- the conditions in-- LV: Now--  INT: --where you were put in? LV: --we imagined that we would be registered and received with the usual ritual, as we were used to in Auschwitz. But nothing of the sort happened. There was no time for it because of the overcrowding. We were jostled into a huge circus tent. It looked like a circus tent. And we were lucky that we managed to get jostled into that tent, because we found out on the following morning, that many hundreds remained outside in the snow and in the freezing cold. Very few got into blocks-- and I don't know why-- into the so-called punishment blocks. Now, that [NON-ENGLISH]-- as I said, it was also called a [NON-ENGLISH]-- was enormous. And luckily for us, we were the last to be pushed into it, very close to the entrance. Because there was always a danger of being crushed to death in the rows of people-- not rows-- there were no rows-- that were behind us, up to the wall or-- a tent doesn't have a wall-- up-- up to the canvas of it.  INT: Do you have any appreciation how many people? LV: Maybe 1,000, but I don't know. Anyhow, we could not lie down, of course. We crouched or sat with our legs sideways on our feet. And the terrible thing was that there was no place on the ground to put down our feet-- not our feet, but those from behind who wanted to get to the toilet buckets. So they had to jump or to be pushed over to the heads of the others, in order to come forward. And when they reached us, who were just in the front row, probably in the front two rows-- or the third, or the second or third row-- I don't exactly remember-- they couldn't contain themselves any longer. And-- and that was terrible, because we tried to-- to doze off-- not to sleep. And-- and we couldn't because of-- of all those women who were jumping over our heads and were falling on us while they were running to the buckets at the entrance. 
INT: How many days or weeks where you kept there? LV: I have no sense of time. I don't know. I have no idea. But during the day, when we got out and loitered about, we saw miserable creatures dressed in torn rags-- not uniforms. They were not orderly kommandos. Most of them were speaking French. I don't remember having talked to anyone, although I spoke fluent French. But I simply don't remember. They had, most of them, wooden clogs. They either had not been allowed to keep their shoes from home, or they had worn away by then and received only wooden clogs. But that clattering, that noise, is still in my ears.  INT: We'll finish tape number 11 here. LV: So quickly?  INT: Conditions in Ravensbrück change, or did you stay the whole time in the tent? LV: No, we didn't stay all the time in the tent. And when I say all the time, it means all our stay in Ravensbrück was approximately three weeks. I couldn't tell you the date of our arrival. It was around the 25th of January. And I know that we left, and arrived in Neustadt-Glewe on the 16th of February. And one day we were registered. I don't remember how many days after our arrival. It happened in a-- in a building which I was told two years ago, when I visited Ravensbrück, was the central administration building. And now, two years ago-- two and a half years ago, I went into rooms on the right and the left of a corridor in that administration building. And I am sure that one of those room was the one which looked like a kind of a clinic, where we had to go in one by one. And some questions were asked. I think we had to undress, but we could keep our clothing. We got dressed again. And by that time, we had already washed ourselves in a washroom, which I forgot to tell you about. But that was quite a few days after our arrival. So questions were asked-- our Auschwitz number. And we were examined. And also something strange again, which I can't explain. Our height was measured. The instrument looked like a weighing machine. We stood up, and somebody [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] was sliding [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] tablet along a column. And our height was measured and noted somewhere, registered somewhere. Now again, the aberrations, the irregularities, the irrationalities of Auschwitz. [SIGHS] 
INT: Did you-- did you get any job? LV: And there we got a number, a Ravensbrück number. Mine was 99626, and Anikó was 99627. These numbers were printed on a piece of cloth in blue ink. And we had to put them-- I don't know how-- on our clothing. And we also got a small pink card with the same number. Later on, after the war, I found out from the famous book by Lord Russell of Liverpool, that in Ravensbrück the pink cards, so-called identity cards, were given out to those who were destined for the gas chamber. I don't know if it was by chance, or why, with what purpose we received such pink cards. I have my pink card to this day. And I showed it in Ravensbrück two and a half years ago. They were surprised to see, because they had never seen such a card. Anikó and I were sent to work-- I don't remember whether other friends came with us-- to the Jugendlager. We found out only later that it was the extermination camp of Ravensbrück, with a gas chamber. Our work was to fill [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] straw bags for mattresses. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] By that time, fortunately, Anikó had already been operated on. She was let into the infirmary, and she underwent a successful operation on her hand. It happened when an [? Aufsehren ?] was standing near her, and she chased her away because she was thinking now the stench came not only from her Auschwitz clothing, but from the boil on her hand, which was, so to say, rotting already. So she underwent an operation with anesthesia. And to this day she's grateful to the-- to the inmate doctor, and to the nurses who helped her. So we were there in that strange place. I say 'strange' because out of curiosity I opened the door of one of the blocks. The blocks were small, wooden blocks. And there was a large, very large room with all the women sitting on the floor, hundreds of them. I was shocked. Of course, I immediately asked, where are you from? And they said Budapest. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] And I thought of my grandmother, my 77-year-old grandmother whom I had left in Budapest on the 19th of March. She was not among them, and fortunately she survived the ghetto in Budapest. Then I closed the door. I didn't talk with them. But several months later I learned that they were waiting to be gassed. There was another room just in front of me. So there was a long corridor. And this room where I had entered was on the left, and just in front of me a smaller room. I opened the door out of curiosity. And that was really a horrible sight, because there were many corpses there. I quickly closed the door. We received an extra bowl of soup during that work, which was really very happy event for us. And we were glad that we could work there. But it didn't last long. And at that time, after the registration, we had already been moved to blocks. And mine, if I-- ours-- if I remember well, I remember two numbers, and I don't know why I remember just two numbers, either 28 or 32, but it may have been 30 or something else. Sometimes one doesn't know why one remembers something, and it may not be exact, but that's not relevant. 
INT: How many people on the block? LV: I don't know, but there were these bunk beds there. I think there were two-- I mean, double-tiered bunk beds with a blanket.  INT: Of what origin were the girls? LV: I don't know. I think they were mostly Auschwitz girls who had arrived together with us. And there were rumors, which proved to be true, that that block, or some similar blocks, were transport blocks, which meant that the inmates who were brought to those blocks were being prepared for a transfer to other camps, labor camps. And that was [INAUDIBLE].  INT: Do you remember from which countries they came, the girls? LV: No, no. If they were Auschwitz girls, then they were from Poland, from Greece, from Holland, Belgium, all the countries that we knew, knew of, Hungary, of course many of them.  INT: But you, you don't remember the girls who were with you? LV: But-- no. No. No, I don't. And in Ravensbrück I don't even remember if we were together with our friends from the Union. I don't know. And when I ask any of my friends who had been with us in the Union, and I am the head of the World Organization of Union Survivors, no one remembers Ravensbrück. They all say, it's so vague. We don't know how long we were there. We don't know who we talked to. We don't remember anything. It was a horrible transition period. And one day, zahlappell. Now, in Ravensbrück there were zahlappells, normal zahlappells lasting for several hours. And I don't remember whether we had been told in advance or not, but in general, we were not informed about our impending fate. So we always found out in the very last minute that it was to be not a selection, but a choice for a transport somewhere. Now, it was a horrible hour or two hours. I don't exactly remember how long it took for me, because my sister was not there. The moment they announced that zahlappell, my sister was not with me, because she had gone to the revier for a new bandage on her wound. It was healing very slowly, probably because our horrible subsistence diet on which we lived. Anyhow, I had to manipulate, to maneuver the rows which we had to stand, because we had to stand up in rows of five, as usual. And I jumped rows. I stood at the end of the five. And nobody wanted to let me in, because the friends were together, lagerschwesters, lager mothers and sisters and daughters as usual. That those who didn't have relatives had their new families in the camps. So it was just horrible, because I went from row to row to the left, because the officer started at the right. And Anikó was on the other side of this huge mass of, of hundreds and hundreds of inmates. And I was horrified. In the very last moment, she appeared, and somehow we managed to stand in one of the rows of five. And we were earmarked for Neustadt-Glewe, another camp. Now, most of the Auschwitz inmates, as I can see from the questionnaires that I sent out to my 355 members in the Union, most of whom are women, got to the camp called Malchow. We call it Malkov. And a smaller number reached Neustadt-Glewe. And there were also some other smaller camps. And very few women remained behind in Ravensbrück for all kinds of different reasons. Now, our journey to Neustadt-Glewe, which was a very short journey lasting for a few hours, because Neustadt-Glewe is not very far from Ravensbrück, was a pleasure ride, so to say. It came as a surprise. First of all, each of us got a loaf of bread without the streak of green color, which was to be our daily fair in Neustadt-Glewe. And we knew it from the death march, the mold-- moldy bread. And they were a real-- it was a real passenger train. And it was not very, very crowded. And we could even look out of the windows. And we looked out of the windows as if we were normal human beings. Of course, I'm not saying we felt like human beings, because we never lost our dignity or our self-respect and respect for others. And when I say 'we,' now in this case I mean my sister and myself, and some of our close friends. So-- 
INT: How long was the journey? LV: I don't know, but a few hours probably, or half a day. I can't tell. Because you know how it was in those days. The military trains had always priority. So as it was on our four-day journey, which could have lasted only one day from home, from the ghetto, that is to Auschwitz, so [INAUDIBLE]. And also from [NON-ENGLISH] to Ravensbrück. It lasted longer because we sometimes stopped and stayed and stayed and waited for trains to pass by, et cetera. Anyhow, we arrived--  INT: Who was supervising you? LV: Pardon?  INT: Who was supervising you? LV: I don't know. I simply don't remember. Probably SS men. I don't know. But I want to tell you something. When we were loaded-- or not loaded. Now I can't say 'loaded.' We got on these trains-- on this train. We met a girl from our town, [NON-ENGLISH] [? Piri, ?] who was in the good shape, better shape than we were. I don't remember where she had been before. But she was so kind that she promised to protect us, because she saw that Anikó and I were in bad shape, and we needed some protection. And at that time, Anikó was already very, very weak. And she kept repeating one sentence all the time-- I want to go to mother, I want to go to mother. And naturally it was a euphemism. I want to die, I want to die. But she said, I want to go to mother. So [? Piri ?] was very kind. And she said, I will protect you. I couldn't have imagined in what circumstances she would protect us, but this opportunity arose very, very soon. During that same night, the first night in, in Neustadt-Glewe, [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] the-- we got off the train, and we were not led into the camp. I don't know why. 
INT: What time did you arrive to the camp, day or night? LV: It was day, and we had to wait for many, many hours at the station. And my memories are very weak. I remember walking somewhere-- I mean, going on foot, not being taken in, in trucks. But I have no idea how long. We had to march somewhere to a huge hall. It may have been [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] at the small military airport, or hangar. Some women say it was a hangar. Others say it was the hall of the factory where we were to work for a period-- for a short period of time. Others say it was a huge barn. Nobody remembers exactly. But [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] that night was a horrible nightmare, because I don't know how many thousands of womens were [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] pushed into that hall. And those who got in first tried to lie down, instead of trying just to sit, because waves and waves of women were pushed in, or came in, after us. I-- well, I think I was among the first ones, because I tried to lie down. And then the struggle for life started during that night, for lebensraum, for living space. And we were simply killing each other. And it was then that I heard for the first time the Yiddish sentence which was to accompany us in Neustadt-Glewe in the camp, [SPEAKING YIDDISH]. Something like that, because I don't know Yiddish, but I understand it. 'Don't put your feet into my face.' [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] And there was beating and scratching and shouting. And the bodies were entangled, and were writhing. And I don't know whether it occurred to me only later, or maybe there, that I imagined that sight, that scene, that if somebody had watched us from above-- maybe if God had existed in those times-- sorry, God did exist in those times, but was busy. 
INT: Let's not go into it. LV: OK. Maybe, maybe He or She was busy with other things, other people. Anyhow, would have seen only parts of bodies, entangled bodies, like in a gas chamber when the Zyklon gas was tossed in. And I'm saying I don't know when I had that association, the visions were similar.  INT: How long did you stay there? LV: Only one night. And in the morning we were taken into the camp. And even now I don't know whether we were near the camp, or whether it was in the town. I can't tell you anything about that. It's vague memories.  INT: What happens in the camp? LV: [SIGHS] We were led into the camp. And there were blocks, and blocks of different types. Now, it turned out only later that the type of block we were accommodated in had belonged to the personnel of the, the small military airport. And they-- there-- they-- there were small rooms. There was a corridor. It was a block, a barrack or a block, with small rooms like an ordinary, ordinary living room like this one-- even smaller than this one. And we were crammed into these rooms, about 50, 60, 70 women. I don't know. I don't remember having counted them. But so many that when we laid down on the floor, on the bare floor, without blankets, nothing at all, not even a straw on the floors, we had to lie sardine-style. And if one turned round, all the row had to change position to the other side, even during sleep. Unconsciously, we had to do that, because there was not one centimeter left to move. Fortunately for us, and not for some other blocks on the other side of the camp, we had a washroom and toilets on the floor, on the other side of the corridor. The washroom was a normal washroom with several basins, and the toilets were normal toilets in cubicles, because, as I told you, the building-- not the building; the block was not originally meant for us. And that was a welcome change. But there was a huge latrine in the courtyard for the other blocks. And those inmates there didn't even have a waschraum. and sometimes they managed to come to our waschraum to, to get washed, because in the meantime, in Ravensbrück, we had been already infested with lice. Now, in the new camp we had no lice and no bedbugs-- in Auschwitz, I mean. So the lice started to suck our blood in Ravensbrück. Although there was a washroom, but it couldn't help, because we couldn't change our clothing, and our clothing was never disinfected, not even in Neustadt-Glewe. And we had no washing facilities. Unfortunately, we didn't wait for the summer to, to experience the washing facility that would have existed. But in winter-- and we arrived in February-- we had no way even of washing our underwear once at a time, because they couldn't have dried. 
INT: You mentioned before that you arrived on the 16th of February. How did you know the date? LV: [DRINKS] I don't know how we found out the date, but I know why I remembered the date. It would have been our mother's 47th birthday, which she was not allowed to reach. And so by association, I know that we arrived on the 16th of February.  INT: What was your work there? LV: [SIGHS] Some-- for some time at the beginning we did not work. And the all-time-consuming activity was delousing ourselves. So before reaching the point of our work, which was a happy event, everywhere in camps, in concentration camps, working was expected as something very good, because it meant life. But delousing was something that had to be done. And I did it for Anikó as, as well, because she was not, not able to, to undress. She had become very weak and apathetic and wanted to die. So I undressed her and washed her and deloused her. And once, only once, for fun, so to say, I counted my lice. And that was the snapping movement of killing lice. And I counted more than 100 at a sitting. We sat there and kept killing our lice. And after a few hours-- I am not exaggerating-- the offspring of those lice were sucking our blood again-- the same number. There were no fewer than at least 100 at a time. And we had, fortunately, warm sweaters, or whatever clothing we had. Even I had woolen stockings. Everything was full of lice. And naturally, our hair-- our short hair-- because we had already some hair on our heads. One day, I don't know under what circumstances, we were moved to-- who is some of us-- Anikó, I, and some friends, close friends from the Union, [? Illi ?] and [? Juji, ?] with whom we came not home, but we started our journey home, were picked out to work in the Dornier Werke, an aircraft factory. And we found out that our small camp had been set up the previous year for that purpose, to provide work force for the aircraft factory, and also for the small military airfield nearby. We were moved over to another block. And that also was a very happy event, because we had those bunk beds, which we had already known the type of bunk beds from Auschwitz, new-- from the new camp in Auschwitz, and from the Ravensbrück camp. And we got blankets. We worked in the night shift, and 12 hours, like in the Union. And we also got a bowl of soup at midnight, for which we were very happy, because we were on a starving diet all the time in Neustadt-Glewe. It was not an extermination camp, but I think we were held in reserve, either to be employed in that factory, or on the airfield, or to be sent maybe to other camps, or to simply die of natural reasons. And fortunately, we did not know until a short time ago, until exactly two and a half years ago when I visited-- revisited Neustadt-Glewe-- that there was an SDG, SS man. Sanitatsdienstgrad was his rank. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] A disinfector-- that was his job-- who was sent over from Ravensbrück to take the unfortunate selected victims from the revier back to Ravensbrück to be gassed. Now, of course, I am happy that we did not know about it then. And when I think of this job, that it was done by a 'disinfector,' then I have a strange association. He was an exterminator of vermin. And in Nazi ideology, Jews were ungeziefer, in German-- vermin under-- 
INT: Mm-hmm. LV: --or among many other categories of subhumans, of untermenschen. So it was just a fitting job for this exterminator to take. And he selected women.  INT: How long did you work in the Dornier? LV: Now, in the Dornier Werke, I and Anikó performed the job of [? nieten, ?] in German. It was, in, in English, these type of nails which are used on aircraft are rivets. So I had to climb up on a ladder. And around me I saw not only Jewish women-- now, I have to mention that-- Polish women and Ukrainian women who were together with us in our camp, but in different rooms, maybe even in our block. I don't remember them. But in other blocks. And we did that job on the wings of the aircraft. Now, I want to skip many years. As a new immigrant here in Israel--  INT: No, please-- LV: I went--  INT: --we talk about it later. LV: No, but it does--  INT: Stick to the story. LV: Having connection with the riveting that I taught pupils.  INT: Yeah, but-- LV: About aircrafts.  INT: --let's go back to your work. LV: Yes. Yes.  INT: Tell me, when did you work there? LV: I can't tell you. It was winter, still. It may have been March. It may have been one month, but I don't know. Anyhow, we heard that there was unemployment rampant. In the factory they had no material. We never knew the reason for anything. Maybe they had no raw materials. And they stopped. Not-- the, the factory didn't stop working. But they didn't need so many workers. And some of us stopped working. 
INT: We'll finish here tape number 12. LV: All right.  INT: Work at Neustadt-Glewe? LV: Yes, there was another type of work, too. So the moment we had stopped being productive elements, we were-- had no right to those bunk beds and blankets any longer. So back to the old block, without blankets, without anything, just lying on the bare floor. And there, in that second block-- all the same block, there was a new arrangement. There were two German murderesses who were our neighbors. We didn't know their story, but there were rumors that they had killed their husbands-- true or not true, but they were criminals anyhow. And you know how it was, that the, the petty murderers and the petty criminals were together with us, incarcerated in our [INAUDIBLE]. The mass murderers were our bosses. These two women took a liking to me and Anikó because they said that we were quiet girls, and we did not quarrel, did not fight. So they liked us, and that was good, because the two of them had the-- their space allotted to them, the size of a double bed, let's say, a narrow double bed. Not a queen's or king's bed. Anyhow, and Anikó-- no, I was lying at their feet, with my head at the wall, and Anikó on the other side. And near me on the right, fortunately, there were no other women, because the opening of the door was just there. Now, of course, we had to put our shoes under our heads. And that was quite dangerous, because shoes could be stolen and then sold to women in another block. And there was no life without shoes. And I had never heard about shoes being given out there in Neustadt-Glewe. So we slept there, and these women sometimes-- I remember just one case, I shouldn't say sometimes-- gave us potato peels. And that was also in addition to our meager soup, which was made up of dry shavings of different types of vegetables, and the cattle turnip-- we call them cattle turnip, because in Hungarian, that's the word-- white turnips. [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] In that block, with this new arrangement, I remember playing society games. And I organized them. It was geographical names and famous people starting with the same letter, ending in another letter, the next one had to start with that letter, et cetera. And I did not remember having recited poems. And when I was writing my memories, my story, I called my friend and asked her whether she could remind me of, of something that I'd forgotten. And she's from Hungary, she doesn't know Romanian, and she said, you recited a poem which was an onomatopoeic poem. And suddenly I remembered [SPEAKING ROMANIAN]-- and it was a Romanian ballad by [NON-ENGLISH] about a cavalry attack in a war. So she reminded me that, yes, even in Neustadt-Glewe, I recited some poems. Now-- 
INT: How did you get, get on with these German ladies? Did they mind your lice? LV: They, they were also infested with lice, because there is no difference between German or Jewish blood as regards lice. They like the blood of both. So probably they were as infested as we were. But I suppose they got changes of clothes, and probably their clothing was disinfected from time to time, because even being criminals, the were privileged. We knew that. And they were probably in charge of our room. I, I can't remember exactly that they had that function, blockovas, but I suppose so.  INT: And they didn't mind-- LV: No, they were kind woman-- not only with me and with Anikó, but they behaved fairly with us. They did not shout at us, they never beat us up, et cetera. It was OK with them. Now, approximately in April-- but I couldn't tell whether it was the second half of April or the beginning-- something strange happened, that we were asked whether we would like to camouflage aircraft. And that's really a strange question to be asked. And naturally, we were promised an extra bowl of soup, or something else, I don't remember what else-- we-- probably a piece of bread or something. So it attracted me very much, but Anikó didn't feel like camouflaging aircraft, so she didn't come with me. And I can tell you that I felt elated. Somehow, [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] spring had its effect on my psyche. Nature was awakening, because it was spring. And I was glad to be outside somewhere in nature, to see grass, trees. Although the work was very taxing, it, it really was very hard physical work to pull aircraft under trees, and to-- I don't know whether we had to cut the branches with which we camouflaged them, but I know that it was very, very hard physical work. But even so, I was glad that I could do it. And I brought back some of my extra food that I got there. Time passed, and there was hope in the air. But also anxiety, fear, similar to, to the feelings we had in Auschwitz before the evacuation. Because naturally, no one could tell whether they would liquidate us at five minutes before 12:00. But we heard the bombardments, and even our Neustadt-Glewe was bombed. I remember one event, and some girls told me that they were just doing outside work when that place where they were was bombed, and even some soldiers were hit. But fortunately, not the girls, themselves. We heard some whistling bombs, and we thought that they might be the flying bombs that were sent in the direction of England. There were all kinds of rumors, and I tell you how and from where. Outside the camp was a work camp for free or forced-- I don't exactly know their status-- French laborers. And some girls, I don't remember having met them, probably they were not in the woods where we camouflaged the aircraft, but other girls were working in different parts of aussenkommandos, and they had the news about the front. So they came back and told us that the front was nearing. And we also heard artillery fire, and especially the raids, air raids, which were really-- that could be heard from a distance. We naturally didn't know who would liberate us, if at all. And I remember once, the-- an aircraft [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] threw hundreds, or maybe even more, leaflets, flyers. 
INT: In watch language? LV: And that-- in German-- and it was meant for the German Army to surrender. And we were forbidden to pick up these leaflets under punishment of death. But even so, some girls picked them up, and told us that it was about the-- they, they-- the Germans were called upon to surrender. Now, one day-- oh, I forget to tell something interesting. On the 20th of April, we knew it was the 20th of April, Hitler's birthday, his last birthday, [NON-ENGLISH] his 56th birthday-- we'd got an excellent bowl of soup with meat in it. And we did not analyze the origin of that meat. Sometimes we heard that they were horses who had fallen somewhere on the battlefield.  INT: Did you know the reason why you got this? LV: Yes, yes, we knew that it was Hitler's birthday. We knew that. It was a very good soup. And a few days later-- and I say in Hebrew, [HEBREW], it should be distinguished from Hitler's birthday-- was my sister's 18th birthday. And 18 means life, and she really got life. And for that occasion, the German ladies were very kind. They saw me congratulating my sister and giving her a gift, which was a sandwich. I fished out the solid ingredients, a very few solid ingredients from my soup, whatever they were, and made a sandwich for my sister. And then they gave her a rich helping of tomato-- of potato peels, and I think even maybe half a potato, maximum half a potato. 
INT: Which date was it? LV: But it was very nice-- it was the 25th of April, five days after Hitler's birthday, but loved it. And it was already very close to the end-- not exactly to the end of the war, but to our day of liberation.  INT: Which was on which date? LV: Now, on the-- which was on the 2nd of May. But on the 1st of May, there was an unusual zahlappell. We were used to zahlappells, which lasted for a few hours as usual. Nothing extraordinary about the usual zahlappells. But on that afternoon, on the 1st of May, the lager commandant-- I don't know what his rank was, but a very high ranking officer-- delivered a speech to us. And that was the rarity-- the special-- the special event, which we immediately sensed. And his behavior was very strange, because [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] he, he was not his-self, his overweening super man self. But he behaved very modestly. And he spoke with us in a friendly tone. And his announcement was something out of the ordinary. He announced that very soon we would be handed over to the Red Cross. Now, we could not tell whether it was a, a devious design, a trickery again, as we had been used to. But I don't know how instinctively we felt that there was some truth in it. And he asked us-- he did not shout at us-- he asked us, I could say he-- not implored us, requested us-- to keep quiet, and to keep the discipline in order to facilitate our handing over to the Red Cross. And not to worry about food, because there was plenty of food in the store rooms. I had forgotten to tell you something important, and in connection with plenty of food in the store rooms, that once, in April, there was a distribution of Red Cross parcels. And in our room, and in all of the other Jewish rooms and blocks, we received, 14 women, one parcel. You can imagine the tiny, tiny amounts of whatever we got in canned food, I think sardines, and chocolate, sugar, biscuits-- the tiny amounts, if we had to, to distribute the contents of one parcel to 14. Because it was quite clear that they-- each parcel was meant for one person. And we saw the German ladies receiving one parcel each. Now, on the 1st of May, the lager commandant-- 
INT: Do you remember his name? LV: No, no-- he was a middle-aged man, not very young. He could have been around 40.  INT: SS? LV: I don't know. I only know that, at work in the aussenkommandos, there were middle-aged Wehrmacht guards. But I suppose that the commandant was an SS man. And he was so, so kind, so understanding towards us, that he even said, you should not forget that we were good to you. Now, having been good to us, I doubt it, because if they had been so good to us, why was there a so-called chevra kadisha kommando in that camp, with so many dead women? And beatings, which fortunately we only heard about, but we did not experience it. I suppose that his attitude, his changed attitude, was due to the hope that, in case they were caught-- and let's hope that they were caught, he and his SS men-- in case they were caught, he could argue that they were good to us. Please ask the inmates, that they didn't harm us, something like that. Now, I don't remember what many of the girls and women remembered later on and told us-- and I read about it in the book which appeared just a short time ago about our camp, with my help, for which I'm very proud-- that the lager commandant left, and returned a short time later completely drunk. And he shouted, now we are the prisoners, and you are free. And then, there was a turmoil. I'm again telling you the truth. I know it from second-hand, not from first-hand experience, but having heard from many women, that the women stormed the food stores. They broke into them. And then shooting started, and a girl was shot dead, many were, were wounded. But at that time already, I and my friend, my sister, were in the block. Because we were sent back to the block, and it was announced that it was lagersperre, which means no one was allowed out of the blocks. But we were locked into the blocks, we couldn't get out. 
INT: Was it still the 1st of May? LV: It was towards the evening of the 1st of May. And we could look out of our window, and I suppose that there was already electric light, because it was dark. But even so, we could see through the window that women, dressed in flowery dresses-- that's how I, I, I remember that sight-- were running out of, of, of the camp. And these were the SS-- or not SS women, but the [NON-ENGLISH], probably the kapos, the functionaries who were changing their clothes into civilian clothes. And later on, we already knew that the [NON-ENGLISH], the [NON-ENGLISH], the guards did the same. And they escaped in civilian clothing, and probably they joined all the inhabitants of Neustadt-Glewe. And also probably tried to, to escape westwards towards the Western Allies.  INT: What happens on the 2nd of May? LV: Yes, yes, yes-- now, during that night, we slept. I don't know how. How could we sleep? But we did. Because I remember that we awoke at dawn, very early in the morning, and we looked out of the window as, as much as we can see. We saw one of the watchtowers, which could be seen from our window, which was empty. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] And there was even a funny episode one of the women told us, or I don't remember it if I read it somewhere, that after we broke out of the blocks, they found one solitary watchman in one of the towers, because there were several watchtowers. And the women asked him, what are you doing here? All your colleagues, all your comrades have already left. And he cursed them. Oh, they, they left me here. And then he got down and ran away. So it's a true story, but I didn't experience it. Now, I don't know how we got out of the block. But I was told later-- at that time, I probably knew it-- that the Ukrainian girls broke the doors of, of some of the blocks, and probably of ours. Anyhow, we could get out. And I forgot to tell you that my first word was-- which I remember-- our mother could not live this moment with us. That was my first reaction, when we realized that we were free, because there was no watchman in the tower. So we, we knew that they had all left, and we were free. But we were still inside the blocks. And then we got out. 
INT: And who liberated the area? LV: No one liberated us. And then we stormed the already open food stores. And the terrible sight was outside in the courtyard of the camp, that women were fighting for anything they, they could get hold of. And that's a shame that they did that, but that's the truth. They were somehow killing each other for something that one person could get her hands on and the other one couldn't. Anyhow, I got into the, one of the huge food stores, and took some handfuls and pocketfuls of dried vegetables. Because there was no danger there-- no one wanted that type of food. And somewhere outside, I got some jam from a friend, which I was reminded of only a short time ago. And when I came into the block, my friend thought it was blood and she was horrified, but it was only jam. In the meantime, my sister was somewhere else. And there was no danger of losing each other, because we knew where to come back and find each other. It was not like the death march. When my sister came in after me, she came with a piece of raw meat, marching at raw meat. And she wanted to give me a bit, and she said I received it from someone. Now, that was really a rare event to receive something from somebody, because it was raw meat. And I blew it out of her hand, and I remember that I shouted at her that we are human beings. We don't eat raw meat. At that time, I didn't know about some types of raw meat that people eat, OK. And then, there was happiness. Just happiness in the air. We were free. Nobody liberated us. And we moved into another block. And it, it was probably the block of a kapo or [NON-ENGLISH], because there was one bed in it. And it was a room. And a small group, friends from our room, a group of eight moved into that other room, where I found a little red diary, which I have here, with many, many addresses in Paris and all over the world of people with whom that woman, who had lost it or thrown it away, I don't know, had written into that notebook. And she was-- that-- it's interesting to mention, a foreign resident in France who had to be taken to Ravensbrück. So it-- from a documentary point of view, it is important. And from Ravensbrück, that woman-- whoever she was-- got to Neustadt-Glewe, either died there or lost her diary. Now, there were a few pages, blank pages in that diary, and somehow I found a pencil and I finished her diary with my own post-liberation diary, which unfortunately-- I mean, the diary could last only for a few days, but it's very interesting. Because they were-- there were no more blank pages in it. 
INT: How long did you stay in Neustadt-Glewe afterwards? LV: Yes. The very first day, a group-- [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] my sister, I, and my friends-- went into the town, which was a few kilometers away. And we were the conquerors of this town, let's put it that way. Because it was a ghost town. And the population had escaped-- or escaped, I wouldn't say escape, had run away, had left their homes a few hours before we had already the opportunity to move in. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] I suppose they went into the woods and wanted to be liberated by the Americans or the British armies. And at that time, we didn't know who our liberators would be, but we did need any liberators, because we were free. And I call it our self-liberation. Now, I remember only one house we entered, and the door was probably left open. They ran away in such a haste that we found even warm food on the table. But we were afraid that it was poisoned. It was really a foolish thought on our part, they didn't have time to think of it. But there was plenty of food in the basement. And in the basements of all the houses, which we took, of course. And we knew that we would need that food, especially preserves, and lots of sugar, and fat. And I'm really ashamed to this day that we ate fat spread on bread and sprinkled with sugar. But otherwise, I was very disciplined. I, and my sister, as daughters of doctors, knew that we were not allowed to eat huge amounts of food, because it could cause our death. And there were thousands of liberated inmates who died, not only in Neustadt-Glewe. In Neustadt-Glewe, there were a few hundreds, probably. Anyhow, in that only house, which I remember having entered, there was a library. And I immediately took some books, and I, I brought some of them home to Romania. But I-- 
INT: How long did you stay in Neustadt-Glewe? LV: In Neustadt-Glewe, we stayed until the 12th, which means 10 days. On the second day, on our way to the town-- because that was daily sport, walking into the town, into that ghost town-- a contingent of the Soviet Army marched just opposite us. Before that, we had encountered just one Jeep, one American Jeep, in the camp. That was on the first day. But the American soldiers, who gave us, naturally-- I don't know what, a taste of America-- and also a taste-- or let's say information-- outside our isolated bubble, because we had been living in a nice little bubble. So they told us that the demarcation line was being discussed at the highest level. So they, the Americans-- I think only one soldier was in that Jeep, some others met tanks, American tanks, I didn't-- didn't know at that point, on the first day, whether the Russians would occupy Neustadt-Glewe, or the Americans. Or even the British, because they were also in the neighborhood. We were really on the demarcation line. So on the following day, as I told you, we met Russian soldiers. And they were behaving, fortunately, very nicely with us. And they gave us whatever we wanted to have. And in the first days, on our way home, they helped us get accommodation, because not always could we get accommodation.  INT: When did you start going home? LV: It was only on the 12th of May. And one or two days before, [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] we witnessed a very sad event. The burial of a woman from Kolozsvar, the mother of [NON-ENGLISH]-- I only remember the name of the girl-- and she had a mother, the mother died there. And was buried there outside the camp. So we were there at that funeral. And then, I took a vow. I, I felt-- I said to my sister, it's, it's like our mother's funeral, like our family member's funeral. And I would always fast on the 10th of June, because that was the day when we arrived in Auschwitz. And I have kept that day of fast besides, of course, Yom Kippur-- to this day, every 10th of June, even while I was working [INAUDIBLE]. 
INT: That's end of tape number 13.  INT: --journey home with your sister, which started on-- May 12? LV: Yes. [PAUSES FOR 5 SECONDS] We formed a small family of eight-- some friends, some of whom we had known from the Union and some new ones. And we organized a cart-- a small carriage-- a handcart. The owner was very angry, because he caught us [LAUGHS] at the moment when we pulled it out from his courtyard. Because, gradually, the population had started coming back home. But anyhow, we enlightened him that we had not been there for a visit in his town, and why we had been there, so he let us take it. And we put all our canned-food reserves that we had, really, stolen from the basements, pantries, of German homes. And when we arrived at the village, we entered houses, we asked for accommodation, and, in some cases, they let us sleep there overnight, or two or three nights, and also gave us food. We could use some of the kitchen. Sometimes, the German families gave us food, but not always were they friendly with us. And if we-- it was evening, and we wanted to go to sleep somewhere, we only had to call the next Soviet soldier, who came in with us and didn't even have to say a word, because they wouldn't have understood him. But [LAUGHS] they did, even without words. So there was no problem with accommodation. We went through a town, Parchim, where we had a fantastic accommodation, which was already organized in an extraordinary way. Whole quarters, villas, were emptied, evacuated, for us. And the German ladies had to cook for us. And we received our meals at tables with white tablecloths. So there were all kinds of interesting experiences on our way home. We heard that there was a DP camp-- we didn't use 'the word DP camp,' of course-- transit camp, where transports were being organized to Romania and to Hungary. And we got there by train. That was the last leg of our journey before coming home. It was Neubrandenburg, which had been a-- a POW camp, before, where Dutch prisoners of war had been accommodated, but they were sent home. So we took their place. It was a very well-organized camp, by the Russians. We got food and everything we needed. And nearby there were barracks that had been, of course, German military barracks. But now they were hundreds and hundreds of Serb [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] POWS, prisoners of war, and Italians-- Italian prisoners. And we befriended them. And it was really a very nice, very entertaining, that month-- not 'month'-- let me see. It lasted approximately from June to the 20th of July. I remember that date, but-- may have been one or two days later, or-- or earlier-- when our transport was organized to Transylvania. And there were even love stories there, and performances in the woods. There was, like, kind of a stadium, in the forest. We really had a good time. And especially, we was thinking of putting off, as long as possible, our return home, in order not to know yet who among those who could have been alive did not survive. Because we figured out our family members. There were some of them about whom we knew 100% that they had been killed, and about others we could only hope that they-- 
INT: Did you have-- LV: --were alive.  INT: --any knowledge of the fate of your father, during the whole time? LV: No, we couldn't know anything about our father. And, on the way, we met some people who lied to us, or maybe they mistakenly, erroneously thought they had met my father. Because I had no photograph. I could only explain where he came from, and he was a doctor, named this-and-this. And some persons told us that they had met him somewhere on the way home, but it was not true. And we looked for his grave, after we met friends who had-- who told us that he died in a military hospital in-- in Bad Ischel, near Ebensee, when he was liberated on the last day of the war, on the 8th of April.  INT: May. LV: Sorry-- on the last day-- on the 8th of May, that he was very, very ill and he never worked as a doctor, all the time, in the most terrible conditions in those mountains, with the tunnels-- in Melk, and in Ebensee.  INT: So how did you know about his fate? LV: And he was really dying.  INT: When? LV: So, about his fate, we heard only in Budapest, when we arrived. And our relatives-- who, fortunately, survived in the Budapest ghetto-- already knew about our father's death from Dr. [NON-ENGLISH], from a town nearby, from [NON-ENGLISH], who had come back and had informed them. But we supposed that, if he died a free man, he must have had a grave somewhere. And in the-- the '80s, in the early '80s, we looked for his grave in Ebensee. I was there with Bela, in the summer of '83. My sister had been there twice before with her friend. They couldn't find any, any trace. And, later on, in the late '80s, a woman from our town, who had been my sister's classmate, came to Israel. And she met my sister. She didn't tell her anything. A year later, she settled here because her husband had been a Jew, and he died, and she came here with her children. She was of German origin, of Saxish origin, [NON-ENGLISH]. And when her sister came to visit her, we met in a cafe, and we talked. And I mentioned the name of the camp, 'Ebensee,' in connection with a message that our father had sent us from there, where to look for some hidden valuables-- with our friend [NON-ENGLISH], who stole everything, naturally. And-- 
INT: So what happened with the woman? LV: He said it was not true. So I mentioned the word 'Ebensee.' Then, the sister who came on a visit asked her younger sister, when you met Anna the last time, did you tell her that our father had found their father's grave? We nearly fainted. It turned out that, after the liberation, Ebensee became a DP camp. This Hungarian family, like all the other well-to-do families from our town, had left the town before the Russians came in, in the summer of '44, a short time after our deportation. And they went further west, west, west, until they reached Austria, where I won't say were liberated-- because, naturally, for them it was no liberation. And, for two years, they stayed in the Ebensee DP camp. One day, a little girl died. And their father, [NON-ENGLISH], who was the barber of our family-- the well-known barber of the town-- went to that funeral. He came back. The-- the cemetery was there in Ebensee. There was a cemetery. And there were people who died there among them. He came back, and he said to his family, just imagine! I have found the grave of Dr. Rosenfeld Endre. Now, [NON-ENGLISH] never told us. I never met him, because they returned in '48, but he could have told my father-in-law, who stayed in Gyergyó in that time, until '50. Anyhow, we are happy, so to say, that our father was buried in a grave and had even a sign on his grave. But we never found it. 
INT: When do you arrive home? LV: In late July, around on the 20th of July, a transport was organized for the Transylvanians and Romanians. And, with the same train, the Serbians and Italians also traveled for a certain track.  INT: Where-- where do you come to? LV: And-- I--  INT: Where do you-- LV: --I-- I must tell you a very short episode. At one station, another train that was standing opposite ours. Or we had to wait till another train passed. And it was a train coming from Russia, with German prisoners of war. I don't know how they could have been sent so early home. And they were in a terrible condition. I don't know whether they knew or not that we were Jewish survivors of camps. But they implored for bread. We had huge quantities of bread and everything that we wanted to have. I reached out a loaf of bread. I was nearly lynched by my friends. It was a very strange episode I'm telling you, because-- I don't know-- it was human misery, human suffering, and I-- it was on the spur of the moment that I did it. And I-- I don't feel sorry for it. Anyhow.  INT: Let's go back-- LV: Now--  INT: --to your story. LV: --the train journey lasted for a whole month! And it was in freight cars-- which was very comfortable, because we could sleep at night on the blankets, and there was no problem how to-- to rest and sleep, because we were not in crowded conditions. And we received either food from the Russians on our way home, or wherever we received a few hours' time for to get off and to walk a little bit in-- on the fields, we could organize-- now, that's really organizing-- from gardens, vegetable gardens of Germans. Sometimes, it was very shameful when they shouted at us. They didn't let us 'steal' their vegetables. But there was plenty of-- plenty of potatoes. And we cooked on the way. It was like camping. It was like camping, only that it lasted too long. 
INT: Where did you get rid of your lice? LV: Now, we didn't have any lice anymore. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] I don't exactly know how we got rid of the lice-- in our hair, only in Budapest. My grandmother helped us and washed our hair. Baruch HaShem, she survived the ghetto. But in our clothes we didn't have any more lice, because we discarded our soiled and stenched-- stenchy Auschwitz clothing, when I found a Hitlerjugend pair of the trousers, shorts, and in these shorts I came home. And a friend sewed a-- a skirt from a tablecloth somewhere, and also from some other clothes. So we had already clean underwear and clean clothing. But I don't know how we couldn't get rid of the lice in our hair.  INT: You arrive in Budapest? LV: Now, we arrived in Budapest, through Poland. And we arrived at a station, not for passengers but for freight, which was very near the place where I had left my grandmother, on the Angyafold in Budapest. And, of course, [? Aniko ?] and I got off and took leave of our friends, who went on to Transylvania, because we wanted to-- to see whether our relatives, my father's-- my father's brother, his wife who was the first cousin, his-- her husband's first cousin, and my grandmother.  INT: Whom do you go to see, first of all? LV: And we went to that house where my grandmother had lived. And there the neighbors told us that Grandmother is alive-- and [NON-ENGLISH], my father's brother. And they are in their own apartment in [NON-ENGLISH] Street. And then we also met my father's first cousin, who lived there, near the station. And he took us to our relatives by tram. But first he phoned the family, because he was afraid that my grandmother would faint or get a heart attack. 
INT: Can you describe the meeting with your grandmother? LV: [SIGHS] We opened the door, and there she was. [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] It was a-- a great, emotional moment, because we couldn't have hoped to find her alive-- because she was then aged 77. Now, after the liberation, we already knew that the Jews of Budapest had not been deported en masse. I told you about the old women whom I saw. There was a death march from Budapest too. That was in late November and December, after the Arrow Cross had come to power in Budapest-- in Hungary. But most of the Jews in the Budapest ghetto had survived. And they also stayed in a so-called protected-- Swedish-protected house-- for certain reasons which I can't go into-- and-- [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS]  INT: Let's go back-- LV: --my grandmother was--  INT: --to your meeting. LV: Yes. [SIGHS] It was very emotional. And they already knew that father was not alive. So, for my grandmother, it was something fantastic, that she got us back from that hell. [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] And how she took care of us-- and, as I said, she washed our hair with turpentine. [LAUGHS]  INT: Could you tell-- could-- could you tell her what happened to you-- LV: Of course.  INT: --all the experiences? LV: Of course. Whatever we could tell them, we did. They-- they thought that we had gone through terrible experiences even after our liberation, because they themselves had experienced their liberation-- it was really their liberation-- by the Soviet Army. And I don't have to tell you that many soldiers misbehaved. So my aunt from Cluj, who was to be our mother for 40 years, wrote us a letter. We found the letter there, because she had already heard from deportees who had come home that they had met us on the way home. And she wrote us a letter. And she-- she wrote, I suppose that you went through horrible experiences, even after your liberation, but you will lead a happy life. And all your life is in front of you. But, fortunately, nothing happened to us after the liberation. [SIGHS] 
INT: How long did you stay in Budapest? LV: [? Aniko ?] was-- was very ill. She was in hospital. She had something with her lungs. I don't exactly remember what she had, but she was in hospital for a long time. And I went to Pécs to meet my mother's brother, who had escaped from his forced labor service and had gone into hiding. And his wife had returned, whom we had met in the Mexico camp. And, then, we didn't tell her that her little son, our first cousin [NON-ENGLISH], who was 13 years old, had been killed the moment she told us that he got lost on the rampe. Then, we didn't tell her that. Of course, they found out. And she never wanted children after the war. So I went to Pécs to meet them there. And we returned home, only-- only at the-- towards the end of September. And only a few days before our leaving Budapest did they tell us that we should not wait for father any longer, because they knew that he had died in an American hospital. Now, that doctor thought that the very, very sick inmates who had been liberated were transported to Bad Aussee. So, for many, many years, we knew about Aussee. It doesn't make any difference, but anyhow, we found out that it was Bad Ischel. And we went there, too, in '83 to find out--  INT: OK-- LV: --what had happened to that hospital. 
INT: When-- when-- LV: But we couldn't find any traces.  INT: --do you move to Cluj? LV: [SIGHS] So, at the end of September-- yes-- I must tell you, when we entered the-- my uncle's house, and my grandmother came to meet us, my grandmother's first sentence was 'Rózsi and Bela are alive.' Rózsi, our aunt, my mother's sister, went into hiding-- in the sixth month of her pregnancy, and that saved her life. The baby died, but she survived. And you can imagine my happiness. Up to that moment, I did not know-- we did not know-- that either Rózsi or Bela, my boyfriend, was alive. And then we returned to Cluj, first. And Bela came to Cluj to meet me. And, of course, we immediately decided to get married. But I must mention my meeting with my father-in-law, at the-- at the Budapest railway station and at their relative's house. I heard that a transport was arriving. That was about mid-September or maybe in the beginning of September. I went to the railway station, and I met Bela's father. Then, he-- he thought that his wife-- Bela's mother-- and his daughter [? Edith, who ?] was my best friend, were on their way home. But I don't know why somebody had lied to him. They perished in Bergen-Belsen. And at that moment he didn't know yet. And when I met him again in Budapest, he already knew. And he said, you come home, you get married, and you will be Mrs. Vago-- and you will go to town. Here, they had a sawmill. And they stayed near the railway station, where the sawmill and the lumber yard was. And they had a coach with a horse and, in winter, a sleigh. So you will be Mrs. Vago, and, like [? Fritzi ?] néni, you will-- you will go to town in the coach, and in winter, in the sleigh. 
INT: Can you describe your meeting with Bela? LV: [SIGHS] Yes. Bela came at the beginning of October, to Cluj. There was an emotional meeting. And he said, oh! You got so fat! But really, it was true. After these three months in freedom, I [LAUGHS] really put on some weight. It was funny, that these were my-- his first words to me. But we immediately decided that we would get married. And we returned to Gyergyó, to look around. I already knew from him that he was home at the beginning of December already, because he had escaped from his forced labor battalion on the 18th of November. And he got home very, very fast. And he went to our house-- which had been plundered. He didn't find anything, but he found the most valuable things for us, our family pictures-- among chickens, and some of them really very dirty-- and some letters, and my diaries-- not exactly diaries. I had copied my letters which I had written to him into a note-- into some notebooks, so that I could remember them later and could relive my youth. That's what I wrote to that German soldier.  INT: So you-- so what happens to-- LV: And he had found all these in our garage. And we got married on the 21st of October. We found our house with people living there. They were Jews. A Jewish doctor was living on the ground floor. He had already started working there. And on the first floor-- this was just a one-story building-- we had-- there was a young man who had come back from his forced labor battalion. I think there was another one. There were two. 
INT: So where did-- LV: And we got back two rooms, there. And [? Aniko ?] soon returned, after our wedding. The wedding was arranged by my mother's best friend and her family-- the family I told you about, that was sent home from Kassa when the Jews were handed over to the SS. And the young rabbi from Szászrégen, who was the brother of [? Moshe ?] [NON-ENGLISH], the rabbi of our town who perished, was invited by my father-in-law to-- to celebrate the wedding. And we had a chuppah-- a makeshift chuppah, but it was a chuppah. And he even wrote a [NON-ENGLISH]. Unfortunately, it got lost with many, many things which we couldn't bring with us--  INT: So where-- LV: --from Romania. And we--  INT: --where do you settle down? LV: We settled down, just for a few months, just for three months, in Gyergyó, in our town, where Bela had already taught in the gymnasium for one year-- although he was only a student. But there was a scarcity of teachers. And even I taught French, because I already spoke fluent French, having learned from childhood. But it lasted only till January, because we wanted to make some money and-- and to get adjusted to our new life. And we had to go to Cluj, because we wanted to go on with our studies. And even there, in Gyergyó, we learned and learned and learned for our exams. And fortunately there was a-- a law for all those who had missed some years because of persecutions, so that we only had to pass a certain number of exams, irrespective of the number of years attending courses. We had to learn very, very hard. I had to pass 28 exams, in about two and a half years. [SIGHS] Bela had already learned, studied, at the Bolyai University, which was a Hungarian-language university. As soon as he had returned home, he got registered and learned-- passed his exams. And I got registered to the Romanian University, and I studied modern philology. In January, we moved to Cluj. We stayed with my aunt, who received us when we returned from Budapest. [SIGHS] That was also a very emotional meeting. As we came from the station, and we called her from the street. We didn't exactly know from which window she would look out-- where she stayed. But she had been waiting for us. I don't know how she knew that we were coming. And she and her new husband, her second husband, adopted us in '47, me and my sister. Her husband died in the same camp where he was together with my father, in Melk. 
INT: So you said he-- LV: Now, we started our studies-- yes.  INT: What subject did you go to study, both of you? LV: I took up modern philology, English, French, and aesthetics. And Bela-- first, he wanted to learn chemistry, but then he switched over to history and geography. And I was-- we were expecting our first child. So, in December, we were already expecting him, and he was born on the 20th of August.  INT: '46. LV: Yes. In the following year, 1946, he was among the first the babies who were born to survivors of the camps. Because, to tell you the truth, we thought we would never have children again, after one year of bromide treatment, when we had lost our femininity, and we didn't have our period. So we thought it was final and irreversible. But baruch HaShem, fortunately, it was not irreversible. So, while we were studying and staying with my uncle-- my mother's-- the husband of my mother's sister [NON-ENGLISH], [CRYING] who was gassed on the 29th of May-- they had arrived with the so-called doctors' transport from Cluj-- Kolozsvár-- with my two first cousins, [? Zsuzsi ?] and [HUNGARIAN]. [? Zsuzsi ?] was born in 1930, so she was 14 years old. And [HUNGARIAN] was born in January '32. [CRYING] She was only 12 years old-- 12 and 1/2. Some of my cousins of-- of [? Zsuzsi, ?] colleagues in the fourth class, gymnasium class, in the Jewish gymnasium, survived. She could have survived, together with her mother-- who was only 42. They probably didn't want to let [HUNGARIAN], the little one, so separately. Or, maybe they were told to go to the right. So my uncle returned-- uncle by marriage. And we stayed together with him. He-- he received his apartment. And our dear Anna, the maidservant, who had been with them, returned to us from her village and helped us with our household. And, thanks to her, we were able to learn and had no problems with a household. 
INT: So you stay in Cluj-- LV: I graduated-- yes, we stayed in Cluj, and I graduated in '48 but had to complete some pedagogical courses in the following year. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] But I already got my first job in September '48. And Bela had already been teaching at the Jewish gymnasium, which was reopened, in Romanian. And I got my teaching job-- it could have been my second one, but I only taught for a few months in our hometown-- at the-- at a Hungarian-language school. Just to explain in one sentence, there were different secondary schools--  INT: Excuse me, but we have to finish the tape. LV: Yes.  INT: It's finishing-- tape-- LV: We stayed in Cluj till '57. As I said, I started working at the girls' school, but only for one year at the gymnasium. I taught English or French. I don't remember. And in January '49, both of us were appointed assistants at our respective universities, Babes-Bolyai, the Hungarian university. And I was appointed an assistant at the Romanian-language university, the Victor Babes. And I taught English seminars especially to first-year students. And later on, the number of English courses was curtailed, because English was considered an imperialist language. And you know that we were under communism. So I lost my job at the-- the English department, and was transferred to world literature. And for some time I was a jack of all trades because of these circumstances. I also worked on the-- at the French department, which was a very pleasant job, taking students to high schools on pedagogical training courses and observation lessons, and also teaching all kinds of special text-- texts to so-called aspirants who were preparing for different specialities-- botany, zoology, et cetera. So I-- I had to prepare them how to understand that special text. 
INT: OK. LV: Now, we--  INT: Any other sons who were born, sons or daughters? LV: Yes. In-- in September, on the 13th of September '55, our second son was born, whose name is-- then was [? Anthony, ?] [? Anti, ?] and in Israel, [? Ariel. ?] I forgot to mention the name of my first son, whom we named after our father, Andrei in Romanian, [? Andres, ?] which is a variant of Andre-- the same name, as a matter of fact. We called him [? Andres. ?] And in Israel he is [? Rafael. ?]  INT: When do you make aliyah to Israel? LV: In '58 we-- in '57 we found some connections, Bela's acquaintances, who were able to help us by means of other connections, and [? high ?] [? protectia ?] to leave the country, because it was not so simple to get out of there, especially, which I didn't mention, we were party members-- Communist Party members. And we moved to Bucharest. Bela managed to have himself transferred to the University of Bucharest under all kinds of pretexts, maneuvering, which was very dangerous, but anyhow we managed it. And we stayed for one year in Bucharest. And we left Romania in August '58. And we got to Vienna by train. And then further on. But I must tell you a very happy event, that somehow, secretly, in-- in so-called [? bird ?] language we call it in Hungarian, which means secret confidential language, we were able to notify Bela's father, who had emigrated in 1950 to Israel, and then from Israel he went to the United States, where all his family was living who had emigrated during and after-- immediately after the First World War. Even his father died there in '47, so Bela's grandfather. And he came from the United States to Rome. And we met on the train in Rome. So it was a perfect rendezvous, and great happiness for him when he met his younger grandchild for the first time, and [? Rafi, ?] when he was [? Andres, ?] who had been only four years old when he had left in 1950, and it was already '58. 
INT: So you arrived in Israel-- LV: So we came to Israel--  INT: --in '58. LV: Yes, on the 28th of August.  INT: Where do you go? LV: [DRINKS] Now we were called then, those with diplomas, [NON-ENGLISH], which meant that we could get benefits.  INT: Please, don't go into all these details-- LV: No, no, no.  INT: --because these are-- LV: Yes.  INT: --less important for-- LV: So we stayed in a-- in a--  INT: --the interview. LV: --safe--  INT: Just tell us-- LV: Yes.  INT: --where did you go. LV: For-- for one year we stayed in a kind of a transit camp in [NON-ENGLISH], not far from here, [NON-ENGLISH]. And we attended a very intensive [NON-ENGLISH] in order to learn Hebrew. And in September the following year we received an apartment in Holon, with the help, naturally of the Sochnut, at which we could buy, of course, a down payment and the rest, the mortgage, et cetera, et cetera. And the most important thing was that I got a teaching job in the Holtz Vocational School in '59, and Bela got a scholarship at the Hebrew University, and he worked also at Yad Vashem. He did research work, first in Hungarian, and slowly, slowly he switched over to Hebrew. And as he had been a lecturer, a historian who had already a name in Romania-- he had also published a book and many articles back home-- he was recognized as a historian, and he was helped a great deal by scholarships in Jerusalem. And he also worked for Hungarian newspapers. He wrote articles in Hungarian newspapers. I stayed at that school. We were living in Holon, as I said. And we-- I worked at that school for seven years. In '66, two years after Bela had been appointed in a teaching position at the Hebrew University, and also at Haifa University-- so that was in '64. And in '66, two years later, he was offered a permanent position at Haifa University on the condition that we moved to Haifa. And that was made possible with the help of the university, that at that time was a fledgling university under the aegis of the Jerusalem Hebrew University. So we-- we moved there. In the meantime, [? Rafi ?] had been invited for one year to the United States to Bela's cousin, where he acquired the English language. And that was very good for us too, just the feeling that he was learning English and was staying with Bela's family. And little [? Ariel ?] was going to school. And one day, on the 6th of June, when he was in third grade elementary class, he came home and said, my teacher saved 1 million Jews. That's what I said to her, because she told us about the invasion in Normandy. Now [? Ariel ?] knew that they thought the 6th of June, because it was Bela's birthday. And I always told the children that we were loaded on the trains and taken to Auschwitz on that same day. So when the teacher told them about the-- the-- the invasion in Normandy, and made a mistake of one year and put it in '43 instead of '44, my little boy-- maybe he was about nine-- nine years old, he said, [NON-ENGLISH]. Approximately, he said, 1 million. So I want to say that my children knew a great deal that maybe not many children knew, because I was not one of those survivors who kept everything to themselves. 
INT: OK, we'll talk about it later. Can you please just tell the points, what were you doing after being in Haifa-- LV: Yes.  INT: --up to this date? LV: Yes. In Haifa I taught at two schools, once at the municipal high school, and then at the Leo Baeck High School, which is built-- which belongs to progressive Judaism. But they accepted even secular Jews like me. Bela taught at the university. And I am proud that I can say here that he was the founder, so to say, of all the institutes and chairs and the documentation centers connected with Holocaust research at Haifa University. That was in-- in the '70s, in '76. And he-- he became the director of the Center for Documentation of Eastern and Central European Jewry, and also the holder of the Holocaust-- of the so-called Strochlitz Chair of Holocaust Studies. And there was also a common project between Haifa University and the ghetto, Lohamei HaGetaot Museum, for publishing books and studies on the Holocaust. And he also became the director of this common project. They published a series of very important books.  INT: When do you move from Haifa? LV: During that time, where I-- where we were staying in Haifa, we spent two sabbatical years, one in London in '69, '70, and the second one in New York, in '77, '78. And from that sabbatical year-- we left in the middle in January-- I had to return for a cancer operation, which I underwent successfully. [SIGHS] Some years-- years passed. And in '84 we went on our half-sabbatical, which was planned until-- from February only until July, when we were supposed to come home for [? Ariel's ?] wedding. In the meantime, when we had returned from our London sabbatical in October '70, our son [? Rafi ?] got married to [? Gabby ?] [? Elias, ?] a teacher. And [? Rafi ?] studied history, like Bela. And in those years he already worked at Tel Aviv University. 
INT: OK. LV: So the years passed. And in '84 we went to London. And on the 18th of March, '84, Bela flew over to New York to a conference which he himself had organized together with Professor Randolph Braham from the City University of New York. It was the 40th anniversary of the Holocaust in Hungary. It was an international conference. And just at the end of the conference he suffered a-- a near fatal stroke. And I was called. I had stayed in-- in-- in London. I didn't go with him to New York. And I went to New York and found him [SIGHS] in-- in a horrible condition. And I was soon told that he would never be able to speak. His stroke was very severe. And he was aphasic, which means no speech, no reading, no writing. Fortunately, till this day he is able to understand everything. And he watches TV. He listens to the news on the radio. Takes part in family life. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] But communication is very difficult, because it's a one-sided, one-way communication.  INT: So you moved to Tel Aviv-- to Petah Tikva? LV: Well, we come back from New York after several months of treatment at the rehabilitation center of New York University Hospital. We came straight to Petah Tikva, Bela, from the airport to [NON-ENGLISH], which is a rehabilitation center. And I came to stay here with my aunt, who had bought an apartment here in this building-- this apartment. When Bela was released from hospital, I rented an apartment here on the second floor of this house. So he never went back to Haifa. We just took him back once or twice when we were packing and making arrangements in our flat, but we never went back to live there, to stay there, not even for-- for one day, because our son is staying here in the same apartment, which we unfortunately, I'm saying, inherited from my aunt when she died on the 31st of August, '85. 
INT: Mrs. Vago, we-- I understand that you became very much involved in Holocaust [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] memorabilia, or to memorize the Holocaust, and memorize the Union. Could you please describe your work in a few words? LV: Yes. [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] On the 27th of January, 1985 was the 40th anniversary of the liberation or liquidation of Auschwitz. And it was observed at the Hilton Hotel in Tel Aviv. And on that day the organization of the Union survivors of Auschwitz was founded by some friends whom I had not known before. I met them there. So I and my sister attended, and we immediately got registered. And at the very beginning there were about 50 members. But slowly, slowly that number increased. Now in that first year I was so busy with Bela that-- and my aunt, who was very ill. She had terminal cancer. And she decided to put an end to her life. And we knew about it. And it was a terrible year. So I could not help my friends-- my new friends. But in the following year I already took part in organizing our new organization, and especially I not only took part, but I took over the leadership as the head of the organization. And our first and most important project was erecting a memorial sculpture honoring the four heroines who were executed-- hanged in Auschwitz on the 6th of January. Three of them, as I told you, were from our factory, from the Union. And the fourth was, as a matter of fact, the leader, was Roza Robota, who did not work in the Union. She worked in the [NON-ENGLISH]. And she was the liaison between the girls and also the men who gave or took over the explosive materials. And-- 
INT: Where-- where did the memorial took place? LV: The-- it took several years, until June '91, until the statue-- or not statue-- the memorial sculpture could be erected at Yad Vashem. It's just opposite--  INT: In Jerusalem. LV: Yes, in Jerusalem, just opposite the Museum of Arts. And I found a well-known sculptor, a-- a Jew, originally from Romania, from Transylvania, a good friend of my daughter-in-law's, of my younger daughter-in-law. It was just a coincidence-- not a coincidence. Through them--  INT: What's his name? LV: Yes, his name is Josef Salamon. He lives in Denmark, but he's a good Jew. But, I say. [LAUGHS] He's a good Jew. And he made some very impressive monuments there in Denmark. Now the monument--  INT: Can you-- can you describe the monument? LV: Yes, I also will show a picture of the monument.  INT: OK. LV: It's four women, four figures of women. It's half abstract. But one can see at first sight that they are camp inmates because of their kerchiefs, or stone kerchiefs on their heads.  INT: I suggest that you will comment-- LV: A very impressive monument.  INT: --when you show the picture at the end of the tape. LV: Yes. Yes.  INT: What is the target of your association? LV: The first aim was, as I told you, this project. Then the second aim is making it possible for long-lost friends from the Union to find each other. And I had such a very moving experience when we were organizing the dedication ceremony at Yad Vashem that I-- we put an ad into the Hungarian And I also asked women from the Union to call me, to phone, because we wanted to-- to find, to locate wherever we could more and more Unionists. About 50 Hungarian women were added to our list. And I asked each of them, would you like to find someone very, very much? And one woman, [NON-ENGLISH] told me, oh, yes, my good friend was from Germany. She told me her name. We met after the war. I know she survived, although we were not together after the Union. I would like so much to find her. And I said, hang on just a moment. I gave her her phone number from New York. And-- her name escapes me. Oh, I'm so sorry. 
INT: That's OK. LV: And she came-- she came to the dedication ceremony. So they met here. As I said, it's one of the aims of our organization.  INT: How many members do you have? LV: On paper, or the number of questionnaires which I started sending out made them up, drew them up, in the days when we were preparing for the dedication ceremony, the number reaches 355, but unfortunately, only-- only on paper, because we know about approximately 35 women and men who passed away. We have very few men in our organization. One of them is Professor Israel Gutman, whose name I would like to mention here--  INT: That's nice. LV: --who took active part in the Auschwitz Jewish Underground. I didn't know him then. I met him through my husband at Yad Vashem later. So quite a few men and women have passed away in these years. And we also have some-- I mean, we don't have them, because they simply disappeared. And we have no way of tracing them anywhere in the world.  INT: Is it still active? LV: Now-- the organization is active, because six years ago we started a lawsuit against the German government for our unpaid slave labor wages. As you know, we were hired out by the SS to the factory. And when I say 'we,' all the slave laborers. I mean those who were not civilian laborers-- Aryans, mostly. But the Jews who were in concentration camps were hired out by the SS. They were the slave holders who received our wages. And naturally, we didn't receive anything. And as we did not receive any compensation from our factory, although there were some negotiations. But the factory in Frondenberg, Germany refused to compensate us. We started this lawsuit. But in '85, a memorial stone, or a tombstone-- a symbolic tombstone-- was erected in the cemetery-- Jewish cemetery-- of Frondenberg where the factory exists to this day, in memory not only of the four girls, but also of all the slave laborers of the Union. And we started the suit six years ago. It went through several courts. We started it at the [NON-ENGLISH]. It reached the Verfassungsgericht, which is the Supreme Court in Karlsruhe. It was thrown back like a ping-pong ball to the [NON-ENGLISH] where, at last, after six-- six years, on the 5th of November, the verdict was announced. 
INT: Which was? LV: The lawsuit was started only by a group of women, because an organization can't start a lawsuit. It was started by 20 women, plus two women from the United States who got in touch with a lawyer. And the verdict was that only one woman will get-- it's not sure yet, because the German Finance Ministry is appealing even this verdict-- will get 15,000 German marks, because she didn't have the opportunity to claim any compensation on the basis of the so-called BEG, which is the Bundesentschadigungsgesetz. And those who came earlier could claim for such compensation. She's only receiving from the claims [? conference. ?] Now I must tell the world here that I personally received about 7,000 marks in 1974 under this BEG law, and then nothing since then. My sister only received 1,700 marks in '68, and now she is receiving compensation through the claims conference-- 500 marks a month. But those whose income is a little bit higher than the ceiling Germany decided upon can't get it, even if the spouse's income is considered too high, as is my case.  INT: Lidia, we are approaching the end of the interview. LV: Just one sentence, if you will allow me--  INT: Mm-hmm. LV: --in connection with our Jewish gymnasium, that we organized a word reunion in 1990 on the 50th anniversary of the founding of our Jewish gymnasium. And we also memorialized or remembered all those who had perished. We were about 1,200 pupils and 50 teachers. And about one-quarter of this number survived. And that's a 'reasonable' number-- I say, it in inverted commas-- because the higher classes survived-- I mean partially-- but the lower classes were all gassed, as-- as you well know. And I prepared a fantastic exhibition of photographs with more than 300 pictures collected from our friends from all over the world, connected with our gymnasium. 
INT: When did it take place? LV: The reunion-- the first reunion, because we had several, in 1990-- October 1990, because our gymnasium, as I told you, was founded in October 1940. And this exhibition--  INT: Where did it take place? LV: Where? At Shefayim, at the kibbutz Shefayim, and the second one in '94 also at the kibbutz Shefayim. Now this exhibition was something fantastic, because I had negatives made of every picture. The pictures are individual pictures, pictures at performances-- drama performances-- class pictures, anything connected with our school. And we found more than 300-- about 350. And we mounted these pictures on huge panels at kibbutz Shefayim. And it-- it was natural-- naturally the centerpiece of-- of our reunion.  INT: Kibbutz Shefayim is located where? LV: Near Tel Aviv. Near Herzliya, near Tel Aviv. And--  INT: In Israel. LV: Yes, in Israel. [LAUGHS] And about 300 former pupils and their spouses, whoever could come with their spouses, participated.  INT: We-- LV: It was a great event.  INT: We come to the end of tape number 14.  INT: Questions of more general matter-- and the first one, why do you think you survived? LV: I think, in most cases of survival, it's mere chance. And it was also chance that led us to the Union, which was the main factor in our survival, at least up to the death march. And also the fact that probably we had strength to survive the death march, because the Union was kind of a sheltered existence for us. It was in the very best interest of the Germans and ours, as well. 
INT: Who gave you moral support during the worst time you passed? LV: Moral support, I could say, at the very beginning-- even those two teachers, whom we had met in that first and traumatic camp, the Mexico camp, because the fact that they organized some sort of a cultural life, as I can call it that, was giving us moral support. Then I and my sister were the most important moral support to each other and our close friends-- not always the same friends with whom we were together. At the beginning, there were three sisters, the [? Fried ?] sisters. And then, in the Union, we had some friends, and also in Neustadt-Glewe. But no one in Ravensbrück. Now, what I'm saying-- what I want to say now may not be true, but it's very strange, and it's also paradoxical. I heard from friends, who came to Israel, at the very beginning, after the liberation, in '45, '46-- were asked by Jews here, why did you survive? From whom did you steal the food? Whom did you kill? I and Anna felt that we also survived because we were so honest. Honest to the end, and 100%. We never even thought of trying to take away somebody else's food-- never. But we witnessed innumerable such cases. One very sad case-- a mother taking away the food, a piece of bread, or something, from her daughter. That was a shock for us.  INT: Did you stay in touch with friends from camps? Like Schwester Lager? LV: Yes, of course. We didn't have lagerschwesters because we were-- the two of us were real schwesters. Now, as I told you before, whoever was alone had to find a family, a surrogate family. 
INT: But did you stay in touch with them? LV: And I had only my sister, as a real sister, so I didn't need lagerschwester. But I stayed in, in touch with many friends-- many? With a number of friends to this day. And my best friend is in Netanya, [NON-ENGLISH], one of our small family of eight, with whom we went to Neubrandenburg, and our ways parted there-- and others, too. And I have lots and lots of new Union friends. And what's interesting that-- we are talking about the Union as if it had been our home, our house. Where did you work, in which department? And people whom you knew were there. So I have received lots of new friends through our organization.  INT: What do you think-- what effect had your experience on the bringing up of your children? LV: That's a very difficult question.  INT: I'm sorry. LV: It is very difficult, because [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] I and my husband, we were very, very overprotective. Not only when they were children, but when they were already growing up, maybe we were too severe. Because we, we wanted the, the best for them. And we, we didn't let them do whatever they wanted. Maybe we were a little bit severe, because we were overprotective. And I think I made a mistake when I tried to inculcate Auschwitz into them. They don't belong to Auschwitz. They belong to life. And they belong to our country, Israel. Why should they live in Auschwitz, as I do? Because, because I do live in Auschwitz. I wrote my story, two and a half years ago, in a matter of two and a half months. And as a kind of a motto, I wrote, they drove me out when it ceased to exist. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] Yet, who will-- now I don't know. [PAUSES FOR 5 SECONDS] They drove me out when it ceased to be. Yet who will drive it out of me? It still exists. Only death will be my exorcist. [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] I live in Auschwitz. It's true what I'm telling you, probably because of all my activities. But I forced it upon my children. And I experienced it many times that they were fed up with it. Because I always have an association, which reminds me of Auschwitz, and I say it. Why don't I keep it to myself? And then-- 
INT: What, what's the reaction? LV: --that's no good for them.  INT: What's their reaction? LV: Sometimes-- rarely, but sometimes, I noticed that they were nervous when, out of the blue, I start telling them something about Auschwitz. Because otherwise, it's natural that there are smells or tastes or sights that remind me of Auschwitz, and then I tell them. For example, I have a skin condition, and I very often get treatment, which is called electrocoagulation, which means burning flesh, my own flesh. And the smell of it causes me more suffering than the pricking of that needle on my face, because you can maybe see that it's full of scars. So the associations are for me, only. Why do I have to share everything with my family, with my children, with my friends? I shouldn't. But it's me. I can't help it.  INT: How did the Israeli society receive you when you came in '58? Did you speak about your experience to anybody here? LV: [DRINKS] Of course I did, as I had done in Romania, but that's entirely different. Because here, we have come home. And part of the Israeli population was made up of survivors of camps. And in '80-- in '58, the situation was quite different from the very beginning. Because some of my friends showed me their arms. They had their numbers removed surgically. I would never have thought of such a thing. And they did it, because they were attacked. Attacked? I mean-- 
INT: Your friends, where? LV: Here, survivors, from the Union, quite a few have had their numbers removed. Because, at the very beginning, they were not received with open arms by the Israeli-- in Palestine, if, if they came before the state.  INT: And how were you received-- LV: There was a aliyah.  INT: --because you came 10 years later. LV: There, there was a new aliyah when we came. In '58, it was the start of an aliyah from Romania and from Poland. In the-- in the late '50s, with our aliyah, we were really the first swallows, the beginners. And even newspapers published our names-- not only ours, but those who came with our transport. And later on, thousands of camp survivors arrived from Transylvania-- especially from Transylvania-- and from Poland. And then they came also from Russia.  INT: But did you share-- did you share your experience with people living here, or it was too late for you? LV: That-- it was something very natural to talk about it, but we were not received with hostility. It was an entirely different situation when we arrived, 10 years or even 12 years after the first arrival of the survivors. By then, the horror stories-- but the real stories-- were already well-known, and it was known that it was true. That, and it was also known that those who survived did not survive because they were cruel to others. There were such cases, because, you know, [NON-ENGLISH] in the camps-- 
INT: That's true. LV: --as well, were everywhere. But we were not blamed for having survived. It was a different situation in Israel.  INT: And do you dream any dreams in conjunction to the Holocaust? LV: I had very few dreams. And I can only remember one or them, which was not a horror dream, which I dreamed about one and a half years ago, in connection with my friend, who, who died around that time. I met her in a camp. We were transferred from one, one camp to the other. And back in Romania, she also had that hobby of reciting poems. And I dreamed about reciting poems, and not remembering a few lines, and she helped me out. Which means they were not horror dreams, not nightmares. And you know why? I know why. I know exactly why.  INT: Tell me why. LV: Because I, as I told you, I live in Auschwitz. And when I say, 'Auschwitz,' I also meet Ravensbrück and Neustadt-Glewe.  INT: The period? LV: The Auschwitz is camps.  INT: The period. The period. LV: Yes, the concentration camps. I live there in my waking hours. I really do. So I, I am-- I can say that I'm nearly immunized to the experience of, of, of the horror of the camps. But I couldn't say the same about my sister. My sister represses everything. She doesn't want to know anything. And she refused to help me, when I wrote my story or when I helped an old German, by the name of Karl Heinz Schütt, who wrote about our camp in Neustadt-Glewe, which appeared a few weeks ago. And I implored my sister to help me, to remind me of events that happened there, which I forgot. No, she refused. She represses everything. She doesn't want to read about it. She never watches a film when we have Remembrance Day-- never. I don't know what's better, who is happier. She says, I live my life now and here, not there, more than 50 years ago. 
INT: Lidia, why did you want to tell the story, here and now? LV: It's like a flood. I can't resist it. I'm a talkative person. I don't know whether it's in connection with my profession as a teacher. Maybe. I like telling about it, so that the world should know. Now, here, most of the world is made up of, of people who know already. But when I am abroad, and I, I traveled a great deal, I used every opportunity to tell strangers-- but really strangers-- about my experience. And if it was in the summer, I made the point of sitting wherever, like this, with my arm bare, so that my number could be seen. And on a train in Switzerland, somebody, a man sitting opposite me-- I was with my aunt-- said, Shalom. He was an Italian. And fortunately, my aunt could talk Italian with him, because she had studied in Bologna and Firenze. And it was such a, a, a nice experience that he knew who I was, one of the Jews persecuted by the Nazis who had survived the death camps.  INT: What is the reaction of people abroad when you tell them? LV: Whoever hears my story-- of course, only such persons can hear my story with whom I am ready to talk. Naturally, they, they sympathize, and they-- and they feel empathy for me. But you know what's going on in the world. I don't have to tell you. My son teaches at the Hebrew University-- at the Tel Aviv University, and he works also on the project of antisemitism in the world. And he writes the chapters about Eastern Europe. So he's involved in the subject, and not only from the newspapers and TV do I know the situation all over the world, but from my own son. 
INT: Do you have any message to give to the-- your children, your grandchildren, to the next generations to come? LV: Who am I to pass on a message? The message--  INT: Your own message. LV: No. The message is Auschwitz, what it symbolizes. And it, it can only be the message of, of tolerance towards otherness. And that otherness can even be a difference between different trends in the same religion. For example, in our country, between seculars and ultra-religious Orthodox. Not only towards foreigners, other ethnic minorities in some countries, to be tolerant towards any people, who think differently or who are different, maybe in color. Anyhow.  INT: There is anything else you want to add to this? LV: I want to thank you, from the bottom of my heart, to have given me this opportunity to talk to you, and who knows to whom else, and who knows when. It depends how long these videocassettes will last. Maybe one or two generations, maybe more. [LAUGHS]  INT: Who knows. LV: Anyhow, thank you for the opportunity you gave me.  INT: Thank you for the interview. LV: Shalom. CREW: [NON-ENGLISH] LV: On the left is the picture of my mother, then my grandmother, from Debrecen, [NON-ENGLISH] Irén, who was gassed in Auschwitz on the 1st of July '44. My Aunt Rozalia, who became our mother for 40 years, and on the right, my aunt [? Anush, ?] my mother's sister, who went to the gas, on the 29th of May, with her two daughters. And the picture on the left is that of my dear grandmother, Katalin [NON-ENGLISH], who survived in ghetto Budapest. And she died in 1948, in July '48. On the right is my dear grandmother, Irén, [NON-ENGLISH] Irén, who arrived from Debrecen with the last transport which arrived in Auschwitz, and not near Vienna, on the 1st of July '44. She was gassed upon arrival. CREW: [NON-ENGLISH] LV: My grandfather, Rosenfeld Izidor, my father's father, who died at home, in Gheorgheni, on the 30th of November '39. CREW: [NON-ENGLISH]. LV: My dear parents, my mother, Harnik Jolan, born on the 16th of February '98, gassed in Auschwitz on the 10th of June '44. My dear father, born on September the 29th, 1895. Died after the liberation at the age of nearly 50. This is our only family picture, on which all four of us are there, my father, my sister, Anna, my mother, and I. It's from 1932. And this picture was taken at Purim, 1942, and I was in the seventh grade at the Jewish gymnasium. And I am playing Queen Esther, in Racine's tragedy. I'm there in the middle. CREW: [NON-ENGLISH] LV: I'm Queen Esther there. [NON-ENGLISH] I remember the verse-- I was just saying then. This is my graduation picture from the Jewish gymnasium in 1943. I am in the second row from the bottom in the middle. 
INT: Which city? In which-- LV: It's in [? Cluj. ?] CREW: [NON-ENGLISH] LV: On the right, my husband, Bela Vago, in 1975. He was then healthy and very active. On the left, it's Bela very recently, when a friend visited him. You can see that he is disabled but listening to the stories of his friend. CREW: [NON-ENGLISH] LV: On the left, my son, [NON-ENGLISH] and his wife, [NON-ENGLISH], now ex-wife, but we love her dearly, and the two little girls. On the right, the little girls are already big girls. It's a recent picture of Omer and Tal. Omer will be 10 years old next month, and Tal was seven in July. This is the memorial sculpture of the four heroines, martyrs, of Auschwitz, who were hanged on the 6th of January, 1945. I am standing near the sculpture. Near me is Hanka [? Heilman, ?] the sister of [? Ester ?] Weisblum, one of the four heroines. And the third woman is [NON-ENGLISH], who was a fighter in the Auschwitz underground. She was not in the Union.  INT: The statue was inaugurated? LV: The statue was inaugurated on the 19th of June 1991.  INT: In Jerusalem. LV: In Jerusalem at Yad Vashem. On the left is my postcard which I wrote to Bela, on the train from Debrecen, on my journey home, on the 26th of March 1944, a few days after the Germans came into Budapest, and my parents called me home from Debrecen. He took it with him to-- during the war in his labor battalion. And the other one is from home, when we were already under house arrest. I am writing it to Bela, also to the army, to his service, to his forced labor battalion. And I am telling him that I don't know anything about his family, nor about their things, because we are locked into our house under house arrest. We are not allowed to leave the house. We don't receive any mail, so he shouldn't write to me. CREW: [NON-ENGLISH] LV: This is my naive letter, for which I am, of course, ashamed, to the German soldier, [GERMAN], in that month of May when we were under house arrest. And the German [NON-ENGLISH] was on the ground floor of our house. I asked for the German soldier not to, to disturb my sentimental letters. CREW: OK. LV: These are the notebooks into which I had copied the letters, which I had written to Bela, so that I can read them when I am an old woman, like now. And Bela found them under very strange circumstances. I think one of them in our garage, and he received the others from strangers when he returned home. CREW: [NON-ENGLISH] LV: That small bag is my original Auschwitz bread satchel, which I bought for, probably, a portion of bread or margarine or something. It was all my property for many, many months, during captivity. Then there are some tablets of aspirin and paper bandage, which I took from the pharmacy of the revier, when I ran back to my sister on the 18th of January, before the evacuation. Then there is the white piece of cloth with blue numbers, 99626, my original Ravensbrück number. And the pink piece of paper, with the same number, which I received in Ravensbrück. The two spoons are-- one is mine, one belongs-- or belonged to my sister. And we also brought-- bought them for whatever, bread or margarine. Our Anna's ski boots from home. As I told you, we were allowed to keep our shoes. And as you can, see the sole was repaired at some time. It was in the Union repaired by her boyfriend, [? Viktor ?] Sometimes, till our way home, we wore these boots, alternately. Sometimes I did, sometimes Anna, because we had, naturally, another pair of shoes. They saved her life, or my life-- anyhow, our lives. This is a typical Auschwitz skirt. The patches are not just sewn on the skirt, but there is a hole underneath. And the, the reason for giving the inmates such skirts was to prevent anyone from escaping, because, if they had no change, no other clothes, they could immediately be recognized. It was not my skirt. I don't remember where I found it and brought, brought it home, because I felt that it was important to bring it home as documentation. These are my Hitlerjugend shorts, which I found on the attic of an official building in Neustadt-Glewe on the first day when we went into town. I wanted to discard my soiled and stenchy Auschwitz outfit, and I arrived in Budapest dressed in these shorts. CREW: [NON-ENGLISH] LV: This is my family. Only the two little girls, [NON-ENGLISH] daughters, could not come today. To my right is my sister, Anna. ANNA ROTH: Yes, my name is Anna, Anna Roth, [NON-ENGLISH]. I am Lidia's sister. I am 70 years old, and I survived Auschwitz. ANTON VAGO: I'm [? Rafael, ?] [NON-ENGLISH]. 
INT: In English. ANTON VAGO: [NON-ENGLISH] GABBY VAGO: My name is Gabby, and I'm his wife. LIOR VAGO: My name is Lior. I'm her grandson.  INT: The oldest, no? IDIT VAGO: No, I'm the oldest. My name is Idit. I'm the oldest granddaughter, 26 years old. EYAL VAGO: My name is Eyal, I'm the youngest grandson. And I'm 19, almost 19 so. ANTON VAGO: It's a secret-- where are you serving now? ANDREI VAGO: My name is [NON-ENGLISH]. I'm Lidia's younger son, and the brother of [? Rafael. ?] CREW: [NON-ENGLISH] ANTON VAGO: [NON-ENGLISH] IDIT VAGO: Thank you very much. ANNA ROTH: [NON-ENGLISH] LV: Thank you very much. ANNA ROTH: Thank you. CREW: [NON-ENGLISH]