INT: Service-- is that right? RS: [LAUGHS]  INT: This is not seen on the-- on the camera, so-- RS: Look, this--  INT: No, just-- just-- UNIDENTIFIED SPEAKER: [NON-ENGLISH].  INT: --here. RS: Oh, that's good.  INT: That's all. RS: That's plenty. [LAUGHS]  INT: This. OK. One for Murray, one for Uncle Reuben. Is this your chair, Uncle Murray? UNCLE MURRAY: That's the one.  INT: I'll keep this water just behind you. UNIDENTIFIED SPEAKER: [NON-ENGLISH].  INT: And you'll let us know if the lights are a problem, OK? RS: I beg your pardon?  INT: Let us know if the lights are a problem. RS: Oh, no. I'll-- I'll manage.  INT: OK. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] I'll just explain a couple of things. UNIDENTIFIED SPEAKER: [? Ronald-- ?] I told her, but she doesn't want to be. Not your fault.  INT: She doesn't? UNIDENTIFIED SPEAKER: No-- [? won't ?] [? participate ?] in any way. RS: She's too shy. UNIDENTIFIED SPEAKER: Well, she-- I don't think she's--  INT: The date is the December the 15th, 1997. Survivor is Rose Svehla, interviewer Reuben Zylberszpic. The interview is being conducted in Otatara, New Zealand, in English. I'll take the-- My name is Reuben Zylberszpic. The date today is the 15th of December, 1997. I'm conducting an interview with Rose Svehla, in Otatara, New Zealand. Could you tell me your name and spell it? RS: My name is Rose Svehla, S-V-E-H-L-A.  INT: What was your name at birth? RS: At birth I was Rose, again, Russ. 
INT: Could you spell that? RS: R-U double S.  INT: What is your date of birth? RS: The 2nd of October, 1918.  INT: And how old are you now? RS: Almost-- I will be 79. [LAUGHS]  INT: When will you be-- RS: In October.  INT: So how old are you now? RS: Well, almost 79. [LAUGHS]  INT: What city were you born in, and could you spell that? RS: In Kysperk.  INT: Could you say that again? RS: K-- Kysperk, K-Y-S-P-E-R-K.  INT: What country is that in? RS: It's in Czechoslovakia.  INT: Do you remember the address of the family home, where you grew up, in Kysperk? RS: Yes. It was Masaryk Square, number 55.  INT: When you say square, what do you mean? RS: Well, it was the main sort of [? ringplatz-- ?] is. [LAUGHS]  INT: And was the home an apartment or a house? RS: It was a house. It was a ones-- two-story house. And there was-- it was in the middle of the square, and opposite a Catholic church. And it was a small, but very clean little town. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] The-- [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] one major town closest to us was Zamberk. And--  INT: What about your family home? Can you describe that for me? RS: Well, yes. Well, we had a-- there was a shop on the ground floor. And on the second floor, we had the-- the apartment where we lived. And it was, well, modest, but reasonable. 
INT: What sort of a shop was on the ground floor? RS: It-- it was-- [PAUSES FOR 6 SECONDS] well, I-- [LAUGHS] I don't know how to describe it.  INT: You can say it in-- in-- in Czech if you like. RS: Well, [CZECH]. And--  INT: Was it-- was it-- so it sell-- did it sell confectionery? RS: Not confectionery. Ready-made clothes. And later on, when my father was managing the textile factory, there was also his own products for sale, like [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] towels, and all kinds of medical material, like gauze and so on. So it was a self-contained [LAUGHS] place.  INT: Did-- did your family own this-- this building, the-- the-- RS: Yes.  INT: --the shop and the-- and the dwelling above? RS: Yes. Yes, it was our parents'.  INT: Was it their-- did they actually work the shop as well? RS: Yes. Yes, mostly my mother. And my father spent a lot of time in the textile factory. It was about 30 kilometers away from our hometown. So.  INT: Which town was your father's factory? RS: Vysoké Myto. [LAUGHS] Vysoké Myto.  INT: And was that his own factory, or did he just work there? RS: No, he was just-- it belongs to his great uncle. And he was managing it, because-- [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] together with another man who was employed there before.  INT: What-- what-- what-- RS: It used to be, in fact, a flour mill before. And there was also some small [PAUSES FOR 5 SECONDS] holding attached to it, you know, like fields and cattle and so on. My father was very keen on agriculture. [LAUGHS] He spent a lot of time there. 
INT: What was the name of your-- your-- your father's uncle, or great uncle, who owned that factory? RS: Well, his name was Adolf Pick.  INT: Could you spell the last name? RS: P-I-C-K.  INT: Going back to your family home on-- on top of the shop, in the square, can you describe that? How many rooms did it have? RS: There were three rooms. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] Yes, three rooms.  INT: What were those rooms? RS: Well, one was sitting, bedroom. Another was a normal sitting room, and one bedroom at the back. And there was another bedroom in the-- on the ground floor, opposite the shop.  INT: Who lived there? RS: Well, usually the employees, two employees.  INT: Did you have a kitchen in the house? RS: Yes. Yes, [LAUGHS] we did, and a bathroom [LAUGHS] as well. So.  INT: How did you keep-- how did you keep the place warm? RS: By heating. We has this American heating, you know. You needed anthracite for it. But at the time, during the war, there was no anthracite at all available. So.  INT: What's-- what is the fuel called? RS: Anthracite. That's a very refined coal, actually. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] So this was-- [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] it really-- it-- it wasn't very posh place, but reasonable.  INT: Did you have a bathroom? RS: Yes. Yes.  INT: Was there running water? RS: There was, yes. [LAUGHS]  INT: Did you have electricity? RS: Yes. 
INT: Who were the other members of your family? RS: My father, my mother, her-- her father, and my brother. That was all.  INT: What-- what was your father's name? RS: Karel.  INT: Your mother? RS: Olga.  INT: And your grandfather? RS: Anost, which means Ernest.  INT: And your brother? RS: Lev.  INT: Who was older, you or your brother? RS: We were twins. So I was half-- half an hour younger.  INT: Did you have your own bedroom? RS: Yes. Yes. I was using the-- but you know, I wasn't practically at home for a long time, because before I started school, I was staying with my grandparents.  INT: Before school? RS: Before school.  INT: Why was that? RS: Because we were twins, my mother had her hands full. And when my auntie came for a visit and saw how very overstretched that they were, she-- she said, look, I take one baby with me. She wasn't married at the time. So they agreed that it would be myself. They both wanted a girl, but in the end, she took me to her home, where she lived with my grandparents. And so I stayed there until I was five.  INT: Is this in Kysperk? RS: No, it wasn't. It was close to Kralupy.  INT: So were you-- RS: That's where I grew up until my school age.  INT: Did you know your parents? RS: Oh, yes. My father used to come rather often. And he always brought me beautiful presents, beautiful-- 
INT: What sort of presents? RS: Toys, mostly from the Leipzig messe, you know, in-- [LAUGHS] they were a very famous [PAUSES FOR 6 SECONDS] place in Germany at the time, where they were manufacturing beautiful toys-- unheard of. And he always brought me some of these toys. So--  INT: Did he bring-- did he go to Leipzig to-- to buy these? RS: Yes. Yes.  INT: And what was he going to Leipzig for? RS: For this-- no, not because of that, but it was sort of [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] generally, very, you know, interested messe. [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] In-- in those days, Germany was suffering from terrible inflation. So that was-- it wasn't a problem to go there and do some shopping, and so on.  INT: Can you-- so are you saying that you were brought up in your grandmother's home-- RS: Yes.  INT: --for the first five years of your life? So did you know your family home in Kysperk? RS: Yes, I did, but it was a place to visit. It wasn't a home, you know.  INT: Until what age? RS: Until six, before my-- we started school at six. And then I felt terribly homesick for my grandparents' place, of course, because it was all foreign to me, you know. So.  INT: Did you adjust? RS: Oh, yes, eventually I did.  INT: Tell me about your-- you father. RS: My father was very clever with his hands. He painted beautifully as well. And he was very, very enterprising and loving person. [PAUSES FOR 5 SECONDS] My mother was a little bit-- yes, well, I never got close to her until I was in my teens myself. She was, in a way, wiser than my father. [LAUGHS] She knew exactly what-- what was what, you know? 
INT: What was-- sorry? RS: Well, what-- what was what. She was-- basically led us to Zionism, because she wasn't that [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] well-adjusted to-- to Czech life.  INT: How did she lead you to Zionism? RS: Well, she suggested that we could, perhaps, go for a summer camp with the Zionist youth organization, [NON-ENGLISH]. So we did. And from then on, we were just hooked, [LAUGHS] you know? [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] And it-- and actually, it saved my brother's life, 'cause he managed to get to Palestine in time. It was the last transport which Haganah organized.  INT: What year was that? RS: 1930-- 1939, yes.  INT: Did your brother leave before the war started? RS: It was already. The Polish episode was past us. And we--  INT: Going back to the prewar days, what sort of a religious upbringing did you have? RS: Practically none, because we had no rabbi close at all. Only later on, the chief rabbi used to come to our place.  INT: What was his name? RS: Dr. Ziecher. And--  INT: When you say chief rabbi, what-- RS: Chief for the whole Czechoslovakia.  INT: Why would he come to your home? RS: I don't-- I can't explain that. But evidently, my father got in touch with him somehow. And he was-- CREW: The mic.  INT: We're just gonna take a break. We've got a technical problem. RS: Ah. OK.  INT: Continuing interview with Rose Svehla, tape one, after a technical problem. Rose, I asked you why did the-- the-- the rabbi, the chief rabbi of-- of Czechoslovakia come to visit your family? RS: I don't know why. Because it probably was because my father got in touch with him and invited him. And he-- he managed to get a group of local Jews to listen to his sermon. He was a very educated, highly educated person. But unfortunately, because [LAUGHS] we were not kosher family, he had to-- we had to feed him only with sardines, straight after [LAUGHS] the tin. And he had to use some bun, you know, instead of cutlery, because that's what-- I don't know how he managed when-- when he was in the hotel. But anyway, that was for several years. 
INT: Do you remember what he looked like? RS: Yes, I do remember.  INT: Can you describe him? RS: He looked like a prophet, you know, with a beard-- a big man. Yes, I-- I think it was a handsome person. He was.  INT: Do you remember any of the conversations that he had with you or your-- your family? RS: Not really. But I remember once we were visitors in his home. Their flat, their apartment was above the synagogue in--  INT: Where? RS: --in Prague. And his wife was a doctor of philosophy herself. She was of Polish descent. But she could speak Czech all right. So once we were there. It was the first time I experienced some really Jewish place-- you know, Orthodox, more or less-- although he wasn't Orthodox. He was rather Reform. So.  INT: What do you remember about that visit to the rabbi's home? RS: Well, it-- it was very beautiful, you know, lots of rooms. In one row, all the doors were open. You could see from one end through the other. And in the corridor there was a facility for washing hands, which was more or less, I would say, rather symbolic. [LAUGHS] And anyway, that was the only experience I had.  INT: Did Kysperk have a synagogue? RS: No. No. The closest one was in Zamberk, but it wasn't a real synagogue. It was only open during the High Holy Days. Otherwise, it was closed. 
INT: Did your family attend the synagogue? RS: Yes. Yes.  INT: Can you describe it? RS: [LAUGHS] It was funny. The only advantage for us was that we didn't have to go to school. So-- otherwise, we had no idea what was going on. Because there was no rabbi. Only these people were just [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] praying. And [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] the funniest thing was that the key of the synagogue was placed in-- in a place of a man who was actually married to a German lady. [LAUGHS] And she saved his life. And she tried to save other people's lives.  INT: What was her name? RS: Elbogen. Elbogen.  INT: Could you spell that? RS: E-L-- E-L-B-O-G-E-N.  INT: You say that she tried to save other people's lives. RS: Yes.  INT: How did you know that? RS: How did I know that? Well, when my father-- my father was taken to Gestapo, because you know, after the-- Heydrich's assassination, they were-- there were a lot of-- [PAUSES FOR 7 SECONDS] you know, the Germans were searching all the Jewish homes. And-- mainly Jewish-- and then some of these people organized in [? so-called ?] other organizations. And they found some [NON-ENGLISH]-- [NON-ENGLISH] in-- at our place.  INT: What did they find? RS: You know, [NON-ENGLISH]. You know, for shooting.  INT: Bullets? RS: Bullets, yes. And when-- so when they found these bullets, they took my father to face the Gestapo in Zamberk. And by chance, there was a man who knew my father from the prewar times, because he was engaged in some-- in some company, who were in business [INAUDIBLE] contact. So that was-- then they were asking about him. And this lady gave him a good report. That's what we know. And there were others who intervened in his favor, so he was sent home after that. 
INT: And what year was this? RS: It was 1940. Oh, sorry. When was the Heydrich assassination? 1942, I think. So it could have been 1941. Yes.  INT: Going-- going back a bit to your religious upbringing, did the family celebrate any festivals at home? RS: Oh, yes. [LAUGHS] Once we celebrated Seder. But then we realized it was one week earlier than-- [LAUGHS] than in fact it was. Because we were really not very educated in this matter.  INT: What was-- do you remember what was done for that Seder night? RS: Yes, well, everything which was supposed to be done. But I appreciated mostly the wine glass, you know, for the prophet. And when nobody looked, I-- I managed to drink it. [LAUGHS] So it was funny.  INT: Do you remember what your mother cooked for that? RS: Oh, my mother never cooked. We had a housekeeper. She cooked. But I don't remember what, really.  INT: Did your brother have a bar mitzvah? RS: I don't think he had. No. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] No, he didn't.  INT: Did you have an extended family living nearby, or in Kysperk? RS: No, but not far away, in Ústí-- Ústí not [NON-ENGLISH]. That-- that was my father's sister and her husband, and three boys.  INT: What were their names? RS: Garel, Ota, Zdenek.  INT: And your auntie and uncle? RS: Irma and-- what's his name? Josef.  INT: What was their last name? RS: Pick-- P-I-C-K. 
INT: Did you have a favorite cousin? RS: Yes, the little one and the middle one, Ota. He was really very nice. They all perished during the war.  INT: Did you go-- did you go and visit them as a child? RS: Yes, every day because, you know, when we were going to the gymnasium, to the high school in [NON-ENGLISH], we had to change the train in Ústí. So we always stopped there, and she would feed us, because is was in the early afternoon. So and then we would go with-- by another train to Kysperk.  INT: Did you have any other extended family, apart from your auntie and uncle and cousins? RS: Yes. Yes, we had-- my auntie, the one who brought me up. She got married, but she never had any children. And [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] my-- then she had a sister-in-law. Her husband was half Jewish. And when he married her, the Nuremberg Laws would apply to him as well. And he refused to get divorced, because he said, I had my good life with-- with her, so I'll stick to her now. And he lost his life on account of that. In fact when they came to Auschwitz with my father, they held each other's hands. And both of them were sent by Mengele in [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] to their deaths. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] So, you know, it's very difficult to remember these things without ending up in-- with these experiences. So. 
INT: Are you aware of the size of the Jewish population in Kysperk? RS: Yes. Yes. There were one, two, three, four, five families all together.  INT: Was that all? RS: Yes. And then the-- Geduldiger was the name of the man who was in the factory, you know, in Zamberk.  INT: Who was this man? RS: Geduldiger.  INT: Could you spell that? RS: He was-- G-E-D-I-G-E-R.  INT: And could you pronounce that again? RS: Geduldiger. It was four-- there were four of them. And before he came to Kysperk, he was in Zamberk, in some kind of director in the factory. You know, the people you know.  INT: Was Mr. Geduldiger, was he one of the Jewish families that lived in-- RS: In Kysperk.  INT: --in Kysperk. RS: Later on, yes.  INT: Do-- can you tell me any of the other family names of the-- those other five families? RS: Yes. Hlavac.  INT: Could you spell that, please? RS: H-L-A-V-A-C. And-- and--  INT: And the other ones? RS: Saxl.  INT: Could you spell that? RS: S-A-X-L; Abl-- A-B-L; then Fischl-- F-I-S-H-L.  INT: And were there any others? RS: Lederer.  INT: Could you spell that? RS: L-E-D-E-R-E-R. I can't remember any. Oh, yes, Mandl-- M-A-N-D-R-L. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] This-- that was all.  INT: Were any of these people relatives of yours? RS: Distant relatives were the Saxls, very distant.  INT: We're just going to take a break now and change tapes. RS: Right. RS: I never had any direct contact with them. Only once I remember, there was a ball. CREW: Mm. RS: I don't know who organized it. But we were invited. And there was a tiny baby. 
INT: Yeah. RS: One of them. CREW: And that was the one with the little girls? RS: Yes. [LAUGHS] And she was-- [BACKGROUND NOISE] her-- her mask was like a-- CREW: They were younger than you-- older than you. RS: No, no, they are younger. CREW: I OK. RS: At least, at that time they were younger. CREW: [LAUGHS] [? --change. ?]  INT: Interview with Rose Svehla. This is tape two. Rose, you just told me the names of the five or so families that lived in Kysperk. Did you-- did those five families associate together a lot? RS: Not very much, no, because they were all assimilated. And they all had the-- [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] the [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] connections. So we just-- I don't know, really. We had our friends, which were not always Jewish. They had their friends. You know, that-- that's the small-town life. And--  INT: Did you ever experience any antisemitism in Kysperk? RS: Oh, yes. [LAUGHS] Oh, yes. Already when I-- after I started school-- [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] once the girls were telling me, look, you crucified Jesus. I said, well, and you burned [NON-ENGLISH] on-- on the stake. [LAUGHS] You know, it wasn't really-- that was my first encounter with antisemitism, I-- I think.  INT: Did you have much, as a child, after that? RS: After that, not really, no.  INT: What about at school? RS: No. Our-- my teacher was a very broad-- broad-minded liberal sort of person. But my own [LAUGHS] brother had some problems with the religious teacher, you know, the Catholic teacher, because [LAUGHS] he tried to persuade his schoolmates that there is no hell, no heaven. And so he smacked him for that. [LAUGHS] But that was the only thing. Of course, he undermined the morale. That was-- it wasn't very clever, was it? [LAUGHTER] 
INT: Can you tell me about school? Your school life? RS: Well, as far as I can remember, it was good for me. I was-- I could read before I started school, in fact. And I didn't mind school. I loved to have holidays, of course, but I didn't mind it.  INT: Who was your best friend at school? RS: My best friend was actually my brother's best friend, who is his brother-in-law now. So--  INT: What-- what's his name? RS: Karel.  INT: What's his last name? RS: Boharc. And the whole family was very friendly with us. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] And--  INT: Did you go to school in Kysperk? RS: Yes. Yes. And then, when we went to [NON-ENGLISH], we had no common life with the other children, because we had to travel every day.  INT: When-- when was this? RS: When we started high school.  INT: Where-- and where did you go? RS: To [NON-ENGLISH]. That-- that was a town on the way to [NON-ENGLISH]. You know, the-- the railway, which eventually went to Germany.  INT: How far from Kysperk was this? RS: Well, kilometer-wise, it wasn't terribly far, but it was complicated. Sometime my father would take us by car, which took about 3/4 of an hour, whereas, it took 3 hours to get there by train.  INT: Did you-- do-- were you living with your family at that point? Were you living at home in Kysperk? RS: Yes, until my 14th year of age. 
INT: Then what happened? RS: Then one of the teachers had some antisemitic remarks, and I started crying. And when we came home, I told my father I won't be going to that school anymore. And so he went to see the-- the head teacher and told him why he wants me-- us to take-- take us away from the school. So that's when my brother didn't want to go on to school. But I went to Kralupy, and that was much better.  INT: To where? RS: Kralupy-- Kralupy nad Vltavou. That was close where my grandparents lived. So I stayed with my grandfather and auntie. And--  INT: Is it the-- is this the same auntie that brought you up? RS: Yes. Yes.  INT: Do you remember what the antisemitic comments were that the teacher made? RS: Yes, I can remember very well. He said, the Greeks are even worse than Jews-- something like that. I was very sensitive to it, you know? Maybe-- well, he was sort of-- he was a crippled person. I think he was crippled even mentally a little bit.  INT: You said that you weren't brought up very religiously. RS: No.  INT: Yet, how did you identify as a Jew? RS: More through the Zionist [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] philosophy, you know, more than religious.  INT: Was your aim at that young age to go to Israel-- Palestine? RS: Well, yes, it was. It was. [LAUGHS] Because when I-- I was, in fact, one of the most successful pupils in Kralupy. And in the seventh class, which was one year before the leaving exam, as a matter of principle, the head-- our teacher-- class teacher-- asked, who wants to leave? I was the only one who lift-- [LAUGHS] lifted her hand to tell them. He said, you? Out of all the people, you are the only one I wouldn't agree, he said. You have to bring your father here. Otherwise, I can't give you any. And why do you want? I wanted to go to Brno to have school for chicken farm people, you know? And I hated chickens terribly. [LAUGHS] That was stupid [INAUDIBLE]. Anyway, my father came. And half of the night, he tried to persuade me what a stupid thing it would be. He said, you always can go to the chickens after your leaving exam. So in the end, I agreed. And that was it. So. 
INT: How long were you in school in Kralupy? RS: For four years.  INT: How were those four years? RS: Very good. They were--  INT: Who were-- who were you living with? RS: With my grandfather and auntie. And my grandmother was still alive then.  INT: Tell me about your grandparents. RS: Well, my grandfather was-- he was very intelligent. He was. He had no chance to get any education at all, but just because he was-- he was sitting next to the son of the property itself, the place, he [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] got up with all kinds of knowledge. So that when I-- when I was studying, he was-- he could understand very well what I was talking about. And my grandmother was-- she was sort of a very kind person, but not as intellectual as the grandfather. He was an avid reader. He even took to binding his own books. So he-- he had a very large library. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] But otherwise, yes, you know, you can see the human faults after you grow up. So [PAUSES FOR 5 SECONDS] the life there was very simple.  INT: Did you visit your family? Did you visit your family in Kysperk? RS: Oh, yes, yes, I did, for every holidays and so on.  INT: So what years were the-- was this that you were in Kralupy? RS: What years?  INT: You said about four years. RS: Yes, it was when I was 14 till 18. And then, of course, I started studying medicine after that. 
INT: Why did you want to study medicine? RS: Why?  INT: Mm. RS: I always wanted to do pediatrics.  INT: From-- from what age did you-- do you remember? Well, we've got a neighbor. And he was a Jewish doctor. And-- where was this? RS: In Kysperk--  INT: What was his name? RS: --before-- Sdasdny.  INT: Could you spell that? RS: [LAUGHS] S-D-A-S-D-N-Y. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] Later on, I made an acquaintance with this doctor's niece in Prague. [LAUGHS] Anyway, he-- he always took me to his surgery, and I loved the smell, you know, of the disinfectant. So I came home and said, when I grow up, I'll go and be a maid to Dr. Sdasdny. But then he had a locum tenens, a young doctor. And so I decided, I won't be a maid to-- but I will marry the doctor. [LAUGHS] But he married somebody else, so, this is OK. So I'll be a doctor myself. That was--  INT: So you say that you were in Kralupy from-- from when you're 14 to 18, which is approximately 1932 to 1938. RS: '37, yes. The--  INT: When did you first become aware of the name Hitler? RS: In 1933. We could hear his speeches in-- on the radio, which was terrible. We knew that it will be no good, you know, that-- and of course, after the death of President Masaryk, it was evident that we are-- we were heading for a very bad time. But of course, when you are young, you are optimistic. You don't think of the terrible things which can happen. 
INT: Do you remember what-- what your parents' reaction was to Hitler? RS: Oh, yes. Oh, yes. Of course I do. They wanted to emigrate.  INT: To where? RS: To Palestine. But then my grandfather wouldn't move. And so I said, I won't-- I won't emigrate because of my grandpa-- grandfather and my auntie. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] So I am, in fact, guilty of, you know, their-- their death.  INT: What do you mean? RS: Well, if I did go away, there was also a chance to go to England as a medical student, you know? They would let me, or train for the nursing profession there. But I didn't want to go anywhere.  INT: Why didn't want to go? RS: Because I knew that my grandfather wouldn't move. My auntie wouldn't move. I didn't want to leave them there, you know? That's-- it was stupid, but--  INT: What-- what year was this that your father wanted to emigrate? RS: Oh, it was about 1936, '37. But it was too late then, because all the-- you know, they would have to go on the [? capitalist ?] certificate, which meant to have 100,000 crowns to pay for it. But to-- [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] to exchange the money was a problem then, because our bank accounts were seized. We couldn't get anything out of it except for a small amount of money.  INT: When was that that your bank accounts were seized? RS: Well, I can't remember properly. But it could have been-- well, already after the occupation, you know? When the-- 
INT: And just-- just stepping back a bit, you said that you went to Prague in 19-- RS: '37 and '38.  INT: And where did you-- where did you study medicine? RS: In Prague, in Charles-- at Charles University. That--  INT: Tell me about that. RS: That was a Czech university. At the time, there were two. One was the German one, and Charles University was the Czech university. So when we started, we were about 400 people in the first semester. And after two semesters, we were only half.  INT: Why? RS: Well, a lot of people failed their first exams, or decided to live a better life. [LAUGHS] And so.  INT: How-- how were you going at university? RS: I was OK, yes. I was very good. The first two exams were the highest degree. But the third I failed. Because in the first place, there was another Jewish student there, and the professor was telling him something about the practical exam he was doing. And he opposed him. And he said, you are certainly Jewish, because you are so cheeky. And this put me out. I just couldn't think anymore about the exam. And so I failed this one. That was, you know, the beginning of the end already.  INT: What do you mean? RS: Well, it was the free-- what do you call it? [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] Anybody could, without any problem, voice his antisemitism, you know. And this is what people were doing. 
INT: And was that happening in-- in-- at university? RS: At university.  INT: Did you-- RS: This--  INT: --witness or hear things like this yourself? RS: Well, yes. I was involved in it. That's this professor of chemistry, you know? And after the war, I had to do the-- the exam again. And I was tempted to tell him what I remembered about him. But I didn't in the end. I thought, oh, gosh.  INT: Where were you living when you went to university in Prague? RS: With my great uncle, the one who-- who left us the house, which we never got. [LAUGHS] And--  INT: Was this the great uncle that your father was in business with? RS: Yes, yes. That was him. He had no children. And my father was very good to him when he lost a lot of money on the-- [SIGHS] on the [INAUDIBLE]. [PAUSES FOR 7 SECONDS] And my father told him, don't worry. Because he met with him in Prague. Don't worry. You can always come and live with us. And this made him so grateful, that he willed his-- his apartment house in Prague to him, or to his-- his children. But of course, we didn't get it. Because first of all, during the communist era, you couldn't get it. Because my half would be an effortless gain, which [LAUGHS] wasn't true. And my brother's half was denied, because he-- they said he emigrated or left illegally the country. So I went [LAUGHS] to the Israeli embassy-- it was still there at the time-- and asked them to give me-- give me a certificate that he left legally. And the attaché told me, you know, we don't give any certificates to private people, but I assume that your barrister wouldn't dare to come here, [LAUGHS] which was true. And so he gave me the number of the transport they went with. And when I brought it next-- to next session, to the [SIGHS] place, they said, OK. So he left legally. But he's staying abroad illegally. They said, well, if you get an immigration passport, the state doesn't assume that you will come back. And it had no sense [LAUGHS] at all to discuss it with them. So I had to sign it that we are leaving the house, the apartment house to-- to the state, and so on. 
INT: What year was this? RS: I beg your pardon?  INT: What year was this? RS: Well, it was 1950-- about.  INT: Going back to just prewar, the Munich Conference was in 1938. RS: Yes.  INT: Did that have any effect on you? RS: At the time, not yet-- only we were worried about the future. But practically, we still lived as normally.  INT: How long did you stay at university? RS: Until the universities-- the Czech universities were closed in November 1939, when--  INT: The war in Europe would have already started by then. RS: Yes.  INT: Germany had invaded Poland. RS: Yes, yes.  INT: Considering the proximity of-- of-- of Poland to-- to Prague-- RS: Oh.  INT: --were you at all concerned? RS: Of course we were, because it was a clear expansionist politics. And we knew that the Drang nach Osten will be going on.  INT: The what? RS: Drang nach Osten. That was Hitler's-- [BACKGROUND NOISE] Hitler's [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] aim, you know? Which means to go to the east to occupy the eastern parts. So--  INT: After-- after you were stopped from going to university, what did you do? RS: First, I learned how to sew. [LAUGHS] Then I went back to my grandpa-- grandfather's place, looking after-- my grandmother died in 1938. So [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] then we lost practically everything, you know? We were-- [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] my father had to sell the shop. And my grandfather-- and for the factory he had a-- a [NON-ENGLISH]. You know, it was a German who was actually leading the whole thing. But the first one was a very nice person. We suspected him-- that his wife was Jewish, because she lived in London with his children. And he was-- he was very nice, very fair. We learned later that he was killed in an air raid. 
INT: Do you remember his name? RS: No, no. I don't.  INT: You say that your father had to sell his shop. Why? RS: Well, because it-- he was Jewish. Otherwise, he would-- it would be taken away from him anyway.  INT: Does that mean he had to sell the family home as well? RS: Not at the time-- only after. No, he didn't sell it. He-- we had it back after the war, and we could sell it then.  INT: What were you doing in Prague at this time? RS: I was doing this course for gymnastics teachers.  INT: What-- what course is this? RS: It was organized by the Jewish community. And then there was another course, when I finished this one, for teachers. Because all the Jewish children were not allowed to go to normal schools, you know. So they had to find some teachers. And that was where I took the course. But I never had a chance to teach anywhere.  INT: Why? RS: Well, because I went back to my parents' place. And there were no children to teach.  INT: Why did you go, leave Prague, and go back to your parents? RS: I can't really remember why. But maybe because they wanted me to come-- [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] to come home.  INT: What-- do you know what year this was, or what month? RS: It must have been in 1940-- '40-- at the beginning.  INT: What did you do at home? RS: Well, first I tried to-- to learn how to sew. But then the people who employed me as a-- an apprentice had to let me go, because again. [PAUSES FOR 7 SECONDS] So that was the end of my [LAUGHS] career. And then I got married. 
INT: Who did you marry? RS: Who? Well, he was-- he came from Prague. And he lived incognito in Kysperk.  INT: Why incognito? RS: He didn't want to advertise that he was Jewish, you know?  INT: And what was he doing there? RS: Well, he was employed-- he was-- by profession, he was chemical engineer working with Batia [NON-ENGLISH]. And you know the name Batia? No? That's the international [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] shoe factory then. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] So when Mr. Batia left Czechoslovakia for Canada, he wanted my husband to go with him. But he didn't want to leave his mother. And in the end, his mother and sister were taken to Lódz. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] I'm sorry. And they both died there. [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] But before that--  INT: Would you like a glass of water? RS: Now I will. [DRINKS] So we were married in 1941.  INT: What was your husband's name? RS: [NON-ENGLISH] Lederer-- Georg.  INT: Where did you get married? RS: Where? Excuse me. In [? Schaumburg. ?]  INT: Can you-- RS: And in [? Schaumburg ?] Street under Hitler's huge painting. [LAUGHS]  INT: In a synagogue? RS: No, no, no. No. It was just the office, you know. And our honeymoon trip were-- was on foot from [? Schaumburg ?] to Kysperk, which was [LAUGHS] about six-- seven kilometers or so.  INT: Who attended the-- the marriage? RS: Nobody. Just-- just the two of us-- and Hitler. 
INT: Why did you marry? RS: Why? Well, we fell in love. And my father once said, oh, I am worried that she will be taken away from us. And-- and-- and here, I said, well, you know, I am usually lucky. So [LAUGHS] we can-- we can arrange it so that she wouldn't be taken. And in fact, he saved my life.  INT: In what way? RS: In what way? His best friend was the transport leitung man, you know. They were organizing the transports. And when we first came, he saw his name on the list. So he waited for us.  INT: On what list? RS: On the list of people who were coming to Theresienstadt. So he was waiting for us, and took us sideways so that we didn't lose anything of our-- normally, everybody had to go through the search, and all the contraband was taken away. So-- and then he-- he knew which activities were protected from transport, you know. So he suggested that my father and-- and my husband would go to build the track from [NON-ENGLISH] to Terezín. There was-- when we arrived, there was no train from [NON-ENGLISH]. That was the last station to Terezín. We had to walk. And so they were building the track.  INT: Can we just step back at this point, back to before you arrived at Theresienstadt? [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] You said you were married, and then you went back to Kysperk. RS: That was then we lived in Kysperk, yes. 
INT: What did you do for that period before you went to Terezín? RS: I don't really-- I can't remember doing anything, you know. Just--  INT: Where did you live? RS: With my parents.  INT: And your husband? RS: And my husband, yes. There was an old annex to the house, to the main house. And we lived in the annex, where previously, used my father-- my grandfather to live. So that's where we were staying.  INT: And in that, you said you got married in '41. When did you go to Terezín? RS: '42.  INT: Do you remember at all what you or George did-- Georg did-- in that year? RS: Yes, well, he was working in a small factory for electrical appliances. And it was next-- next door village to our-- to Kysperk-- exactly the place where [? Marilyn ?] [? Fulbright ?] was born.  INT: We're just going to take a break now and change tapes.  INT: Oh, [? Bob, ?] give me just a minute. RS: Is the microphone all right?  INT: Microphone is fantastic, isn't it? CREW: First [? goal at ?] the moment.  INT: Are we done already? RS: [? I do ?] [? not ?] [? want ?] [? to ?] [? see it again. ?]  INT: Excuse me. CREW: That was a big yawn, pal. RS: You need it.  INT: Yeah, as you know, shit happens. Now, what are we up to? We're up to tape three? OK. Let me just think for a second. [PAUSES FOR 6 SECONDS] Just please start it for a second there. CREW: We're just running bars and black. 
INT: Hang on a sec. CREW: And--  INT: Interview with Rose Svehla. This is tape three. Rose, can you tell me about the events leading up to your deportation to Theresienstadt? RS: Well, we were expecting something to come, because many other [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] places were already evacuated, you know, sent to Theresienstadt. So our [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] [? Kreis ?] was the almost the last one. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] So that's why it was in December 1942. [PAUSES FOR 5 SECONDS] So we were expecting it all the time, because before us was the Pardubice-- just a [? Kreis, ?] you know? And this was [? Hradec ?] [? Králové, ?] [? Koniggratz ?] in German. So [SIGHS] we were one of the last transports. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] This is maybe why, why I survived by chance. I never, never intended to bring my survival about.  INT: What do you mean by that? RS: Because it was doubtful that we would be able to live normally at all.  INT: Were you aware of this before you were deported? RS: Yes.  INT: How did you know? RS: Well, there were rumors going around, you know. But some people we knew were taken away. And, for instance, some people ended up in hotels and, and we knew. The family used to get letters, usually some fictive diagnosis, [LAUGHS] like your father, you-- or your husband died of tonsillitis. And people were saying, he had no tonsils anymore. How could he die of tonsillitis? It's things like that. Later on, they even never bothered to let people know. So we knew that something terrible is happening there. But it wasn't on such a big scale at that time. It was just individuals who were arrested for something like listening to the foreign radio, or, or somebody would denounce them, which happened, too. So that was the way of life before we managed to get. After Theresienstadt, we knew that-- what, what was going on. 
INT: So can you just tell me how you went to Theresienstadt? RS: How we went?  INT: Went there. RS: Well, first of all, we had to get to Hradec Králové, where we had to concentrate, all of us.  INT: Who gave you the orders? RS: Well, it all had to go through the Jewish community workers. This man, Geduldiger, the guy who managed it, was employed by the community at that time. But, of course, they were instructed by the Gestapo. It was all on one person I knew, who was the chairman of the Prague community at the time. His name was Hanus Boehm. He was a poet, a very, very gifted and [NON-ENGLISH]. And he, when he was ordered to start organizing these transports, he refused. So they hanged him. And all the rest didn't dare to refuse.  INT: Was he a friend of yours? RS: Well, not a close friend. I knew him. But he was older than, than I was.  INT: What did you take with you? RS: We were allowed to take 50 kilograms of clothes and so on. 50 kilograms is quite a lot. But most people were deprived of it, stayed-- after they arrived to, to Terezín. We were not. We were, thanks to this friend of [? Jurga's. ?]  INT: Do you remember what you took personally? RS: Oh, well, we took everything we could, you know, in the way of bedding and clothing, and some food, as well. 
INT: What about valuables? RS: We were-- theoretically, we had to give away to the Germans all, all jewels and all valuables. We didn't. We left it with some friends. We left it there. But [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] whoever dared to, to be caught by, you know, importing contraband was straightaway sent to, to Auschwitz. The transport started shortly after we arrived.  INT: Where did you arrive? RS: To Terezín. In--  INT: Again, just stepping back, I, I just want to know about the journey from Kysperk to Terezín. RS: Oh, yes, well, after we congregated in Hradec Králové, we were sent by train, normal train, no, no, no-- to Terezín.  INT: How long did the journey take? RS: Oh, well, [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] All right, it's-- I think it took a whole day, because the train couldn't go all the time, you know? They had to, to wait on the side tracks and so on.  INT: Were you-- were you given any food? RS: Food? No. No. But we had food with us. And--  INT: What happened-- what happened when you arrived at Terezín? RS: We arrived in [? Bohusovice. ?] That was the last train station. And then we had to walk, with all our luggage, [BACKGROUND NOISE] to Terezín.  INT: Where was your-- where were your grandparents and your brother or your mother and father at this time? RS: My mother and father were with us, with me, and my husband, as well. But my brother, at the time, was already away. He managed to escape with the last transport organized by the Haganah. 
INT: Do you remember saying goodbye to your brother? RS: Yes, yes, yes. It was a long time before the transport started. And at the time, we still were in contact with a cousin of my mother's, who lived in Zagreb, in Croatia, Croatia. But then we heard that they were all exterminated, as well. The Croats were very, very busy at that.  INT: What was the name of this aunt? RS: That was a cousin, a male cousin. His name was-- gosh, what's his name? I can't remember his name at all, because we were in very short contact with him. He was-- he was employed. He was a director of a textile factory in, in Zagreb.  INT: What happened when you arrived in Terezín-- in this-- RS: In [? Bohusovice? ?] Well, nothing much. We were just marched to Terezín.  INT: Who marched you? RS: Well, it was all organized by the transport [? Leitung, ?] you know? Everything was seemingly made by our own people.  INT: Did you see any Germans? RS: No, no. I didn't.  INT: What did you see? How long did the journey take, the walk? RS: Well, it was about four kilometers.  INT: Did you arrive at day? What time of day did you arrive? RS: It was night. It was night.  INT: Were you marching in the dark? RS: Yes.  INT: Were any orders given to you? RS: No, no.  INT: Was anybody hit or any punishments given? RS: No. I couldn't see anything. There were Czech gendarmes around, and some SS men. But they didn't touch anybody. 
INT: What nationality were the SS? RS: German. German.  INT: What happened when you arrived at, at Theresienstadt? RS: We were put into [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] barrack. And there we were waiting. In the end, we were sent to some attic, which was terribly dirty and cold. And there we had to stay, on the floor, without any bedding or so. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] And next move was to some other [LAUGHS] attic, again.  INT: Did you have your belongings with you still? RS: Yes, yes. And I was with my mother all the time.  INT: Where was your father at this point? RS: They were in some men's barracks. So we were-- [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] at that time, I think the civilian people were already moved away from Theresienstadt. So we could move around the place quite freely until 8 o'clock at night. Then it was sort of house arrest, you know? You couldn't move.  INT: Who was-- who was maintaining discipline within the ghetto at night, to, to police the curfew? RS: I think it was, again, the ghetto [NON-ENGLISH].  INT: The what? RS: Ghetto [NON-ENGLISH].  INT: What's that? RS: The-- our people, who were maintaining the order there, sort of. And the Czech gendarmes.  INT: How was the ghetto surrounded? Did it have some sort of a barrier or a wall or a fence? RS: Well, no, you know, it was a Festung. I show you. I show you the picture. Oh, I can't. 
INT: No. That's OK. Can you describe-- RS: It was a fortress. And ghetto was placed in a big fortress. And the little fortress was a very bad German jail. That was really. So only people who were misbehaving in the big fortress were sent to the small fortress.  INT: What happened next? RS: Next, [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] we were sent to another attic, again, my mother and myself. And my father and my husband were located in a different place. [BACKGROUND NOISE] So that was that. CREW: Just keep going. Sorry. Just make sure that stays nice and straight. RS: Sorry.  INT: How long did you stay in this other attic? RS: Well, I think about almost two years. Then they built barracks at the other end of the town. And they were-- that's where they housed all the nurses. So I was shifted there.  INT: When were you shifted there? RS: Oh, I can't remember very--  INT: How long after you arrived? RS: Oh, well, about one and half years.  INT: In-- talking about that one and a half years before you shifted within the ghetto, tell me about life there. What did you do? RS: Well, I was working as a nurse and looking after old people-- old women. [SIGHS] It was--  INT: Where? Whereabouts? RS: In one of the military barracks. They were huge places.  INT: What's-- did you volunteer for that, or were you chosen? RS: No. You know, this friend of ours suggested that it would be a protected [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] employment. And, of course, this is what I wanted to do anyway. 
INT: What hours did you work? RS: I usually worked at night. And that meant-- that meant that I had to attend to people who were acutely ill or who died. I had to shift the dead people outside the room. In the morning, I had to wash them and prepare them for the day.  INT: What, what sort of illnesses were people contracting? RS: Oh, it depended, you know. There were a lot of epidemics. At one stage, we had a huge epidemic of typhoid fever. At that time, I was sent to nurse children, who were sick with typhoid fever, which was the worst part of my stay there, because they were dying. There was nothing to treat them with, nothing at all. So they were dying. And they wouldn't eat their food. They were-- they had marvelous food. So when they left it, I couldn't resist and ate it, because I was so terribly hungry. And consequently, I developed typhoid fever [LAUGHS] myself, but it wasn't too bad, because I had inoculation years ago.  INT: These children that contracted typhoid, what was their age? What were the age group? RS: Oh, all sorts of age groups. They were very young ones, about 3, 4 years old, and up to 10, 11 years.  INT: What medications did you have to treat them? RS: No medication. None whatsoever. They had a little bit of [? Piramidon. ?] That was, you know, to ease the fever. But that was all. That was-- 
INT: What was the treatment you could give them if you had no medication? RS: Nothing. No treatment.  INT: What, what training had you had up to that point to be a nurse? RS: Practically none. Of course, I had the training, you know, during the medical studies, which had nothing to do with nursing.  INT: Could you approximate or guess what percentage of the children that came in to the hospital died? RS: 100%. No, none of them survived, none of them.  INT: How long did this epidemic last? RS: I think it was about half a year, all together. But then there was another one. It was encephalitis. It was, you know, brain.  INT: Encephalitis? RS: Encephalitis, yes. It wasn't the Economo-type, which leaves you completely crippled. It was sort of Theresienstadt, [LAUGHS] Terezín-type of encephalitis. But it left you, for many, many months, quite, you know, head aching, especially when you had to work in the sun. And you didn't feel very well for quite a long time. So I got it, too. [LAUGHS] And there was hepatitis, another one. So-- and, of course, so-called [NON-ENGLISH], which was a permanent diarrhea.  INT: Was there any medication at all available? RS: Oh, well, some of it, yes. But--  INT: Where did the-- RS: --you know, in those-- in those days there were no antibiotics yet. There were some [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] chemotherapy, like Prontosil and so on. But yes, we could get it. We could. But it wasn't very persistent. Sometimes it was available. Sometimes it wasn't. 
INT: Where did the supplies come from? RS: [LAUGHS] Usually from the confiscated Jewish homes. And--  INT: Who-- but who was in charge of you? RS: Who? In direct charge, I can't remember his name. He was a-- a sort of smallish man from [? Budejovice. ?]  INT: From where? RS: [? Budejovice. ?] That was the southernmost town in Bohemia.  INT: Was this hospital just for Czech people? RS: No, no.  INT: What nationalities? RS: Well, there were a lot of German people, who were sent there as, you know, supposedly [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] VIPs, who were supposed to be treated with great-- sort of, like a spa, which was-- Of course, it was a fraud. They came. They were-- they came half decrepit, with all their jewels and everything. But they lost everything, of course.  INT: What other nationalities were there? RS: There were some [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] Danish people. But they were protected by the king of Denmark. They were not allowed to be transported any further. And there were some Dutch people-- very few of them. And that was about all.  INT: Of these, you said that 100% of the children who came in with typhus died over that approximate six-month period. RS: Yes, I couldn't really tell how, how--  INT: Could you-- how, how many beds were in the hospital? RS: [LAUGHS] It wasn't a hospital. It was, you know, an apartment, originally, an apartment block. And in a room like this, of this size, there would be, well, one bed next to the other. There was no space between the beds. 
INT: What was the average length of the stay of these children? RS: Till they died. Till they died. And then, when I contracted it myself, of course, I wasn't there anymore. But--  INT: How many other nurses were there? RS: I don't remember any other one, because we-- when we changed the shifts, you know, we didn't meet. I only remember the head, head doctor. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] He was very careful. He never would touch the door handle, you know. He always opened the door [LAUGHS] with his elbow. But it was wise. He probably didn't--  INT: Did, did anybody-- did anybody train you in, in your-- in nursing? RS: No.  INT: The doctor? RS: No.  INT: How did you learn? RS: Well, there was no nursing. It was basically, you know, maintaining a hygiene, and--  INT: Did you know any of the people who came in who were sick, personally? RS: Well, yes, I knew. I knew two ladies. One was a very prominent politician and, and her mother. They became good friends. She was-- she was a communist, a very, very highly educated person. And her husband was [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] killed.  INT: What was her name? RS: [? Sekaninova-Cakrtova. ?]  INT: What was her last name? RS: [? Cakrtova. ?] She was, later on, when the Russians invaded us in 1968, she was the only one who was protesting in the parliament. So, she was in disgrace at that time. But-- 
INT: How-- could you guess or estimate how many children died in that six months of that epidemic? RS: I can't, really. I couldn't.  INT: Who told the parents that their children had died? RS: Well, they were allowed to come and inquire, you know, so the person who was-- [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] who was there actually would tell them.  INT: After you contracted typhus, what did you do? RS: After that? Well, I was, again, back at the same place. Then [LAUGHS] they made me--  INT: What do you mean, 'back in the same place'? RS: In the same place where I went from, you know?  INT: You're-- the attic? RS: No, no, in the sick bay. And that's where-- from there, they sent me to-- [LAUGHS] to look after German immigrants. Immigrants? People who came from Germany. They were all old people, a lot of them really demented. And it was the most terrible night I can remember, because I had to chase these demented people away from other people. They would go to their bed-- well, it was bunks-- and wanted-- another-- one woman wanted to steal jewelry from a lady. And she eventually died. And then her husband, he was such a huge person. And he came. And I told him that she is gone. He fainted, falling on me. And I was about half of his size. [LAUGHS] And I gave him the jewelry. And he wanted me to keep it. But I told him, look, for this ring, you'll get a whole loaf of bread. So don't, don't get it away, because he was really-- oh, my gosh, it was terrible. Anyway, this night was over. And they moved them all to Auschwitz. 
INT: Who? RS: All the people who lived there.  INT: The German-- this is the German people you're talking about? RS: Yes.  INT: Did you know that they were going to Auschwitz at that time? Did you know that they were going-- RS: Oh, yes, yes. We knew. We knew.  INT: And did you know what was going on at Auschwitz? RS: We couldn't believe it. We knew what was going on. We were told. But nobody would believe it. You-- a normal brain doesn't take anything like that in, you know. So.  INT: How was your mother? RS: How she was in Terezín? She was very happy there. At last she was among her brethren. And she was quite happy there. She was looking after the old people. And they liked her very much there.  INT: What were living conditions like for you and her? RS: Dreadful.  INT: What do you mean? RS: Hunger, cold. We were very hungry all the time.  INT: Did you still have your own belongings that you brought with you? RS: At the time, yes. Yes. We lost it only when we were sent to Auschwitz. So all the 50 kilograms went to there.  INT: Did your mother get sick at all? RS: No. It was amazing. She was keeping very well.  INT: We're just going to take a break now and change tapes.  INT: I don't know. You want tea or coffee there? CREW: All right. 
INT: [? Herring? ?] [LAUGHTER] CREW: Hang on a second. I might need some more water.  INT: OK. I'll get it made if you like. Would you like anything else? RS: No, I'm fine, thanks.  INT: OK. CREW: No, we're all right, thanks. RS: You must be terribly bored. CREW: No, not at all. I have to keep monitoring this all the time. How's your lapel mic? I might just check the mics before we go.  INT: Yeah? I checked both of them here. CREW: Great. Oh, yours is fine.  INT: Interview with Rose Svehla. This is tape four. Rose, were you able to be in touch with your father? RS: Yes, during the day, because from 8 o'clock onwards, we had to be at our own lodgings, you know?  INT: 8 o'clock in the morning or evening? RS: In the evening, yes. So, of course, I did mostly the night shift. So during the day, I was able to be in touch with everybody.  INT: How-- how were you in contact with them? Could you actually physically go to visit them? RS: Yes, yes, I could when they were in their lodgings, yes. So--  INT: And how was your father? RS: He was fine. He was fine. And he managed very well. Because as a ghetto [NON-ENGLISH], he was allowed to go out-- outside the ghetto. So he managed to bring things, you know? He was-- [LAUGHS] he was very inventive-- like a cucumber, which was a treasure. And I remember when I was ill myself with the encephalitis, he brought me a cucumber, because it was something. Everybody was envious. And I felt very guilty about it. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] And-- 
INT: Where did he get the cucumber from? RS: He stole it. You know, there were gardens around the ghetto, and the young girls were working there. So it was a privileged position. And--  INT: What was his position? RS: No, I mean the girls who were working there. They had access to vegetables, which was something unheard of. So my father managed to get-- [LAUGHS] get it from them.  INT: How was your husband going? RS: He was very good too. He learned how to mend shoes, you know? And this was [LAUGHS] his way how to earn some food or even cigarettes. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] I was a smoker at the time-- but my father too. But it was really very limited then.  INT: Was there any sort of black market trading going on? RS: Oh, yes. Yes, it was. But it was punishable by death. So it was-- everything was really very risky.  INT: Did you ever participate in any black market activities? RS: No. No, we just-- as a recipient. [LAUGHS]  INT: What did you receive? RS: Oh, well, you could buy a lot of bread for your wedding ring, and-- and so on.  INT: Did you have to do anything like that? RS: Oh, yes. Yes.  INT: What did you do? RS: Well, you had to find someone who was able to sell it to you. You had to know him. But--  INT: What did you buy? RS: Well, I remember buying a loaf of bread once. 
INT: How did you pay for it? RS: With my wedding ring. [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] It was rather expensive, wasn't it? [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] And [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] on the other hand, a little boy-- some of my friends from Kysperk got scarlet fever. And he was-- he got blind and deaf. And he was in a terrible state. And I sent him a lemon-- real lemon.  INT: How did you get a hold of that? RS: I can't remember how I got-- got it. But they gave me as a present a loaf of bread for it. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] In the end, the little boy died. He was such a-- such a angelic little person.  INT: What was his name? RS: Zdenek Fischl.  INT: Could you spell that? RS: F-I-S-C-H-L.  INT: Is this the same Fischl family from Kysperk? RS: Yes.  INT: Was it their son? RS: This was their only son.  INT: How old was he when he died? RS: When he-- when he died, he must have been seven years-- seven.  INT: Did his parents survive? RS: They did. And they-- they are dead now. But of course, they managed to get to Australia. And that's where they lived until she was very ill. She got blind. And she was traveling between London for-- for her eye operations and was with me in Sydney. They lived quite well there.  INT: In-- in the ghetto, was anybody allowed to leave? RS: Leave? Only to-- 
INT: Go outside the ghetto, I mean. RS: Oh, no-- just people like these girls who were working in the gardens, veggie gardens, or the ghetto [NON-ENGLISH].  INT: Who was guarding the ghetto-- the perimeter? RS: Oh, the Czech [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] gendarmerie, together with the ghetto [NON-ENGLISH]. They were the only, you know, just--  INT: What were hygiene conditions like in the ghetto? Were you-- did you have a supply of fresh water? RS: Well, the water wasn't very good, because it was over-- [SIGHS] it was too many people, you know, for the facilities there. But at least it was water.  INT: What about the toilet facilities? RS: That wasn't very good either.  INT: Can you describe the conditions? RS: Well, you can imagine a military barracks were meant for about tenth of the people-- to what they were then housed. [PAUSES FOR 6 SECONDS] And so you can imagine that the hygiene couldn't-- couldn't be that high. [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] Besides the water, you could never get warm water for having a shower or a bath. And so--  INT: We were able to wash your clothes? RS: My-- oh, yes. Well, in a limited way.  INT: How limited? RS: [LAUGHS] Well, you have-- you had to find out what time is the easiest time to get to the faucet, to the water. And [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] it's funny. I can't remember the details, you know. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] But altogether, life was very difficult. You had to stand in queues for every bit of-- sorry-- of soup, for instance. So-called [? Linzer ?] soup was the daily fare, you know. 
INT: What was that? RS: Oh, it was something-- some dirty [LAUGHS] water.  INT: How many times a day were you fed? RS: In the morning, we had coffee-- of course, not real coffee. It was a just black thing. At noon we had this soup, the-- our [? Linzer ?] soup. And sometimes, there was a bun once a week. And in the evening, there was also some kind of soup. That was all.  INT: What were your sleeping conditions like? RS: Bunks-- three-- three-tiered bunks. For the younger people who could climb, they were on top. Then came the middle ones, and the ground floor ones.  INT: Did you have a-- did you have a bunk to yourself? RS: Yes. At the time, yes.  INT: Who were you sharing-- sharing a bunk with? RS: I wasn't. I-- it was one for one person in every sort of a level.  INT: Was your mother with you in the-- in the-- in the-- next to you or above you in the bunk? RS: Yes, she was.  INT: Did you have any mattresses or blankets? RS: Blankets? Yes, we had our own-- what we brought with us. And the mattresses, it was only the [NON-ENGLISH]. You know what [NON-ENGLISH]? It's something filled with straw. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] So that was-- that was it.  INT: Were there any cultural activities in the ghetto that you were aware of? RS: Oh, yes. There were plenty of them-- plenty. There was music, theater, and lectures of all kinds. Because-- 
INT: Did you ever attend any of this? RS: Only once or twice, because we were quite adamant to boycott it, because we knew that it was sort of Nazi way of showing to the world, look how good they've got it. So we didn't want to attend it. But I-- I was at one concert as far as I can remember.  INT: What was it? RS: Well, it was a [SIGHS] singer who was quite well-known. There were a lot of very famous people there from Germany, from Czechoslovakia.  INT: Do you remember any names? RS: [LAUGHS] Names-- that's my weakest point. There's Hans Krása, who actually composed the music to these children-- a theater called It was an allegory, you know. was the bad Nazi. And the children were fighting him, and successfully. I still remember the song.  INT: Could you sing it? RS: [LAUGHS] No. [NON-ENGLISH SINGING]  INT: What does it mean? RS: Anything goes when you will. In spite of the cruel times, we've got humor in our hearts. That's what the children were singing.  INT: How did you learn that song? RS: I don't know, probably because everybody sang it. [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] But of course, all the-- practically all the children perished in Auschwitz.  INT: Did you attend any of the lectures that you had talked about? RS: No. No. No, I did not. First of all, I was working usually at night. [PAUSES FOR 7 SECONDS] And then, the only thing I was able to read, at the time, was fairy tales and the Bible. 
INT: Why was that the only thing you were able to read? RS: Why? Because all the rest was irrelevant to me, somehow.  INT: There were more things available? RS: Sorry?  INT: There were other things available to read, but-- RS: Oh, yes. Yes. People had books.  INT: --why were fairy tales and the Bible-- RS: Why?  INT: --relevant to you? RS: I don't know. I don't know. Maybe because it was so far away from the reality, you know?  INT: What fairy tales? Do you remember? RS: Oh, all of them. And mainly the one by Karel Capek. Capek was a very famous writer. You know, he was the one who wrote the letter-- English letters. Well, they were-- most of his works were translated into English.  INT: What fairy tales do you remember of his? RS: which means nine fairy tales.  INT: Yeah. Do you remember any of the-- RS: No.  INT: --the stories of any of those? RS: No, I can't remember them anymore.  INT: What about the Bible? Were there any passages that you memorized? RS: Yes, well, I remember most of the Matthew. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] And this was the one part of the Bible I thought was closest to me.  INT: In what sense? RS: I just-- [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] I had the feeling that it's the most genuine part of the Bible. Because all the rest was-- was just reiterating what I could see in Matthew's. 
INT: Do you remember any of those passages? RS: No. I can't remember passages at all. I wish I could remember more than that. I think this is-- CREW: It's OK.  INT: Were you in the ghetto when you-- the ghetto was visited by the Red Cross? RS: No, at the time-- oh, yes. Yes. It must have been, because after that, with it started these mass transports. No-- but again, I was busy. I never wanted to attend to this circus, which was, in fact, a circus for the-- for the Red Cross people.  INT: Did you ever see the Red Cross when they visited? RS: No, no. I didn't.  INT: Did you form any close friendships with anybody in Theresienstadt? RS: Yes, yes I did.  INT: Who? RS: And we were more like sisters, you know? She was a distant cousin of my first husband. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] And when we arrived, she came to the first attic to welcome us, because she was there already for a few months. And she gave me a bear hug. And since then, we were really like-- more like sisters.  INT: What was her name? RS: Lily.  INT: What was her last name? RS: Drenger.  INT: Could you spell that, please? RS: D-R-E-N-G-E-R.  INT: How do you spell her first name? RS: L-I-L-E. No. L-- L-Y. [PAUSES FOR 5 SECONDS] But unfortunately, she-- oh, she died, but she managed to get back, in spite of everything she went through Auschwitz. And then she was somewhere in Poland. And she was on the death march. And she managed to came back. And we-- by chance we met in Prague. She was standing in a queue in front of the synagogue, you know, in the [? Alt-noy ?] synagogue. And I was passing by, and all of a sudden, they called me-- [? Susanna. ?] All of a sudden they say, [? Susanna! ?] [LAUGHS] And she was standing there. [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] So that was it. Of course, her husband didn't survive, you know? 
INT: Why was Lily's friendship so important to you? RS: I don't really know. She was closer to me than my own brother. Well--  INT: Did you work together? RS: No. No.  INT: When did you see each other? RS: Well, she was-- you know, before the war, they had a [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] place-- well, you know, washing. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] And she was working with-- with the former employee.  INT: In the ghetto, where did you-- RS: In the ghetto?  INT: --where did you see her-- if you were working at night? RS: Well, during the day, you know, when I had the time to. So I could see her.  INT: What did you two used to talk about? RS: I don't remember. I don't. But of course, all we were worried about was the next food we could get, you know?  INT: Did you share food with Lily? RS: Oh, we-- yes, well, you know, she was relatively well-off. Because her husband was in the [NON-ENGLISH]. I don't know how you would--  INT: What language is that-- [NON-ENGLISH]? RS: [NON-ENGLISH] is in German-- the washing factory. And so when-- when they did something extra ordinary for someone, they could get some extra food or so. But with her, it wasn't a matter of food. It was just the close-- closeness. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] And then, when the transports started, she and her husband was in the transport, and so was I and my husband. But it was before the [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] preparations for the Red Cross. So the commandant at the time was-- he was called Rahm. So when he saw that all the young people were about to be shifted away, he proclaimed that he would do the selection himself. So he did. And he selected my husband and myself to stay. Because well, he looked very healthy, and you know, good color, and so did I, because [LAUGHS] I was able to-- to walk on the ramparts during the day. So we stayed, and they were shifted to Auschwitz. And it was very bad for me. Anyway, she survived, and I survived too, which very often, I-- I felt sort of guilty about, you know? 
INT: About what? RS: About surviving. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] Because you tend to think, why me? Why not the others? [PAUSES FOR 5 SECONDS] So--  INT: How long did you stay in Theresienstadt? RS: In-- until 1944. Then we were-- first, all men were moved away to Auschwitz. That was the first three transports. Then came one, about three women transports. At the time, we were-- yes, we were shifted-- still in normal wagons-- not in the-- [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] yes. And--  INT: When the men-- when the men were shifted, [SIGHS] RS: Yeah?  INT: --did that include your husband and your father? RS: Yes, my father went with the first transport, and this brother-in-law of my auntie as well.  INT: And your husband? RS: My husband went with the next transport.  INT: Did you have the opportunity just to see them before they went? RS: Yes, but only it was a fleeting moment.  INT: Do you remember what was said? RS: We knew, at the time what was going on. No, at the time-- the first people who went to Auschwitz left messages on the-- on the walls of the wagons. And we knew that it ends in Auschwitz.  INT: So when your husband and father were deported, you knew what was going to happen to them? RS: Well, we were hoping that they will survive. My father would have survived. He was only 49 years old.  INT: Do you remember what your last words were? RS: Mine? 
INT: To your father or to your husband? RS: I can't remember. [PAUSES FOR 7 SECONDS] It's hard to remember things like that.  INT: Tell me about your departure from Theresienstadt and the trip to Auschwitz. RS: Well, at the time, it still were in normal wagons. And we could see what was going on around. So even-- you see, when we were passing through Dresden, which was heavily bombarded, nothing was on-- in one piece, except the rails. They were-- they were never touched. If they really wanted to stop it, I mean, the Allies, they would have bombarded just as well the rails, and there wouldn't be any transportation. But they were intact. This is something I just can't forgive. [PAUSES FOR 5 SECONDS] So during the trip, there were-- we could see the [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] air raids over Breslau, you know. And all the way, they were night air raids. But nothing touched the rails.  INT: How long did the journey last? RS: I think it lasted day and night.  INT: Did you-- were you fed on the way? RS: No.  INT: Did you get any water? RS: No, we had what we had with us, you know?  INT: What did you bring with you? RS: What we bring-- we could bring some things.  INT: And do you remember what you brought? RS: No, I don't. I only remember that we had a loaf of bread. And when we arrived to Auschwitz, we were chased out-- chased out of the wagons. And my [LAUGHS] mother put the loaf of bread to me. I had a big coat. And she-- [LAUGHS] she made me to-- to hide the-- the loaf under my coat. But Mengele saw that it was a child, you know? So he had this pipe-- this stick. And with the stick he opened my coat. [LAUGHS] And when he saw that it was a loaf of bread, he just ordered me to throw it away. That was it. 
INT: How did he-- in what language did he speak to you? RS: Oh, just gestures.  INT: How did you know it was Mengele? RS: Well, I knew him. We knew him-- all of us-- somehow. I don't know. We knew that he would be doing the selection there.  INT: What did he look like? RS: A handsome man-- youngish.  INT: Was he-- was he tall or short? RS: Tall. He was tall. And you know, he was playing god-- showing with his glove, the way.  INT: What-- what was he wearing? RS: The uniform-- SS uniform.  INT: Did he have any other distinguishing marks? RS: I don't think so. No.  INT: When you got off the train, what orders were given to you? RS: Just shouts. And these are very mostly so-called kapos. And they were mostly Polish. They were very cruel.  INT: What time of day did you arrive? RS: To Auschwitz? It must have been some time in the afternoon, because it was late still. And when we were marched to the left side, [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] to a place where there were showers, there were showers everywhere, even on the other side. That's why I never can take shower since. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] Because you know, that brings about the memories of the showers where there was no water coming, but the Zyklon B.  INT: Did you know about this before-- RS: No.  INT: --you were arrived at Auschwitz? RS: No. No. And if we were-- we heard about it, but we couldn't-- we couldn't believe it. Because it was so in-- unimaginable for a normal person. You know, there was a man. His name was Lederer too. He wasn't any-- an-- a relative. He managed to escape in SS uniform, and he came to Theresienstadt. And he informed even the authorities. But-- and he couldn't get it, and get people to know that it was. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] I don't know whether-- he probably managed to survive somehow. 
INT: What happened at the selection? RS: At the first one? Well, Mengele was standing there, waving his [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] glove to one side, and to the other side. At that time, we had no idea what-- what which side meant. And of course, as soon-- as soon as we arrived inside, we were informed. But all-- all the time, the camp orchestra was playing terribly. It was a terrible sound. They were marching around and playing. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] And the flames out of the chimney, you could feel the terrible smell. You can't-- you can't make anyone aware of it.  INT: Where was your mother? RS: She was sent to the right side, to the [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] gas chamber side.  INT: Did you have the chance to say anything to her? RS: No. Not a chance. [PAUSES FOR 26 SECONDS] So that was that.  INT: Were you questioned at the selection? RS: No.  INT: Did anybody ask you? RS: No, nobody asked anything at all. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] The next selections were done when we were naked, you know, at this--  INT: Was this after this-- straight after this first selection? RS: Well, it wasn't straight after that. It was few days apart. Because in the meantime-- in the meantime, I developed a very bad dysentery. And the doctor who visited the blocks, the-- told me, look. I can't give you anything while you are here. You have to go on the sick bay. Everybody dissuaded me to-- not to go there. But I just couldn't do anything else, because you couldn't get away from the block to go to the latrines, you know, when you needed. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] And so I said, OK. So why should I be afraid of it? So I went there, and another girl who was close to me there said, I'll go with you. I don't feel well either. So she-- she came with me to the-- to the [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] sick bay. And when we arrived there, the doctor who came to see us was a Czech doctor. She was from Kolín. 
INT: From where? RS: Kolín. And I remember her name was Ella.  INT: Is that her first or last name? RS: I don't know her last name. But at the time, there was a very heavily pregnant woman there. And she was married to this doctor's cousin. And I remember she asked her, what will happen to me? And this doctor said, well, first we'll kill-- kill it, and then they send you to-- to-- through the chimney-- like that. You know, I was shattered. And I said, well, how can you talk like that, being a doctor? I said-- she told me, you know what? If I didn't do whoring with these SS men, I wouldn't be here either. I saw my mother go in into chimney. This is how people had to react, probably.  INT: We're just going to take a break and change tapes. RS: OK.  INT: We're carrying on. UNIDENTIFIED SPEAKER: I see.  INT: OK? UNIDENTIFIED SPEAKER: OK. So I'm not allowed in.  INT: No. UNIDENTIFIED SPEAKER: Not even this way?  INT: Sorry? UNIDENTIFIED SPEAKER: Not even here? RS: No, you were coughing.  INT: No, I'm sorry. You're coughing. UNIDENTIFIED SPEAKER: Am I?  INT: Yeah. RS: Yes.  INT: You've done it a few times. And also, as I explained to you before, we prefer not for-- for other reasons as well. RS: OK. UNIDENTIFIED SPEAKER: You don't want to [INAUDIBLE]?  INT: OK? RS: Bye-bye. UNIDENTIFIED SPEAKER: I'm not-- I just to see her-- 
INT: OK. UNIDENTIFIED SPEAKER: --how she looks. [LAUGHS] RS: [LAUGHS]  INT: She's doing great. She's-- she's-- she's doing great. It's hard work, but she's doing great. Interview with Rose Svehla. This is tape five. Rose, were you given any medication for the dysentery, at Auschwitz? RS: Not-- well, I was in the-- on the block. But once I came to the sick bay, I was surprised to see very rare medication, like Endiaron. In those days, it was very rare to get, even outside the-- the camp. So the symptoms disappeared very quickly. But next day--  INT: Go on. RS: --when I thought we might have been sent away, there was a general selection in the whole C lager, so-called. And it was the camp, the part of the camp.  INT: How soon after this-- how soon was this after your arrival at Auschwitz? RS: Well, I don't remember.  INT: Approximately. RS: Maybe about two weeks or so.  INT: Can I just step back for the minute, back to your arrival? And I'd like to get some more details about what happened after your selection, and you were chosen to go to the-- RS: To the--  INT: --to-- RS: --left side.  INT: --the left, and your mother to right. RS: So we were marched to a place where there were showers. We were [PAUSES FOR 5 SECONDS] shorn all together, all our hair, wherever. And then they looked at our-- in our mouths and ears and so on, in case we should harbor some jewelry. And then they threw at us-- after the shower, we had, of course, no towels at all. And they gave us some kind of terrible-smelling thing on our body. We were-- we had no lice or anything, but we got it only there, you know, from the clothes they threw at us. And it was terrible. It was-- I managed to get a tiny slip, which was covering half of my legs, and a very small jacket. I don't know. It was unbelievable. So after we were led like-- like that, we were marched again into the proper camp. And so, this time, we had bare [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] wood there. The-- [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] the bunks were fit for not more than 5 people, but we were 10 in each-- on each level-- no mattress-- nothing at all. And for the 10 of us, we had 2 very thin blankets. So we had to put one blanket underneath and cover ourselves with the-- the second blanket. 
INT: What time of year was this? RS: It was the end of November-- or well, November, it be.  INT: How cold was it? RS: Very. It was cold, windy. It was like a very cold day here. The wind was terrible. And I can remember we were sleeping like sardines, you know? One head here, another head here. And of course, at 3 o'clock in the morning, there was a wake-up. And we had to stand in rows-- [BACKGROUND NOISE] bless you.  INT: Thank you. RS: Five in a row, so that they can count us properly. And I remember there was a-- a young girl. I-- at that time, I didn't know even her name or where she came from. But she was bleeding. She had a abortion before there. And so we had to support her. And we were sort of alternating, because she couldn't stand properly. She was so, so weak. And well, it was really the most terrible time you can imagine.  INT: How long were you standing there? RS: For how long hour wise? It depended how quickly they managed to count us. They were not Einsteins, you know? [LAUGHS] It-- so after that, we were--  INT: What happened to the girl that you were holding up-- the one who was bleeding? RS: Oh, she-- she survived. She survived. And then I learned about her, that she was originally from somewhere-- Sudetenland, you know? And they managed to escape to Holland. There, she married. 
INT: What was her name? RS: I can't remember her name.  INT: Tell-- RS: I didn't know the name at all. I just--  INT: Did you hold her up? RS: Beg your pardon?  INT: Did you hold her up in the Appell? RS: Well, yes, we were-- we were sort of alternating.  INT: After the-- after the Appell, what happened? RS: After the Appell, we were sent back to the barracks. And nothing happened. We got our beautiful [LAUGHS] breakfast that was some-- a dark black brew. I don't know what from. It-- it was bitter, of course. And then we-- well, the bread we used to get at the evening Appell. But everybody ate the bread straightaway, because it was dangerous to have bread. You--  INT: What do you mean? RS: Well, people were stealing. Of course, everybody was starved. So after that, we usually were lying about in the-- on the block, until they needed someone to carry something somewhere, you know? And at this occasion, I can remember a-- when I still was on the block. An SS woman was walking next to me, and she said, you are very fortunate. I said, what do you mean? And she said, because you won't be staying here long. You'll be sent away. So it was really-- I couldn't believe it.  INT: What language did she speak to you? RS: In German. In German.  INT: And how did you understand that? RS: Well, I knew German. 
INT: From where? RS: From school. And somehow it didn't matter to me. [SIGHS] So [PAUSES FOR 5 SECONDS] the next day, I went to the sick bay. I told you. And we stayed for one night there, myself and this girl who went with me. And then the general selection started in the whole camp. And they sent all the emaciated girls, selected for-- for the gas chambers, to the sick bay. We were all sent to one side, and they were on the other side. I knew one of them.  INT: What was her name? RS: Lederer. Again.  INT: What was her first name? RS: I don't know. I can't remember anymore. Anyway, and the night was terrible, because all the relatives of these women who were selected for-- for gas chambers were around the barrack and were calling, crying. Oh, it was a terrible scene. And next to me was a young girl from Slovakia. And she got-- she told me about the uprising in Slovakia. And I asked her, please, tell me about the uprising. Again and again, again-- all night long. I was so unhappy, because they didn't select her to go away with us. Anyway, in the morning, the doctor arrived-- came. And we asked her, what will happen to us? Oh, God. What will happen? And the sick bay goes en bloc to the gas chambers. And we told her, look. Couldn't you help us and-- no, I won't to risk my life for you, she said. So I told her, look. You are friendly with the Unterscharführer. Couldn't you ask him to-- to make the selection? So she did. And he came and he selected us for next selection. And we were about 14, I think, or 20, who were out that. 
INT: Out of what? RS: Of this sick bay, you know? Because then the black [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] trucks would come and push everyone on the truck.  INT: The what? RS: The [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] freight cars. They were all black, you know? So when they opened the door, and we could run out.  INT: You-- were you still in Auschwitz at this point? RS: It was still in Auschwitz, yes, just a-- a flew blocks-- a few blocks away from the last one, where the last selection was taking place. So they pushed us in the small group. And then the gate opened. And the selection started. It-- this time it wasn't Mengele. It was Hess, the commandant of--  INT: How did you know it was Hess? RS: We knew. We knew all that-- all-- all these people already, you know?  INT: Do you-- RS: Somebody said, that's Hess.  INT: Do you remember what he looked like? RS: Yes, a big, fat person.  INT: What color was his uniform? Do you remember? RS: SS uniform. It wasn't black. It was sort of grayish. So at this time, we had to parade in front of him naked, with your hand like that, you know, so that he could see whether you were emaciated or not. And so he sent us among the living. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] And that's when we were made ready for the transport. This moved us to the main camp, you know, where I mentioned the-- [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] the block where the homosexual girls were. And-- 
INT: What-- how did you know there were homosexual girls there? RS: Well, they told us.  INT: Did you meet any of them? RS: No. We were just pushed in between the bunks, you know? We were all sitting there. It was at night, and--  INT: Did you talk with any of them? RS: No, no. They were mostly Polish, these girls.  INT: Did you-- did you see them? RS: Yes, we saw the--  INT: Did you-- RS: --closest to-- to us.  INT: Did you see the-- if they had any uniforms or-- RS: No, they were-- they were undressed. It was at night. And next night, we spent in Auschwitz proper again. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] That was when-- where this Polish woman was, you know, who told me, who do you think you are?  INT: Tell me what happened. RS: [LAUGHS] Well, I was [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] taking empty dishes to the wash house. And somehow, I didn't-- she didn't like me, or I don't know. She started talking to me in such a way, [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] that I wasn't very impressed. And-- and she says, do you know who I am? I'm [? 'Airish--' ?] [? Airish. ?] [LAUGHS] you know. I said, [LAUGHS] to me you are the same dreck as we are. [LAUGHS] And she [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] cut my-- she tore my ear-- earlobe a little bit. So that's, you know? That's the way. [PAUSES FOR 5 SECONDS] So we spent the last night there. And next time, we were put to-- on the ramp where the train. This time, it was the cattle train. When-- 
INT: How long had you been in Auschwitz at this point? RS: This, it's hard to tell, because we don't know the time. I think it might have been altogether about three weeks, not more.  INT: Just a couple of questions about your time there-- [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] speaking of the conditions, what were the conditions of the latrines? RS: The trains?  INT: Latrines. Toilets. RS: Oh, latrines. [LAUGHS] [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] Just like any other-- not good. In the first place, you couldn't go very-- when you need it. You had to adjust your needs to the regimen. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] And of course, there was no hygiene whatsoever.  INT: Were people sick? RS: Yes, people were sick. But mostly, the water was terrible. You couldn't drink it. And the only fluids we could get was this black coffee or-- or the so-called soup.  INT: How did you keep warm? RS: We didn't. We were cold all the time.  INT: Did you get-- receive a number when you arrived at Auschwitz? RS: No, we were not tattooed because we were designed for, you know, move. So that's why I haven't got any-- any tattoo.  INT: Do you what block you were in? RS: C Block.  INT: Do you know what-- what barracks number? RS: No. No.  INT: Did you encounter anybody who was involved in any sort of medical experiments? RS: Oh, just one boy. He was one of the twins who were subjected to Mengele's so-called scientific experiment-- experiments. 
INT: How did you know who he was and what was happening to him? RS: He told us. He told us.  INT: What did he tell you? RS: He said, you know-- first of all, he was about 10 or 11 years old. But something as cynical as this boy, I've never met in my life. But of course, you couldn't blame him under the circumstances. He was one of twins. And he knew exactly what was going on. [PAUSES FOR 10 SECONDS] Yes. So that-- that was this episode.  INT: Did-- do you remember what he said to you? You said he was arrogant. RS: No, no. I don't think arrogant. He was cynical. You know?  INT: Cynical. What-- RS: He said--  INT: --what did he say to you? RS: He said, don't you worry. You all will end up in the chimney-- like that.  INT: Did he talk to you at all about the experiments that were being conducted on him? RS: No, he didn't. He didn't. He kept silent about that.  INT: How did you meet him, and where did you meet him? RS: Oh, he came to our block, you know? He came. This-- his advantage was that he was free to move around the camp. And he came just to see other people. Yes, you know.  INT: What other nationalities, if any, were in your block? RS: It was very difficult. We had no contact with each other at all. You know, because we were confined to these bunks. And the kapos were mostly Polish. 
INT: How did-- were they strict disciplinarians? RS: Oh, yes. Mind you, they lived on it, you know? Because they-- all the food which came in was distributed by them. So they served themselves first. [PAUSES FOR 5 SECONDS] And, yes, they knew exactly what was going on.  INT: How many women were in your barracks? RS: Oh, it must have been about 1,000 or so-- even more.  INT: Do you know if they were mainly Czech women? RS: No, no. There were all kinds of-- there were also people-- I remember, opposite our bang-- bunk was a group of girls who came from Lódz. One of them was-- later studied-- studied medicine, and she graduated as well.  INT: What was her name? RS: Huh. I think Arend. Yes. I can see her in front of me. But--  INT: Could you spell that surname, please? RS: A-R-E-N-D. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] Yes. I think that was the correct name.  INT: Did you make any attempts, if at all possible, to find out if your husband and father was-- were in Auschwitz at that time? RS: I couldn't find out. I couldn't at all. Because there was no registration-- nothing of this kind. And frankly, I was afraid to ask too much. I just wanted to have the hope. [PAUSES FOR 5 SECONDS] It was only after the war when I heard what really happened there, after they arrived-- their arrival. Because one man who used to live in the same place with my father, he came at the same time. So he witnessed it. And-- 
INT: What happened? RS: Well, he came with this brother-in-law of my auntie, who was only half-Jewish. And my father was-- they were holding arms, you know, like that. Because my father, during this war, and [PAUSES FOR 8 SECONDS] he was wounded in this ankle. So when he jumped off the train, he sort of sprained his ankle again. So he was limping. And this [? Pepa ?] was holding his hand. So they send him both to the gas chamber. That was what we heard. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] But it was only after the war.  INT: Going back now to your departure from Auschwitz-- can you tell me about that journey on the, what you described as the cattle train? RS: Yes. Well, there was no food, of course; no water-- just one big container for, you know, for-- instead of a toilet.  INT: How-- how many-- was it men and women with you? RS: No, just women. Just women.  INT: How many women were in your wagon? RS: Oh, I--  INT: Can you estimate? RS: It must have been at least 50. We were simply [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] squashed there, one to the other. You couldn't move very much. If somebody wanted to stand up, it would probably be impossible.  INT: So were you sitting down, then? RS: We were sitting down when we were lucky. Yes, some people died on the way, because the train was going through some very funny places, you know? We had to-- we had to wait for another train to pass and so on. 
INT: How long did the journey take? RS: I remember that we had left late evening-- on late evening. And sometime during the night, we were traveling through Moravia-- you know, in Ostrova and so on. And-- and-- [PAUSES FOR 6 SECONDS] it was a beautiful, sunny day when we arrived to Austria. Everything was white-- you know, snow everywhere. And I asked the girl who was walking next to me, please, pinch me. Because I think we are in heaven now. It were--  INT: Did you know where you were going? RS: No, no. Nobody talked to us, of course. But that was evident that we are in Austria.  INT: Did the train stop along the way anywhere? RS: It did when-- when they had to pass other trains.  INT: Were you ever allowed off the train? RS: No, of course not. No. The--  INT: Where did the-- where did the journey end? RS: The journey? [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] Somewhere in Austria. We didn't know. We only knew that we were going past, out of Mauthausen, to a small place. And this small place was Lenzing. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] It was on the verge of Salzkammergut. You know? Salzkammergut is the Alpine part of Austria. [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] And it was really beautiful there, only we couldn't appreciate it [LAUGHS] very much. But the commandant was very good. He was really humane. He said, this is not a vernichtungslager, which mean-- [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] vernichtungslager, you know, what it means. This-- this will be a arbeitslager. So nobody is allowed to be-- [PAUSES FOR 5 SECONDS] to be touched at all. Imagine? And he went to-- back to Mauthausen to provide uniforms for us, because [LAUGHS] he said, this is terrible. I-- I never saw such a terrible outfit. [LAUGHS] 
INT: Did you ever learn his name? RS: No. No. But there was another man who was very friendly-- another SS man. These were old people, you know, elderly people, who probably remembered better times. And he would give to the little girls a-- a piece of something-- a bread or apple.  INT: What do you mean little girls? RS: Well, there were a few of them, about 13-year-olds who were tall, so they managed to get through the selection. One of them was-- [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] well, one of them was a-- a daughter of-- of a woman who was very, [LAUGHS] very clever. You know, she knew how to [LAUGHS] handle things. She [LAUGHS] even would pay me, for instance, with bread for checking lice in her clothes. [LAUGHS] At that time. We were given clothes in Auschwitz. They were infested with lice because the-- the disinfection was very inadequate. Anyway, and so we-- they survived, these girls, who were only 13. And I remember three of them-- or four. [PAUSES FOR 5 SECONDS] And so--  INT: We're just going to take a break and change tapes. RS: OK.  INT: [INAUDIBLE] So I think we've got about another hour to go. CREW: [INAUDIBLE]  INT: You've been great. UNIDENTIFIED SPEAKER: I had a [INAUDIBLE].  INT: Have you? CREW: It's like a massage.  INT: If the phone does go and you grab it, could you just make sure that you [INAUDIBLE]-- Interview with Rose Svehla, this is tape six. Rose, after your arrival in Lenzing, what happened? RS: Well, we were marched into a derelict factory, which was to be our next home. And I don't remember. We may have been about 2,000 of us, because we never got together, you know? We were divided into groups. And part-- one group worked-- worked in the morning, another one in the afternoon, and next one at night, so that we never got in touch. I didn't know that some of these girls we met in Auschwitz were there, too. But anyway, it wasn't that bad considering. 
INT: Did you receive a number upon arrival? RS: Yes, my number was T714. It was Czechish for-- the T for Czechish  INT: And how was that number displayed? Was it given to you in some form? RS: Yes, we-- we were given sort of metal things, wired around our wrist. That was the only thing. And then we had it on our jackets, [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] the striped jackets [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] Apart from-- from that, before we got these striped jackets, we had relatively warm jackets with big stripe-- stripes painted on the back. But they were-- at least they were warm. That was all the way of the kommandant, how he treated us. I remember when [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] the last day of December came. At midnight, he came. He was evidently under the [LAUGHS] influence. And he said, so, my children, I came to wish you all the best. Next year, you will be with your mothers. Of course, our mothers were all dead. So we started crying. But he was-- he didn't know. They were told by the SS that we were incarcerated because of murder, you know, that we were murderers.  INT: Sorry, say that again? RS: That we were in camps because we committed murder.  INT: Who said this? RS: They were told, the-- some of the SS people, the-- the-- [SIGHS] because we were-- there was a very young girl. She was called Rosie. And Rosie was very good. She-- [LAUGHS] she was very stupid, but very nice. And she told us that they were told that we were murderesses. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] And she said, I couldn't believe it, because you looked so-- so nice and normal. [LAUGHS] And my-- my sister was married to a Jew-- [LAUGHS] is married to a Jew. [LAUGHS] Because we told her, no, we didn't murder anyone. We are just in the camps, because we were born Jewish. So she wouldn't-- she wouldn't-- she didn't know that. And she escaped herself. She defected. 
INT: What work were you doing there? RS: Well, first, we started working in the factory. That was so-called [NON-ENGLISH] factory. When the factory had to close--  INT: What were your duties there? RS: Well, my group was working with the press, pressing the bales of [NON-ENGLISH].  INT: What's [NON-ENGLISH]? RS: [NON-ENGLISH] is the artificial wool. And there we had to work with a group of Ukrainian girls. They were not prisoners. They were sent just as [NON-ENGLISH]. And there was another tiny group of Greek women. These Greek women were very nice, indeed, very nice. They--  INT: Were they-- were they prisoners? RS: No, no. They were also just sent for work, civilian workers, just like the Ukrainians. So they were better food. And they were relatively free. But the Ukrainians were very nasty to us.  INT: In what way? RS: In what way? For instance, they deliberately managed to hurt us wherever they could. For instance, when the press went down, they were supposed to-- to wait until we tell them that everything is ready. They didn't do that. And consequently, it hit my finger. It was very bad wound here at the time. And the floor foreman, who was at-- he was an old Austrian. He was [INAUDIBLE], no? He said, you watch there in the-- the Russians. They hate you. He warned me, he said. And then he took me to the-- to the first aid place. And they were very nice, too. I can't really complain. 
INT: Was it a private factory? RS: Well, it was a company I think. We never saw the-- the proprietor.  INT: Did you know the name of the company? RS: No, no.  INT: You said the Greek women were nice? What did you mean? RS: Well, they-- first of all, they were very friendly. And they would give some food to-- to us, you know, when they could, mostly to the little girls we had with us. There was a 13-year-old Hungarian girl, such a lovely child. And she had a congenital heart defect. And she was in my pair. We were in pairs, you know? It was-- at the factory, it was in the bunker we were building. And so she was the target of the benefit-- beneficiary-minded people. But she deserved it. She was from-- from Budapest.  INT: Do you remember her name? RS: No. I never knew her name, I'm afraid. I knew that her father was a doctor.  INT: How many hours was your work shift? RS: Oh, it was 8 hours. Only the night shift worked 12 hours.  INT: And did you ever work night shift? RS: Oh, yeah.  INT: Or did you stay on the same shift? RS: No, no. We-- they would alternate, you know, the shifts. One week we were in the morning shift, next in the afternoon, and then night shift.  INT: What were living conditions like? RS: You mean in the camp? Well, as I said, they were better than in Auschwitz or even in Mauthausen. 
INT: Did you have your own bed? RS: Yes, we had bunks. The lower one-- oh, I think I was on the lower bunk, because I was elder. [LAUGHS] And the two sisters, the 13-year-old one and the 15-year-old one were on the top.  INT: Do you remember their names? RS: Yes, yes. They were [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] [INAUDIBLE]. The surname was Vohryzek.  INT: Could you spell that? RS: [LAUGHS] V-O-H-R-Y-Z-E-K.  INT: Thank you. What were their first names? RS: Golly, [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] I saw them in front of me. [LAUGHS]  INT: What did they look like? RS: Just like young girls, the older one later studied medicine. And she became a pediatrician, too. And then she married an officer, army officer, who was involved in these terrible show trials, you know? Because he was an adjutant of one of the tried persons. They were basically pogroms. And so he wasn't-- he wasn't hanged, fortunately. But they-- after the Russian invasion, they fled to Switzerland. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] But the-- the younger sister went to France before that. And she married a Czech man. And they emigrated to Canada.  INT: Back to your work situation, how far away from the camp was the factory? RS: Well, I think it was about 3 kilometers.  INT: How did you get there? RS: By foot.  INT: Who guarded you? RS: The-- the SS women, nobody else.  INT: Did anybody ever try to escape? RS: No. No. But the Russians did. [LAUGHS] The Russian girls, they were-- later on when-- when Auschwitz was liquidated, they sent down about-- I think about 60 Russian prisoners. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] Next time, they were sent to where they escaped. Because they had-- they had lot of help, you know? There were these Russian [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] war-- [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] no, [LAUGHS] not war criminals. 
INT: Prisoners? RS: War prisoners and a lot of Russians as [NON-ENGLISH]. So they had places where to hide. So that was that.  INT: Generally, how were conditions compared to Auschwitz? RS: Oh, you couldn't compare it. It was so good. Once they sent us to Hitlerjugend camp to-- yes, to [LAUGHS] tidy up some [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] vegetable. [PAUSES FOR 5 SECONDS] They-- they had a lot of vegetables stored there. So the first it was that we ate what we could. Then we [LAUGHS] stuffed our pockets with whatever we could. And when [LAUGHS] we came back to the camp, they tried to find out in our pockets. But of course, if you've got cabbage in your pocket, it looks very suspicious, don't you? [LAUGHS] So they stopped it. But the poor girls who were so frightened, they threw all the vegetables on the floor. So you have no idea what it looked like after we left.  INT: Was the camp surrounded by a wall or a barrier or a fence? RS: Just a fence, yes.  INT: How was it guarded? RS: Well, it was locked. And there was one SS man guarding us, you know, in front of the main-- [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] the main part of it.  INT: How high was the gate-- the fence? RS: The fence? Well, you wouldn't like to climb it. But there was no electricity in it, like in Auschwitz.  INT: Were there only women in this camp? RS: Yes, yes. 
INT: Were there any-- what was-- what was the gender of the guards? Were there male and female guards? RS: Both. Yes, both. But I can remember only three of them really very bad.  INT: Three? RS: Of the SS people.  INT: Male or female? RS: Two were female, one was male.  INT: And why was-- why were they bad? RS: Well, rough, you know? They-- they didn't beat anybody, because they were not allowed to. But they were not-- not good at all.  INT: Were you aware of any sexual advances made by the guards towards any of the prisoners? RS: No, no. I wasn't at all.  INT: How long did you spend at Lenzing? RS: In Lenzing, till the end of the war.  INT: Were you fed well? RS: No. It won't be exaggerated. We were not fed well. We were on very small rations. Besides, the cook who cooked for us cooked also for the Russian war [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] prisoners. And first of all, he fed himself well, then his Russian friends. And we got the least.  INT: Were you able-- were there shower facilities there? RS: A shower.  INT: Shower and washing facilities? RS: Not shower, but washing, yes.  INT: Were you able to wash your clothes? RS: I can't remember what we-- what we would do about the clothes.  INT: Are there any memorable incidents in that time at Lenzing apart from what you've told me? RS: Only once we were rushed to-- at the time, we were already building the bunker. And there was-- 
INT: What-- what do we mean building the bunker? RS: The--  INT: You said you were working in a factory. RS: After that when the factory was closed, we were-- my group was sent to build a underground shelter.  INT: Where? RS: Air raid shelter, not far away from the factory. And then [PAUSES FOR 8 SECONDS] there was-- there were two Russians. You know, they-- they had to get out the oh, you know, the pneumatic-- pneumatic--  INT: Drill? RS: Drill-- drill to the ground, and we were supposed to carry it out. So we had-- [PAUSES FOR 8 SECONDS] we had these real wheelbarrows. And the front of it, to the front there was a wire attached. So one girl was holding the wire and pulling it. The other one was pushing the wheelbarrow. And it was over-- [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] you know, the main person was a French engineer, [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] who was-- who came every day just to look at it. And he always would stand behind the corner. And one of us who could understand him would stand behind the wall. And he would tell us all the news from the front, so the latest. So we knew exactly where the front was going. It was really very good to-- to know.  INT: How long were you working there? RS: I think we were there till the end of the war, because it was never finished, never any air raid was-- there were air raids, yes. But the bunker wasn't finished yet. 
INT: Was your area bombed? RS: No. No.  INT: Where did you go during the air raids? RS: Outside, we were not allowed to go into the shelter.  INT: Who did come into the shelter? RS: The SS women. And of course, because of the air raids, we didn't get any food. And eventually after it finished, we were taken to-- to this kitchen. And we were standing in a queue. And this-- one of the bad SS women said, [NON-ENGLISH], they are [NON-ENGLISH]. [NON-ENGLISH] means that you don't think of anything but food. And there was another one. She was very nice, says, [NON-ENGLISH]. They are [NON-ENGLISH]. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] So these-- these were just details.  INT: What happened next? RS: After the air raid? Oh, next when the end came, I don't remember that I was terribly happy. You were sort of devoid of all feelings somehow.  INT: How did you find out the war was over for you? RS: Well, we were told. We were told that.  INT: What happened? RS: First of all, the kommandant left. And he waved to us, [LAUGHS] wishing us all the best. Because he was very protective. And then the bad ones left, too. [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] The first person was some Hungarian [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] prisoners who came, who brought the-- the Americans to us. [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] We were locked in, so they threw bread over the fence. When the Americans came, they had no-- nothing with them. So all they gave us, they couldn't give us anything else, but a packet of crackers and about 29 [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] decagrams of the fat, the fattest fat you can image, bacon. Of course, everybody ate it at once. You cannot-- can't imagine the camp. We-- they had to-- to move us away from the camp. [LAUGHS] I hope they threw it in the air. Anyway, it was a miracle. Because then I developed myself, I developed terrible pain in my gall bladder. It was really quite unbelievable that we survived that, this good-- this good deed of the Americans. [LAUGHS] [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] So then they sent an officer, army officer to the kitchen. And he supervised the cooks to give us a proper diet. So because I had this terrible pain, they sent me as proper diet, Wiener schnitzel. You know what it is? It's very greasy stuff and pureed potatoes with lots and lots of margarine on it. [LAUGHS] It was the proper treatment. Anyway, that's where we survived the quarantine after about six weeks, I think. I can't remember exactly. The [PAUSES FOR 5 SECONDS] Czechs sent two or three-- I think it was three buses to pick us up and brought us to-- back to Prague. 
INT: What did you do when you got to Prague? RS: What did I do? First of all, I got in touch with my first husband's cousins. They-- they were products of mixed marriages. So they were not transported anywhere. And they were very good. And one of [NON-ENGLISH] uncles was there in Prague, too, because he was in a mixed marriage. [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] So these people were so good to me. [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] [SIGHS] And, well, I didn't want to go on studying, because I had no memory whatsoever. And I had not a piece of paper, you know? Nothing. All my books and everything were-- were lost. But then I met a former classmate of mine. And he made me-- in fact, he said, look, you have to go and study. Because it's so easy now. You don't have to study out of your books. Everything is just scripts. And he let me have some of the scripts and papers. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] So in the end, I went back.  INT: Back where? RS: To the-- to the university.  INT: Which university? RS: Charles University.  INT: What were you studying? RS: Medical, medical [? faculty. ?]  INT: Where were you living? RS: At the time, [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] yes, at the time I was living in this house which was supposed to be ours, only there-- before that, there used to be a woman, a German woman had the apartment. But it was divided and there were-- there was-- there was another Czech woman living there and two-- one girl who came from Vienna. But in the end, they shifted away. So that's where I lived. 
INT: Did you receive assistance, financial or any other sort, when you got to Prague from a committee or anything like that? RS: Well, yes, it was a meager one. It was very little. I managed to get a pension from my first husband's employment, which, because he was very young, it wasn't more than, I think, about 400 crowns per month, which would be about $40.  INT: How did you survive financially? RS: Well, my brother in-- in-- in the meantime, came back. I didn't know about him at all. So I went to the radio station, because they were broadcasting [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] people looking for someone. And so I told him, look, I heard that my brother is with the Western Army somewhere in-- near Plzen. It was the American zone. And would you-- I would like you to broadcast that I survived, that I am back. He said, oh, yes. Of course. And I ask him, what time would it be approximately? Says about fortnight. I said, look, I heard that they might be sent away back to Germany, which was true [INAUDIBLE]. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] And he said, well, why don't you go there and find out? I said, I haven't got any money. And how could I? You don't need any money. I had a paper from the repatriation place stating that I'm coming from Terezín, Auschwitz, and Mauthausen. So that was all I had. And it was enough on the train and everywhere, only when I came to Plzen [INAUDIBLE]. It was Sunday. And to get to the address of my first husband's cousin, whom-- about whom I knew that she managed to get back, so I had to go to the police station. 
INT: We'll just have to take a break and change types.  INT: Remember the last question I said I'd ask you? Do you have a message to leave? RS: Yes.  INT: That'll be my last question. After I've said that, after you've answered that question, I will say, thank you. And that's an indication to you that it's-- RS: To shut up.  INT: No! [LAUGHTER] That the interview is over. OK? RS: Yes.  INT: So that's to let you know. RS: Thank you.  INT: And so you'll hear me, mate. I'll finish off. The last question is, do you have a message to leave for future generations-- blah, blah, blah. And she'll answer. And when you hear me say, thank you, just hold it for a few seconds, and then cut, and that's it. So wherever that-- RS: [LAUGHS]  INT: Interview with Rose Svehla. This is tape seven. Rose, you were telling me about contacting, meaning, seeing your brother again. And you'd went to this police station. RS: Yes. And the policeman wouldn't-- couldn't help, me because it was Sunday. So I took out a packet of American cigarettes. And then I had the address immediately. [LAUGHS] That was really-- that was the way people were at the time. So, after that, we managed to get together. And--  INT: How was that reunion? RS: Oh, great. Great.  INT: Tell me about it. RS: Well, yes. I managed to get in touch with another uncle of my first husband. And he came back. And he arranged the place. You know, it was a castle near Nepomuk-- was the place. To ask for my brother, to let him know that I am in [? Plzen. ?] So they said, well, he's got a [LAUGHS] date somewhere. So some-- but we'll get you. So somebody went on the motorbike, called him with the young lady. [LAUGHS] And he says, your-- your sister is in [? Plzen. ?] So he jumped on the motorbike, got back to his quarters, packed some perfume and things like what I really needed, and came to [? Plzen. ?] So that's how we met. 
INT: How did he look? RS: I beg your pardon?  INT: How did he look? RS: He looked fine. He looked well, [LAUGHS] like a Western.  INT: What happened next? RS: Next, we were contacted with our best friend. He biked from east Bohemia to-- to [? Plzen ?] to best-- west Bohemia, on bike, just to meet us. He became his brother-in-law in the end. [LAUGHS] So-- and that was it.  INT: Did you then go back to Prague? RS: Yes. I had to go back to Prague.  INT: Did you finish your university degree? RS: I finished the studies. And then I met with my second husband in the-- at the university. And eventually, we got married. And that's the end of the story. [LAUGHS]  INT: What's your husband's name? RS: Oh, Ctirad-- C-T-I-R-A-D, Svehla. You know.  INT: Tell me Ctirad. RS: Ctirad?  INT: Tell me about him. RS: Well, [PAUSES FOR 5 SECONDS] he's a very kind, understanding person. [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] I couldn't-- I couldn't find any better person. That's all. That's it. [PAUSES FOR 5 SECONDS] I don't know why I'm always moved to tears when I have something good to say about people.  INT: When did you get married? RS: When?  INT: Mm. RS: On the 28th of December, 1948.  INT: Where did you get married? RS: In Prague, over there, you know? [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] And--  INT: What does Ctirad do? RS: What-- 
INT: What did he do? What-- his profession. RS: Well, he-- he was studying medicine. That's where we met. And before the war, he's was studying Faculty of Commerce. But he wasn't any businessman [LAUGHS] by nature at all. He was supposed to inherit his uncle's [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] enterprise. But he didn't want to do it. So he wanted to study medicine, and he did that.  INT: How long did you stay in Prague? RS: Until my graduation-- then I had to go to a country hospital. And Ctirad was still finishing his-- his studies. Then he came after me. So we were the only-- only house surgeons at the time. So one night, I was on duty. Next night, he was [LAUGHS] on duty.  INT: Where was this? RS: In Príbram [LAUGHS] It was a mining town about 60 kilometers from Prague. Everybody had to serve for a summer outside Prague, especially if no-- if you were not a party member.  INT: And how long did you stay there? RS: Ctirad went for his military-- [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] military service from there. And I was there till our daughter was born.  INT: What's your daughter's name? RS: Eva. Eva Maria. And she was born in the hospital in there. And that's why her birth certificate shows Príbram as her birth place.  INT: Tell me about Eva. RS: Oh, she was a gorgeous child. But she [LAUGHS] became very religious, because we were living at the [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] place which was called Saint Mount. You know, there was a-- a pilgrimage place. And the nanny who was looking after her was very [LAUGHS] religious. So once I went with her around, and we-- we went-- we were passing the crucifix. And she says, [NON-ENGLISH], [LAUGHS] in her baby language. The master, he-- he's asleep. He's got a big pain, bad pain, you know? So she was interpreting me this. Another time, there was a mass, and she was with her nanny there. And she started singing [NON-ENGLISH SINGING]. [LAUGHS] Maria, Maria. A beautiful lily. [LAUGHS] You know? That's what we had for a child. [LAUGHS] 
INT: What sort of religious upbringing did you give Maria? RS: We-- we never gave her any. She-- because of her grandmother, Ctirad's mother, she was christened in the Catholic church. But she never knew about it, no.  INT: How long did you then stay in-- RS: In Príbram?  INT: --Príbram? RS: Well, after my maternity leave, I managed to get to one of the children's hospitals in Prague. And that's where I was until after Tom was born, and then I went into the-- in general practice, you know, for children, of course.  INT: When was Tom born? RS: 1940-- '54, the same day as Eva was.  INT: Tell me about Tom. RS: Well, [LAUGHS] Tom had a German nanny. She was our housekeeper. And she was allowed to stay in Czechoslovakia, because she wasn't a Nazi. But she didn't speak any good Czech at all. [LAUGHS] So Tom's first words were very funny. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] And well, he was-- he was a good boy.  INT: Tell me about Tom and Eva now. RS: Now. Well, you know, Tom lives in Sydney. He's got a Japanese wife, and a little boy, who unfortunately, suffers from a storage disease, which is inborn defect of-- of his digestive system. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] So he has to get [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] cornstarch every four hours through his-- through a cannula in this tummy. So that's why Tom stayed at home with him, because [? Ellie, ?] his wife, was earning much more than he was. [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] And at the moment, they are expecting a little girl, which causes him some anxiety, then. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] But I think he's quite happy there. 
INT: What about Eva? RS: Eva is not very happy. She's not. She always thinks she lost something very important when she came here. [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] You know, she was-- she had a lot of friends in Prague, and she's missing them. And well, when Horst was in Prague with the children two years ago, he told a former neighbor of our that Eva wants to come back, and that she would love to come back, and that she is sorry and missing Czechoslovakia. And she said, just send her here. Send her here, and she will walk on foot back to New Zealand, see.  INT: How long did you stay in Czechoslovakia? RS: We left in 1969, after the Russian invasion. Because before that, the Dubcek era was so marvelous, you know? It was full of hope, full of best possibilities for the future. And then all of a sudden, it was squashed again. And we couldn't imagine that we could live under the circumstances again.  INT: So why did you choose New Zealand? RS: Why? By chance. [LAUGHS] [BACKGROUND NOISE] Bless you.  INT: Thank you. RS: Ctirad went to inquire about the possibilities to Geneva. He meant to work for the Red Cross, but it's impossible. You have to be delegated by your national organization. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] And so the man he interviewed was a-- at WHO. And he was an Australian doctor. And he explained the situation to Ctirad and told him, look. Have you ever thought of the other part of the world, like Australia or New Zealand? And he said, no, I never did. He said, you know, Australia is a nice, free country. But if you want a quiet life without getting rich, you could choose New Zealand. So that was it. So he went to the Australian embassy, which was in the same building. And there was a-- a Swiss girl. She told him, well, you could. And-- and I give you this and that information. And then he went to the New Zealand one. And there was a New Zealand young girl. And she said, well, yes. We'll-- we've got some possibilities, but you know, come in the afternoon when the vice consul will be here. The vice consul was another lady. And she said, yes, we've got a quota for refugees. And about 100 refugees from Czechoslovakia they could take. And she said, but come tomorrow when the consul [LAUGHS] will be here. She was another girl, another lady. And they took it as their own private business, you know? And she said, look. We'll send a cable to Wellington to ask about it, to medical council, and the medical council will tell us all. So before Ctirad left, the answer was there. But not-- not yet the-- the eventual. So he had to leave. And then we-- we got a letter posted in Bratislava, on-- with a Czech stamp, saying that we were given three days to come to Geneva, to join them first. The-- 
INT: To join-- to join who? RS: The embassy people, you know, the New Zealand embassy people in Geneva. But the first we missed because-- oh, it was a long story. And [LAUGHS] Tom got mumps. We couldn't go. Next one was for some other reason impossible. The third one, we left in two groups. Ctirad and Eva went through [NON-ENGLISH] to [NON-ENGLISH]. And I with Tom went through Moravia to [NON-ENGLISH]. So they were first in Vienna, and our train was delayed for about two hours. And anyway, eventually we managed to-- to meet. They were waiting for us. [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] And we were staying-- I was staying with Eva at one relative of a friend of ours, and Tom and Ctirad with another relative. So we were divided. And so after a week or so of waiting, we were given, eventually, the pass to--  INT: How did you get to Australia? What mode of transport? RS: By plane. But--  INT: Where did you-- where did you-- RS: We had to--  INT: --leave from? RS: --meet another people, another group of Czech immigrants in-- [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] where was that? [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] In London. And then we were sent by plane to first, Australia, then to Wellington. The other people from the group landed at Auckland. And we were sent into Wellington. I don't know why. But then we were waited by-- also met by Count Kinsky, who was, at the time-- he was an immigrant as well. And at the time, he was already a director of the ornithology department of the museum in Wellington. But before that, he asked him how he managed to start. They asked him, when he arrived, what sort of profession-- profession he had. He said, I was a forestry engineer. So they sent him down south to fell trees. 
INT: Who is this? RS: This Count Kinsky. [LAUGHS]  INT: How did you get the money to come to Australia by plane? RS: Oh, it was paid by-- by the government.  INT: Did you receive any assistance upon your arrival here in-- in New Zealand? RS: No. No, but we were designated to come to get the jobs here.  INT: Where did you-- where did you live when you arrived? RS: It was--  INT: Which city? RS: In Wellington. Actually, Trentham. You know, there was a camp, originally army camp. And it was then designated for immigrants. So we had one or two houses in-- in this complex there. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] So that was our--  INT: Did-- RS: --start here.  INT: --did Ctirad work? RS: Not immediately. But after we came to Invercargill, he started working at the hospital. And I was supposed to work with the Health Department as a school medical officer. So I was-- I also worked with the Plunket Clinic. And it was very enjoyable, except that the work with the Health Department in the end was terribly boring for me, because I was-- didn't have much contact with patients. And anyway, it was very good.  INT: Did you-- where did you end up working? RS: Beg your pardon?  INT: Where did you end up working finally? RS: After how many years? About 10 years, I went to do some locum work for a GP who went to England. And it was supposed to be for one year. And he-- then he let me know that he won't come till later. But in the meantime, I promised a friend of mine, who wanted to go back home to Scotland for a visit, that I will take her practice for the time. So I had to leave. 
INT: So is that where you stayed working? RS: Yes--  INT: And did-- RS: --until she came back. And then I stopped working. Oh, I-- I did sort of locum work for different people--  INT: Did-- did-- RS: --from time to time.  INT: --did Ctirad end up staying at the hospital here in Invercargill? RS: Yes, he stayed there. And when the people from Wellington asked me whether I would like to move somewhere, to some other place, Ctirad said, well, I couldn't leave, because they were so good to me. So we stayed here.  INT: Can I ask you? [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] We spoke earlier today about your extended family, and we know that your-- your parents didn't survive. RS: Nobody.  INT: Nor your grandmother, your grandfather. RS: Mm-hmm.  INT: How many of your extended family did survive the Holocaust? RS: Nobody except myself and my brother.  INT: What-- what about your extended-- aunts and uncles and cousins? RS: No, they also perished. They all are dead.  INT: What about the five families in Kysperk? Did you ever find out what happened to them? RS: Yes, well, [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] nobody survived except for one woman. And she still lived when I came to visit the town.  INT: Did-- did you ever go back to Kysperk? RS: Twice-- just for a visit.  INT: How was that? RS: It was very sad. It's like walking over graves, you know? 
INT: You told me earlier today that when you left Kysperk, back in 1942, to go to Terezín, that you left some belongings, some valuables with friends. Did you ever get them back? RS: Some of them, yes. A-- a former friend of my mother had a lot of money. And she had some. Then this-- the parents of-- of Karel, who is married to-- I mean, who is the brother-in-law of my brother-- yes they-- they had a lot of things. And they used some of it. Of course, that was only natural. We were happy that they could do it, because they-- you know, there was nothing for them there.  INT: Can-- RS: And the thing was, when my father was taken by the Gestapo because of the bullets, the gun was with this-- these friends, these parents of-- of Karel. And he was so panicked that he threw the pistol into the chimney. [LAUGHS] And then when-- when she made a fire, it was, you know, very, very funny. Anyway. And-- [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] what was the question?  INT: Well, I just-- I'm moving onto the next question. How-- how-- have you told your-- Tom and Eva about your experiences during the war? RS: I couldn't talk about it. I couldn't talk about it for years, for years. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] Only later on [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] I was able to-- to talk a little bit about it. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] But we all were very reticent. We all were very shy to talk about it. 
INT: What do you mean we all? RS: All of the survivors. We didn't want to.  INT: Why? RS: I don't know why. I don't know.  INT: Have you-- have you told Eva and Tom in-- in the last few years? RS: They know, yes. Yes. But I never showed them the tape this professor made with me. I said that they can see it when I die, but they will probably see it before then.  INT: Will you show them this tape? Will you let them see this tape? RS: I think so.  INT: Did they ask you, as they were growing up, about what-- what you went through? RS: Martin, the, the oldest one. Yes, he does ask quite a lot of questions. And-- the oldest grandson, I mean. We haven't got much contact with the oldest granddaughter. That's the one in the picture. But [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] otherwise, we are in close contact with the extended family here.  INT: Did you find it difficult to adjust to life in New Zealand? RS: Not really, except for the language. That was the main problem. But on the other hand, I felt like coming to paradise, you know? Because what-- before I could drive myself, when the nurses were taking me somewhere to work, I always felt this is like a picture from a Bible, you know, children Bible stories.  INT: Did-- did your experiences [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] affect your religious beliefs, [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] your experience as a Jew in the Holocaust? RS: Yes, I-- I have no religious beliefs today-- none. 
INT: Is that a-- RS: I'm sorry for it, because it would be much more helpful if I could believe.  INT: Is that lack of belief a result of what you experienced? RS: Yes. I'm sure of it.  INT: Did you tell your children about their Jewish heritage? RS: Oh, they know. And Eva maintains that she is Jewish. [LAUGHS] Yes.  INT: And Tom? RS: Yes, Tom too. His doctor is an Orthodox Jew. And he's very friendly with him. And--  INT: We just have to take a break and change tapes. RS: Again?  INT: We're just changing tapes to-- just, just finishing off. OK? CTIRAD SVEHLA: OK.  INT: This is the important part. CTIRAD SVEHLA: Yes.  INT: I-- I'm, I'm banishing you from your own lounge room. I'll never do it again. I promise. RS: [LAUGHS] CTIRAD SVEHLA: Let's hope you are true. [LAUGHTER]  INT: Interview with Rose Svehla. This is tape eight. Rose, do you dream-- have dreams or nightmares about those times? RS: Not anymore. But I used to have.  INT: Do you think about those times? RS: Now, since I retired I've got plenty of time to think, so I do. I do.  INT: Do you also think about pre-war times and, and your family back then? RS: No, I have to censor it.  INT: Do you think your experiences have influenced the way you lead your life? RS: Oh, yes, undoubtedly. Yeah.  INT: How? RS: Well, first of all, the lack of belief and trust in people, because what I would never have thought is possible really happened. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] And so when you lose all illusions about mankind, it's very difficult. Isn't it? 
INT: How else has it affected you? RS: How?  INT: How else has it affected you? RS: Oh, I think that's enough.  INT: Did it affect the way that you brought up Tom and Eva? RS: Well, frankly I, I am afraid that it might have. Because, first of all, I was so busy when I had to work full-time after I went into practice. And there was no way how to get help, proper help. So you had to work on two-- in two fields, as a mother, as a cook, as a housekeeper, and as a doctor. So it wasn't very easy. I had very little time and energy for the children. It might have been my fault. I shouldn't have had any children at the time. [PAUSES FOR 5 SECONDS] So--  INT: And [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] have you put any thought to what-- what it was that, that-- the reasons that you survived? RS: No, it wasn't my merit at all. I wasn't eager to, you know, to fight for survival, survival at all.  INT: So how did you survive? RS: By chance. First of all, because I was late to camp, because we had this very helpful friend of, of my husband's. Secondly, it, It was the time factor too. And because I was still relatively very young and well preserved, that I managed through the selections. It was a pure coincidence.  INT: To-- just to finish off, do you have anything to add, a-- perhaps a final message to leave to somebody watching this in the future, maybe your children or your grandchildren? RS: To make sure that nothing like that happens again. But it's happening. It is, in all parts of the world. Genocide is nothing new or nothing final, is it? That's my message. 
INT: Thank you. RS: Now I would like to introduce my dearest husband-- [LAUGHS] you know his name already-- and my grandchildren. The oldest here, the one who's [? stuck ?] is, is Tommy. Then comes Danny, [? Daniella, ?] and [? Misha. ?] And the last, this is Ben. That's the baby of, of the family.  INT: Whose children are these? RS: They are Eva's, our daughter's and [? Horst's ?] children.  INT: Tommy, can I ask you, has your grandmother ever spoken to you about her experiences in the Second World War? TOMMY (GRANDSON): No, not really that much. But, sort of, she's explained it to my older brother. And I, I meant to ask one day, but it's sort of a hard subject to talk about, isn't it? I'd really like to ask one day, but-- So has it all come out, out of this?  INT: Would you like to view this video if it-- when it-- when it arrives in a few months time? TOMMY (GRANDSON): Oh, definitely. It's really interesting.  INT: Why do you find it interesting? TOMMY (GRANDSON): Oh, just the way people treat other people. I mean, I think we can learn from past mistakes. [LAUGHS] CTIRAD SVEHLA: Well, it was much more than mistakes.  INT: Ctirad can I-- can I ask-- sorry, you were saying something? TOMMY (GRANDSON): No, this wasn't just a mistake. It was a horror really. It was horrific. CTIRAD SVEHLA: Well, it's my turn to speak now. [LAUGHTER] All right. I love them all, especially this woman. And I have over-- well, what do you call it? [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] Compassion with her. And, well, I love her. RS: Well, he survived almost 50 years with this hag. [LAUGHTER] That's something. CTIRAD SVEHLA: Well, I feel proud about it. RS: [LAUGHS] 
INT: Thank you all very much. Yeah first thing you'll say is this-- RS: This photo is from a book about Terezín, the first camp where we went. And on the right-hand side is my father's inscription. At the time, he was a ghetto watchman. So he was able to get at the other-- to the other side of the gate.  INT: What, what are these inscriptions, Rose? RS: These are mostly names of people who were around the ghetto.  INT: And what is-- what does father's inscription say? RS: It says Karel-- K. Russ, Kysperk.  INT: Thank you. RS: This is my first husband's picture, made in Prague before the, the bad events at all. He-- his name was [? Georg ?] Lederer. And he was a chemical engineer working at [NON-ENGLISH] factory.  INT: How did you get this photo here? RS: Well, it was saved by our friends. And then other friends sent it over to.  INT: Thank you. RS: This is our wedding picture, taken on the 28th of December 1948, in Prague. And the rest are our friends and relatives.  INT: And which one is-- and who is that tall gentleman there? RS: That tall gentleman in the middle is Ctirad. He's holding, reluctantly, a bouquet of orchids. And I'm next to him. So--  INT: Thank you. CREW: Rolling. RS: On this picture, there is my twin brother, on the left.  INT: What's his name? RS: His name is [? Lev. ?] Next to him is his wife. Her name is [? Miruska. ?] And the young person is their oldest grandson, [? Aaron. ?] He was here in New Zealand, and they joined him at our place. 
INT: What year was this taken? RS: It was taken in '96.  INT: Thank you. Don't worry about where. RS: This is the picture of our oldest grandson. He is the son of our daughter, Eva, and her husband [? Horst. ?] At the moment-- this one was taken about two years ago, so he looks a little bit different now.  INT: What's his name? RS: His name is Martin. And he is-- he lives in Christchurch, doing the master's degree in tourism.  INT: Thank you. RS: This is a picture of Martin, on the left-hand side. Next to him is his mother, Eva. Next to her is [? Horst, ?] the father. And the baby is [? Misha. ?]  INT: And who is a little one on the right? RS: That's [? Misha, ?] there. Oh, that's [? Daniela. ?] When she-- it's an old picture.  INT: Who is Eva and [? Horst? ?] RS: Eva and, and [? Horst ?] are parents of all these three children.  INT: And what relationship is she to you? RS: Well, she is our daughter, and he's our son-in-law.  INT: Thank you. CREW: Now you've got the whole-- OK in frame. RS: This is a picture of our son, Tom, with his son, Oliver. And it was taken some time ago, when Oliver was still a baby.  INT: Thank you. CREW: And-- RS: In this picture is our daughter-in-law, [? Ariko, ?] and her little son Oliver. It was taken shortly after Oliver was born. And it would be five years ago.