INT: March 16, 1998. The survivor is Miriam Stanton, maiden name Sandzer. The interviewer is Emilie Erbmann. The city is London. The country, United Kingdom. The language used is English. My name is Emilie Erbmann, E-M-I-L-I-E E-R-B-M-A-N-N. Today's date is the 16th of March, 1998. I'm conducting an interview with Miriam Stanton in London, United Kingdom. The language used is English. And this is tape one. What is your name? MS: Miriam Stanton.  INT: Could you spell that, please? MS: S-T-A-N-T-O-N.  INT: And your first name? MS: Miriam.  INT: Could you spell that, please? MS: M-I-R-I-A-M.  INT: What was your name at birth? MS: Sandzer, S-A-N-D-Z-E-R.  INT: And what is your date of birth? MS: 6 of May, 1914.  INT: How old are you? How old are you? MS: 6 of May, 1914. I am 83 years old. I will be 84 in six months.  INT: Which town were you born in? MS: In Warsaw, Poland.  INT: Could you spell Warsaw, please? MS: [POLISH] 45.  INT: No, sorry. Could you spell Warsaw for me? MS: W-A-R-S-O-- S-A-W.  INT: And which country was that in? MS: Poland.  INT: Thank you. [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] You just told me you were born in Warsaw. Did you grow up in Warsaw? MS: Up till I was around six years old, and then I was sent to boarding school.  INT: Where? MS: In Germany.  INT: Where in Germany? MS: In Agnetendorf, in Riesengebirge. That's near Breslau. It's in the mountains. 
INT: Why were you sent to boarding school? MS: Because Warsaw was occupied every week by somebody else as a Russian or Polish. And we had a very lovely apartment, was always confiscated for the generals. So my parents decided to-- went-- to-- went-- they went to Katowice in Silesia, where my maternal grandparents were living, and to leave the children. And the bank manager-- my father's bank manager said why don't you send them to boarding school where my children are, to leave them alone? So that why we went to boarding school, my brother and myself.  INT: Do you remember the names of your paternal-- the name of your paternal grandfather? MS: Yes. Moshe Majerowicz.  INT: That was your-- the father of your father? MS: My maternal grandfather.  INT: Your maternal grandfather. What was he like? What was your maternal grandfather like? MS: What was he?  INT: What was he like? What kind of a person was he? MS: He was a-- he-- to me he was a gorgeous person. He had a little beard, and of-- short and stout. And he was always having on his button a little parcel. There was some sweets on it. And we-- it was every week somebody else's job to take it off. And we had the sweets there. He was gorgeous.  INT: Where was he from? MS: He was also from Poland, from Sosnowiec.  INT: And your maternal grandmother, what was she like? What was her name, first of all? MS: She was Sara Majerowicz. That's the grandmother I went to-- to concentration camp with. Not concentration camp, it was a-- an alien camp. And when my grandfather passed away, she came to live with us. 
INT: What about the parents of your father? How-- did you know them? MS: Oh, yes. They were wonderful.  INT: What was your grandfather's name? MS: Shia Mendel Sandzer. He was a big man with a big white beard. And he sat like a king at the top of the table. He was absolutely gorgeous. Absolutely gorgeous.  INT: Where was he from? MS: He was also-- he was also from Bedzin, which is the next town between Sosnowiec and Katowice was just a tram stage, a tram-- going-- tram car going backwards and forwards because it was-- it was two little villages, and they were 90% Jewish. And they both lived there.  INT: So we've spoken about your-- the-- your father's father. What about your father's mother, your grandmother? MS: She was also from Bedzin.  INT: And what was she like? MS: She was short and fat, and a very, very good cook. Excellent. And we loved to go Sabbath there to-- to lunch. And [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] she was very kind. And she always preferred my brother and myself. They had a lot-- enormous amount of grandchildren because my father was the eldest of 12. And she had a lot of grandparents-- grandchildren, but she always had special parcels prepared for us. But I also remember my great-grandmother, her mother.  INT: Yes. What was her name? MS: And-- I don't know what her name was. See, we used to call her 'Babciu--' it's in Polish 'Little Granny--' [POLISH] because she wear a little cap with-- with ornaments here. And for supper she had a special ornament, you know? But she always-- she never wore-- her hair was all shave. Instead of wearing a wig, she wore-- she was more religious-- and she would just set little beret. And it wasn't a beret. It was like a little turban in black silk. And she looked just lovely. So we called her Babciu [POLISH] because she was in-- in Polish it is [POLISH], and [POLISH] is a little-- a little cover of the head, you know? And she was very sweet. And what I remember the most of her, that she wore one of those old dresses with about six or seven [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] under-- what do you call that? A white-- 
INT: Undergarments. MS: White--  INT: Garments. MS: That's right. And she used to have-- lift them up when she saw us, and in the last one was a pocket and she took out some sweets special for my brother and myself. All the other children had the sweets on the table. [LAUGHS]  INT: What was-- MS: We were very special to her.  INT: What was her name again, your grandmother's name? Your-- MS: She was my grandmother's name.  INT: Yeah. What was your grandmother's name again? Your-- MS: Pardon?  INT: The-- your-- your father's mother. What was her name again? MS: I don't know. I don't know.  INT: What was your mother's name? MS: Frieda.  INT: And her maiden name? MS: Majerowicz.  INT: When was she born? MS: In 1989.  INT: And where was she from? MS: She was born in-- I think in Sosnowiec, in Sosnowiec.  INT: Near which big town would that be? MS: That was in Silesia. Bedzin and Sosnowiec were two twin towns, and my father from Bedzin and my mother from Sosnowiec. And my father used to go to a yeshiva. And he was a very handsome young man. And one day-- the two grandfathers knew each other very well. They were good friends. They used to go to the same yeshiva. And one day my maternal grandfather came home and says to my mother, you are engaged. I said, oh, am I? So he says yes. She said, may I know who it is? So he says yes. [POLISH] Sandzer. So she was delighted because he was so handsome. She used to admire him when he walked in the street. So she-- and she had never met him before, you see? But she-- the-- all-- the girls always looked at the boys going to the yeshiva, you know? And she was very happy about it. Whether he was happy, I-- I never ask him. 
INT: What-- what-- what was your mother like? MS: Hm?  INT: What was your mother like? MS: [SIGHS] What can I say? She was gorgeous. She was very young when she got married. She was only 15. And my father was 15 and 1/2. And they were married. They were under 31. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] No, they got engaged before, and then they were married. The-- they were just 31 together, the two ages together. And [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] she saw him only going into the yeshiva and coming back from the yeshiva, et cetera. And she always liked him very much. He was a very handsome man-- young man, very handsome.  INT: What was your mother's family like? You've talked about your grandparents. But what were your-- what were her brothers and sisters like? Did she have any? MS: My mother's brothers and sisters?  INT: Your mother's, yes. MS: My mother had actually seven brothers and sisters, but five of them died when they're youngsters. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] And when I was born, my mother had a sister, younger sister, and a younger brother. She was the oldest of the three. And the younger sister, unfortunately she suffered from TB. So she died pretty young. She was under 30 when she died. And I was very sorry because I adored her. So-- and that-- so my mother remained with one brother only.  INT: What was your father's name? MS: Avram [HEBREW]. 
INT: And when was he born? MS: He were only a few months before my mother, in January.  INT: And which year was this again? MS: And also 1989. Pardon?  INT: 1889. And where was he from, your father? MS: Bedzin.  INT: What did your father do for a living? What did your father do for a living? MS: He was a merchant. He was importing and exporting and selling and-- I don't know what he was doing. We were never short of anything. He were-- he was a business man. He was a business man.  INT: Was he in military service during the First World War? MS: Yes. He was a Russian soldier.  INT: Did he ever talk to you about that time? MS: The only thing I remember-- he never talked very much about it. But what I remember, I remember seeing him in uniform as a little girl, and [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] when-- also, in incident, when I was born, my mother had a very difficult birth. So they sent her on holiday to a-- to a-- what do you call that? [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] A nursing home in the country outside Warsaw. And it was pour-- and one-- one day they put her into the woods. It was in the middle in the woods, the nursing home. And the-- it was starting to pour with rain. They put her in-- in the arm chair, and she could not go in, and they forgot about her. And when my father came to say goodbye to her, because he was in the army, they remembered that she was outside. So they brought her in wet, and she developed right away-- she had a [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] very bad flu. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] And he kissed her goodbye, and he caught the germ. So the next day when he went to the army and was in the barracks sleeping, when-- the next morning when he woke up he had high temperature. So he couldn't go with the army. The-- he went to the hospital. They put him in the hospital. And that was-- and when he got better he came out to my mother and looked-- he was-- he had two weeks [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] off-- he had two weeks off the duty. And when he went back to the army, he had a high temperature again. So they said to him, excuse me, where are you coming from? So he told them what had happened. He says he is the only one surviving out of your-- of your [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] whole company. He says why? He said because when they left and you couldn't go, they walked over the field of mines and the whole lot was killed. And you are the only one remaining. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] So his illness-- twice he had that-- was a blessing to him. And he never went-- and they never called him back. 
INT: What was your father like? What sort of a person? MS: Well, it's difficult to tell me that he was absolutely wonderful. He was a very, very handsome young man, and very kind. He was a very kind man, very warm hearted. And he taught me a lot of things, which I carry out. And I am very happy about it. He was a very, very nice man. But he was a-- he was a business man. He was not a-- a worker. He was a business man.  INT: Did you have any brothers or sisters? MS: I had two brothers.  INT: What was your elder brother's name? MS: Jake. Jack. They called him [POLISH] in Polish.  INT: What was he like? MS: He was very nice. Very nice. Is-- [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] He protected me. When he went out with girls, he always came home with a little parcel of a present for me. So when I woke up in the morning, I always saw on my bedside table a little present from him because he went out. And I wanted to go with him, but he didn't want me to go with him. [LAUGHS]  INT: What about your younger brother? What's his name? MS: Bill. William.  INT: What was he like? MS: He was 10 years younger than I am. So-- [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] also very nice, I must say. He was like my son because I looked after him. During the war my husband looked after him. And he was-- [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] after the war we brought him here, when I was married. We brought him here, introduced him to a lovely girl, and he got married here. But unfortunately he's dead now about nine or 10 years. He had cancer. And he died. 
INT: It's maybe difficult to say how did the three of you get on, because one was so little. MS: Pardon?  INT: How did the three of you get on? Because one was very little and one was older than you. MS: Well, with my older brother I got on very well. With my younger brother, he looked-- he knew me better than his own mother. I looked-- he looked upon me like his mother. And [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] here-- when he came to London, he was living here, right here. And [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] how shall I say? It was a very warm and united feeling.  INT: What language was spoken at home in Poland? MS: German.  INT: And outside the home? MS: Out of the home, the-- the country's name-- my mother taught me Polish because we moved away from Poland in 1920.  INT: To go where? MS: We went to Berlin, where my maternal grandparents moved to, or my uncle moved to, to Berlin. My father was a partner-- lent my uncle some money to buy some cinemas. He was in the cinema business, and my father was a partner. So we moved to Berlin, and my grandparents adored their son, their baby son. And from there my father came to Paris. And he decided to stay in Paris.  INT: So how long did you-- did you actually live in Berlin, or were you at the boarding school? MS: One year. 
INT: One year. MS: One year with my grandparents. My grandparents had an apartment, and we lived with my grandparents. And when my father realized it's no business for him, so he went to Paris. And we stayed on till my father was established here.  INT: So when exactly did you move to Paris? MS: 1920.  INT: And so did you go to school there? MS: No, wait a minute. No. I am wrong. 1930 we moved to Paris. 1930.  INT: Had you finished school by then, or were you still at school? MS: Yes. Yes. I finished school by then.  INT: Can I just ask you if you know-- I know you were too young at the time-- but do you know what the relationship was in Warsaw between Jews and non-Jews before the war started? MS: Very bad. Very bad. Antisemitism was very high.  INT: Do you remember anything of the-- MS: Yes. I remember we had a lovely apartment with a big balcony. And I remember the 1st of May was a march because first will be the workmen was working. And we were standing on the balcony and looking down. My mother and whoever was in the-- at home with us, because we had the apartment in one of the best streets, like Park Lane was in front of us, you know. And there they were walking like Oxford Street. They were walking there. And I remember that they were shouting 'Down with the Jews! Down with the Jews! Their blood should run in the gutter,' et cetera. And also what I remember, that I came down for Passover. My parents-- all-- was a-- a Jewish new year. My parents used to buy us new clothes. And we went down very proudly with our new dresses. We were-- I was about [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] 12? [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] 12. And my brother was about two. And we were walking down the steps to go for a walk, and the housekeeper came down, came out of their lodge and poured ice water over us with our new clothes. And you said you dirty Jews, you need that. And it was terrible. Can you imagine? Ice, with the pieces of ice on your. 
INT: So after that, what was it like in boarding school in Germany, in Silesia? MS: In-- in-- it was [GERMAN] in Agnetendorf. And boarding school was very nice.  INT: Was it a Jewish boarding school? MS: The owners were three sisters, unmarried sisters, old. And Sara [GERMAN] was the eldest one. And she had two sisters as well, the younger one. They were Jewish, but they didn't practice the Jewish-- the Jewish religion at all. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] But there was no antisemitism at all. We were all-- we had [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] a lot of very high class girls when-- and this Esterházy was there, which was-- Esterházy was a-- the family in-- in Hungary, the Lord Esterházy, you know? And their daughters were there. And from-- from Vienna the-- the royalty was there, the children. We were all friends, and I don't remember any more who they were. But they were very high up. So it was no antisemitism there. But in Paris-- in Warsaw there was a lot.  INT: Was your family religious? MS: Yes. Yes.  INT: How-- did your family observe the Shabbat? MS: They-- they kept Shabbat, yes.  INT: If they went to synagogue? MS: Pardon?  INT: Did they go to-- did they go to synagogue as well? MS: Oh, yes. Oh, yes.  INT: How did you celebrate Jewish holidays? MS: Oh, yes. We celebrated all the--  INT: How? MS: --all the Jewish holidays. For Passover, we came home from boarding school, and we had a proper Passover with Seder nights, with everything. And Rosh Ha-Shana, Yom Kippur, they was-- in shul-- in the school was a synagogue, a room which was made a synagogue. And my parents used to come to be with us. They also came Christmastime because it was holiday time. So they-- we were skiing. And in the summer, we used to go to-- on the sea-- to the seaside, to Danzig, to Sopot. So that was my holiday. But the Jewish holidays, my parents used to come. And for Passover I used to go home. 
INT: Which was your favorite Jewish holiday? MS: Passover.  INT: Why? MS: Oh, yes. Because I used to love the Seder night.  INT: We take a tape break here. MS: Hm?  INT: We take a tape break here. MS: Yeah, I'm going to have some--  INT: This is tape two. I'm interviewing Miriam Stanton. You were just telling me that Pesach was your favorite holiday. MS: Yeah.  INT: But why? MS: Well, two things-- first of all, I had the-- as a child, you mean?  INT: Yes. MS: I had a new outfit. And I was allowed to choose myself. And that was a great, great privilege. And also because of Seder night-- we were allowed to stay up late. I used to fall asleep on my mother's shoulder. But that doesn't matter. But I was allowed to stay awake, you know?  INT: You've just told me that you went very young to boarding school. Do you remember any names of teachers or classmates there? MS: Oh, gosh, I-- up till lately, I do remember Mrs. Goebbels. Mrs. Goebbels was there. It's not-- nothing to do with the Goebbels, Hitler's Goebbels. She was a very, very nice person. And she was first-- [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] when I was a little girls, when I was first came, in her room was three other beds for the newcomers when they are very small to feel secured. Afterwards, we had our own rooms.  INT: Do you remember any names of classmates there? MS: The what? 
INT: Of school friends? MS: Yes, [? Hansie, ?] [? Hansie ?] was her first name. I don't remember now-- [? Hansie ?] [? Erlich, ?] I think, [? Hansie Erlich. ?] And they were from Vienna. And they had cinemas. And her uncles and aunts came. And they were all very important cinema, well, owners. And we are very friendly.  INT: You told me there was no antisemitism at your boarding school. How about outside the school? Was there any antisemitism outside the school? MS: No, not out-- we were not allowed to go on our own. But there were several buildings. And for the holidays, we were allowed to-- [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] the families used to come. And they took us out, you know? And we were little girls. We didn't-- we were ready by 8 o'clock to go to bed, you know?  INT: Until what age were you at the boarding school? MS: Pardon?  INT: Until what age were you at the boarding school? MS: Me, until 10.  INT: Then where did you go? MS: Then I went to Poland, because my mother was having my youngest brother. And she was sure that she won't survive it, the birth. So she wanted the children to be with her. Well, thank God, she survived. And we were-- I was in Poland after Christmas time. And then that was in April. And in September, I went to a school in Warsaw just for a few months. 
INT: What was that like? MS: Well, I had to learn the language first, you see? And my mother taught me Polish. And I didn't like it. I didn't like it at all, the Polish language. But I had to learn it, because my mother told me that a language is a very important thing in life. And you have got to learn several languages. I said, not me. I know German and German only. Well, she says, no, you will have to learn other languages as well. And then I realized that she was quite right. Because in life, my languages are-- did help me a lot. And I speak now several languages. And it's very useful in life.  INT: What was the time at school like? Was there any antisemitism at school, at the Polish school? MS: Pardon?  INT: Was there any antisemitism at the Polish school? MS: Not that I know of, no, not that I know of.  INT: And outside the school? Oh, you told me, yes. MS: Oh, yes.  INT: You told me about the ice water and-- MS: Yeah.  INT: --all that. MS: But you see, in Warsaw, my parents had only Jewish friends.  INT: How about you? MS: Well, I didn't have any many friends because I was only a short time in Poland.  INT: Did you have any non-Jewish friends? MS: I don't think so, because I was friendly with the children of my parents' friends, you see? I-- 
INT: Do you know what the Jewish community was like in Warsaw? How many-- roughly how many Jews lived there? MS: I don't remember, no.  INT: No, you don't remember. Do you know at all what the relationship was between Jewish and not-- Jews and non-Jews? MS: No, it-- it was not--  INT: It was not good. MS: --a difference. No, we celebrated Christmas. We celebrate Rosh Hashanah. We celebrate everything together, you know? Christmas time, I remember, there were big Christmas trees, enormous Christmas trees. And we helped to decorate them. It was fun, you know? But that was no difference.  INT: So why did your father decide to go to Paris, to go and live in Paris? MS: Because he had an opportunity to make a, a business there. And my father was a peculiar person. He was a very good business man. But he liked to start a business. And when it was really flourishing, he was tired of it and started another business. And in Janowice, he started a factory, a knitted factory. And we knitted everything from socks to hats, clothes and everything. And we had 36 retail shops. With partners, he had it. And when it was really flourishing, somebody proposed to him to go to Paris. We had a Swiss friend. And his nephew was a friend with my father. And that Swiss friend came. And he says, [NON-ENGLISH], how about coming to Paris and starting a factory there? Oh, my father was all for it. So he sold the factory. And we waited in Berlin with my grandparents till he was settled in Paris. And then he brought us over. 
INT: Did you still go to school there? MS: Where?  INT: In Paris. MS: No, no.  INT: Did you-- MS: I had private lessons.  INT: Did you speak French? MS: Oh, yes, oh, yes, oh, yes-- I did business in French.  INT: You say you had private lessons. Did you have private school lessons at home or-- MS: Yes, yes.  INT: And your brother as well, the little one? MS: Pardon?  INT: What about your little brother, he as well? MS: Oh, no, he went to school. He went to school.  INT: What sort of books were there in your parents' home? MS: What?  INT: What sort of books were there in your parents' home? MS: Oh, gosh, we had so many books, specially Jewish books about the Jewish religion and the Torahs and all that thing. But we had a lot of books. Did you see our library here? I will show it to you, our library-- can photograph it. [LAUGHS]  INT: What did you like doing in your spare time? MS: What I did in my spare time?  INT: Yes. MS: It depends. In the winter, we were skiing. I used to love embroidering very much, especially this stuff, all that, and reading and enjoying life, going out and going for walks and all kind of things.  INT: Did you belong to any youth organizations? MS: No.  INT: When did you meet your future husband? MS: How did I meet my husband and when did I meet him? 
INT: When and how, yes. MS: Well, that was a very funny story. When I was in boarding school, his parents had a building in a big block, corner block of flats, in Berlin. And my uncle looked after it. And when they came to Berlin to see how the property was going on, he-- my parents were there. And they were just preparing to come for us-- to us for Christmas for skiing. So his parents came along with it. And he predicted, my father-in-law predicted, that I will marry his son. He predicted. And I hated him for it. [LAUGHS] I really hated him for it. And then I forgot about it completely. And when I was in Paris [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] and I was in charge of the factory, my father's factory, and his parents came to visit some-- a cousin of his-- my mother-in-law. And they didn't-- they were not kosher. So they were very annoyed till they came to us to visit us. Because we were kosher, they spent time with us. And his mother predicted that I am going to marry him. I said, now look, your husband predicted when I was a little girl. And you predicted now. And I am-- don't want to marry him. I don't want to marry him. And I got engaged to somebody else, one of our clients, an Algerian Jew. And he was very, very nice. I didn't love him, but he was a very nice fellow and, and very good client as well. And then one day, I went to Calais to buy some lace because I was not satisfied with my supplier. I was designing clothes. And I had a contract with the White House in Paris. So I wanted special lace. So I went and bought some lace. And the manufacturer was very impressed how I was buying, how I was choosing and I was buying. They invited me to lunch, home to, to his home and to meet his daughter, who was my age and didn't want to do anything. She said, let her see what you are doing. Please come. So I went to lunch there. Whilst we were at lunch there, they decided that they are going to London to King George V's funeral. And they invited me to come with them. So I say, very sorry, but I have got to ask permission of my parents. So he was shaking his head to me. And he says, she buys thousands of francs of lace and she doesn't have to ask anybody's permission, but to have a trip for nothing to England, she has to ask her parents' permission. I say, yes, I must ask them. And my mother said, yes, please go and get yourself a fur coat. Her cousin had a fur shop. Get yourself a fur coat for your wedding, because no Jewish girl has a trousseau without a fur coat. You have to have a fur coat. I say, OK, Mummy, I will do that. And I went to London. And the furrier was a relation of Ben's family as well. And she says I must go and visit his mother. His mother was ill. I say, I didn't come to London to visit a mother or-- of somebody I don't know, and especially a sick person. I came to have a wonderful time. And the manufacturer is waiting for me. She says, never mind waiting. I promised her that I will bring you over. And she will hear that I am-- that you are in London. She will be very, very annoyed. And you don't want to make a, a split in the family, do you? So go over, speak 10 minutes with her, and then you go where you want. So I went over. I didn't go over. She phoned up and within five minutes was a car with a chauffeur there, a magnificent car, the chauffeur in gray uniform. And he opened the door. And there was a fur carpet in it. And I thought to myself, am I going to Buckingham Palace, or what is it, yeah? And I was very impressed with that, you know? And when I came their beautiful house they had in [? Brondesbury, ?] and I visited her. I didn't take off my gloves. I didn't want to take off my hat because I wanted to be only 10 minutes with her. And a few minutes later, he came in. And I thought to myself, that's the man I'm going to get married-- not my fiancé, that man. And he sat down. And, and in 10 minutes, you know what-- how long I have stayed there? A week. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] And I told my mother, you tell Leo what I am-- that I want to break off our engagement. She says, you come home and do your dirty work yourself. I don't do it for you. [LAUGHS] That was-- that how I met him. And we were in correspondence. And that was it. 
INT: What was the relationship between Jews and non-Jews in Paris? MS: What was the--  INT: The relationship between Jews and non-Jews in Paris leading up to the war years? MS: It was-- it was perfectly all right until Hitler came. And when Hitler came, you dirty Jews, get the hell out of here. And that, we heard when my mother went to buy a loaf of bread. And the butcher was running after my mother with a big knife. You bloody Jews, get out of the Paris. And we decided to leave then. But we helped a lot of refugees in-- who came from Germany and Belgium, et cetera. We helped a lot. Did you read my book?  INT: Yes. MS: We helped them a lot.  INT: When Hitler came to power in '33 in Germany, what was discussed at home about that? MS: What was--  INT: What was discussed about Hitler coming to power in 1933? MS: I don't know.  INT: You don't remember? MS: No, I don't know. I only know that in 1933, I saw a salesman selling bananas, which was a rare fruit in Europe at that time. And I wanted a banana. And I went and bought a banana. And when he looked at me, he said, you bloody Jew, and grabbed the banana away be from me and didn't give me back my money. [LAUGHS] That was the position, I really can't imagine.  INT: When was this? Was this just before the war? MS: Just before the war, yes. 
INT: Did your father have any Germans working for him? MS: German, what?  INT: Did any German work for your father? MS: Yes, we had engineers working, because the machines were from Germany, from Chemnitz. And every time we bought machines, a engineer came with them. And he was staying about three months to put the machine together, see that everything would be all right, and also that it should work properly. And then he left. But the last engineer stayed with us. Did you read my book-- [GERMAN]. That was it.  INT: Why did he stay with you? MS: Because what he said in the book, that he was a head of the-- of the Gestapo in Paris.  INT: Did you know that at that time? MS: No-- until he told me afterwords, I didn't know that. He swore that he is going to fight the Germans next to my brother. And he also officially married a, a, a woman. And had-- she gave birth to his baby. But really and truly, he was married in Germany. And the wife came over. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] He was a very nasty chap, but at the same time, he helped me.  INT: So did he stay with your father until you left Paris [? for ?] good? MS: He was staying with us until, until we ran away. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] One day, he didn't come. And it was about couple of weeks before, something like that. But it was a lot of strikes. And our people were striking as well, because it was a [? fashion ?] [? of ?] striking the workmen. And he settled the strike. He said, what you striking for? You want some more pay? Said, no, we strike because everybody strikes. So that was it. 
INT: So you told me just now that when you were called dirty Jews and being harassed, harassed, that is when your father decided to leave Paris? MS: It wasn't in Paris. It was in Berlin. He asked me in Germany. It was not in Berlin.  INT: What happened-- what happened in Paris just before? MS: In Paris, my mother went to buy some bread. And they were running after her. The butchers were running after her. And that was a time we decided to leave.  INT: And which-- when was this, exactly when? MS: Pardon?  INT: When was this? MS: We left Paris on the 12th of June, 1940.  INT: 12th of June, 1940. MS: Yes, I think so.  INT: Hadn't the-- hadn't the Germans come into France around May? MS: No, they were-- apparently, that what we heard afterwards, that a lot of German soldiers were dressed in, in ordinary clothes. And they came as visitors or refugees. And when Hitler came in, Hitler came from the north, and we went through the south the same day. And they threw off the clothes, and they were in uniforms. They were Germans-- was a lot of them here.  INT: What did you take with you when you fled? MS: You what?  INT: When you-- when you went south from Paris, what did you take with you and what did-- MS: Just one set of clothes, each one of us, and mattresses and blankets, that what we took, and a-- and the boot full of food, like sardines and tinned food. And that what we had, because we knew that that will be very short. And that how we left. 
INT: Did the whole family go? MS: Yes.  INT: Did both your brothers come as well? MS: No, my older brother went-- was in the Maginot Line. He was a soldier, volunteer soldier. He was in the Maginot Line. And he went to his wife and daughter. And they were in the country on the-- on the-- in-- [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] what was the name of it? [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] I'll tell you in a minute-- Honfleur, in Honfleur. Her grandfather had a-- had a villa there. So they went there. And he went there, straight there, to the-- to his wife and baby. And we went on our own. But we traveled to Honfleur to see-- to take them along with you. But she wouldn't go.  INT: Your sister-in-law would not go? MS: No, she wouldn't go. Leah wouldn't go. She wouldn't leave France. And she didn't.  INT: Did anybody else come with you on that journey down south? MS: Yes, my grandmother, my parents and my grandmother, and also two workers. When we were leaving, they stopped us-- and actually three, the two workers-- the two-- no, two clients. They had a car they couldn't drive. And the husbands were in, in the-- the British Army and prisoners, actually. And they had a car. And they asked us to drive the car with them. So I went. And I-- no, Papa went and bought a car. And we filled up the two cars. And we drove in two cars. And when we came to the corner of the street, one of our workers was there with her baby. So we took her in as well. And she drove with us until we stopped one day. We were in the Exodus, you know, the television, the Exodus, bumper to bumper, and also people, thousands of people. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] And she, she came with us. And when the airplanes followed us, she protected the baby. And she suffocated it. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] And that was it. And she stayed with the baby. We made a grave for the baby, and she stayed there. 
INT: We'll take a tape break here. MS: Yeah.  INT: This is tape three. I'm interviewing Miriam Stanton. You just started describing your journey down south from Paris, how when this young woman tried to protect her baby she suffocated it. MS: Yeah.  INT: Which towns did you go through, and-- down south? Where did you stop off? MS: We went to Nantes. We actually wanted to go to Bordeaux, where, on-- where ships were leaving. We wanted to go to England. And but in driving-- in walking and driving, suddenly it was a lot of hooting. And the French army was driving the same way. So we realize that it is no good, that they are retreating. And we were lying in the grass. Well, everybody was lying in the grass on the side in the fields. That's when she suffocated the baby because she was protecting the baby, you know. And [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] we could not go any further. They told-- told us that Bordeaux is now for the army. You can't go to Bordeaux. So we had to go somewhere else. And we went to Nantes. Actually, what happened was we-- Papa and I-- went for a smoke. And we saw a-- [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] a farmer standing far away. So we went to him, and say hello. My father had enormous charm, chatted away. And you would have thought he is a farmer. He knew the conversation, was very good. And the farmer said to him, would you like to have some-- a hot drink? And Father says, oh, well, I have got to go back to my family. They're there. He says, I will give you something. They gave us a lot of bread and cheese and things like that. And he says, if you want a night, you can have the barn here. And that was luxury hotel, a barn. We didn't have to sleep in the fields. So my father went, collected my grandmother and the others. And we went to the barn. We spent there a-- a night. And we had water. We could wash, which was, after a few days walking like that, we had no opportunity to wash, you know. It was very, very unpleasant. But we were lucky. We were sitting in the car. The others were walking. So we were not complaining, you know. But the all of us, we went to the barn, and we spent there a night. And we were refreshed in the morning. And he came in the morning with some fresh baguettes, and-- and cheese, and fresh goat cheese, and it was very nice. 
INT: What was his name? Do you remember that? MS: I don't remember the name. No.  INT: Which other towns did you stay in? MS: From there, we went to Nantes. From Nantes we went-- we wanted to go to Bordeaux. But we could not go to Bordeaux, so we went from Nantes we went to Toulouse. And when we came to Toulouse it was so crowded that you couldn't get in. And when you were in you had nowhere to park. And you couldn't get out. So eventually we got out. And we went. We saw a name called Tarbes. We went to Tarbes. And when we arrived on this main square, there was a lot of coffee shops, you know-- the bistros-- the French bistros. And we were so exhausted that we sat down, and we asked for a hot drink, which we didn't have for a long time, a hot drink and a baguette. It was absolutely-- I was looking forward to an omelet. I was looking forward to it. And all of a sudden, I heard, from far away, from the other side of the terrace, calling us, my father's friends from Belgium. So my-- we had all to go over there and talk to them. And so I-- when I came back, my omelet was flat, and it wasn't as nice. But they were going to Nice. And they were trying to go to Nice. And they say not to stay in Toulouse, because there are no rooms at all. So we went to Tarbes. And when we came to Tarbes, the mayor was sitting-- standing in the main square with a doctor, of the teacher, they're all the high positions in the village. And they told us they have the school ready. We can go there. So when Mummy and I went in, it was so much dirt there, especially droppings of some mice, et cetera. So we didn't want to. So he says, we'll go to chateaux up there. And they have some rooms. So we went to the chateaux. And when we arrived there, the chatelaine was not there. The owner of the chateaux, she was not there. But the caretaker told us that she left a couple of rooms for refugees in case somebody comes, but no furniture. So we ask her for a table and chairs. But we brought our mattresses in. We slept on the mattresses. And we could use all the vegetables we wanted from the garden. So it was very nice. And my mother opened a couple of tins of sardines, and we had a lovely, hot meal-- the first hot meal for a long time. And we stayed there till we decided to go to Marseille. And my father was driving backwards and forwards to Toulouse. It was only two kilometers away from Toulouse, and-- from Tarbes, actually. And we decided to go to Marseille. But my mother was very ill. She was bleeding very badly. She needed an operation. And they didn't want to operate her in Paris, because they said, the Germans are any minute in Paris. They will throw you out or kill you. You better go as you are. So she was operated in Toulouse. And I went to Marseille to arrange the papers. And eventually they came down to Marseille. I was traveling backwards and forwards, and eventually taking them down to Marseille. And so from Marseille they went to Nice because there was more space in Nice than in Marseille. Because also the Algerian came over. And they settled in Marseille. So we went to Nice, and we rented an apartment in the Hotel Luxembourg. And I was traveling every week to Marseille to arrange papers. 
INT: Can I just take you back a minute until you were living in Nice? That journey from Paris down to-- via Tarbes, and Toulouse, to Marseille and then Nice, where-- was there a lot of bombing while people were walking? MS: Just that once.  INT: Just the once? MS: Just that once.  INT: Mm. MS: Yes. There was no bombing.  INT: Now when you were going up and down to Marseille, for-- what sort of papers were you-- were you trying to get? MS: I was trying to get the hell out of Europe, wherever it was possible. So I heard the Cuban consul was inundated-- inundated-- impossible to get-- get even near the consulate. And also, every day it was more expensive. They took a lot of money. But we didn't mind that. But not only the consul took the money, but all the others. The porter took the money, and the secretary took the money. Everyone wanted to have part of it. And when we came to the consulate, it was absolutely impossible. So I-- [PAUSES FOR 5 SECONDS] I was very depressed about it. First of all, we didn't have any passports, because we left the passports behind.  INT: And what passports were they. MS: They were Polish passports. So I went to the Polish consulate. And they gave us passports. But for me, here, I was short of one passport because everybody came without passports. And they were short. So he gave me a piece of paper with my photograph. And it was just as good as a passport, which I was very sorry I didn't keep, because to exchange for a passport in Jamaica, I sent it to Cuba, and they didn't send me back the paper. And I was very annoyed about it. Anyhow, to cut a long story short, the [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] the Cuban consulate was very busy. And there was a waiting time-- years. And so I went to-- I heard that the Shanghai people-- Chinese people-- you passed with visas as well. So I took my passports. And I went to the Chinese consulate. And they gave me a visa for all of us for $2,000. And when I went to have a transit visa to Portugal and to Spain, Portuguese these people told me the wonderful news that the last boat for Shanghai left the day before; or the same day I came. And he can't give me a transfer-- a pass for a visa. So I was very, very upset. You can imagine how upset I was. Eventually I heard that the Portuguese consulate was very lenient. So I went to the Portuguese consulate, and I said to him [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] the story about Shanghai. He says I can only give you a transit visa. That's all I can do. But you have got to have a visa further away. So I say, where do you want me to go? Wherever you can get a visa. I say, well, it's impossible. He says, well, let him give you a stamp for Shanghai. And you promise you sign that you will not-- you won't go. So he-- I say, if you phone him, if you know him, phone him, and tell him I am coming. And he did. And that's not in my book, because I don't want, if anybody is still alive, I don't want them to have trouble. And-- and he gave me a visa for Shanghai. And I had a transit visa for Portugal. And then I had to have the Spanish visa, which was a whole article in the Spanish-- did you read about it? 
INT: Yeah. MS: Yeah. And that was-- that was my destination-- Shanghai.  INT: Can I ask you, in the meanwhile, what was life like-- apart from going up and down, to try and get visas-- what was life like in Vichy France-- especially for the Jews? MS: Well, when I went to Vichy France, to Vichy in France, it was all the hotels were closed. I knew Vichy very well, because every year I used to go with my mother. And I went for the exit visas. And we were staying in a little private hotel opposite the bath where the water was. And [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] the owner was very thrilled to see me. But he invited me to lunch. And he says, you, I don't know whether you know that you are here. Very, very dangerous to be for you here. So tell me the truth why you're here. So I told him. He says, don't go to the police station, because you will never come out. They put you in the back room, into the lorry, and took you-- take you to Auschwitz. So I says, what am I to do now? So he says, give me the passports. And his son went. He knew a friend of his was working there. And he came back at lunchtime with all the passports, with the visa-- exit visa-- for me. And he conducted-- he took me in his car to a farm outside Vichy. And from there, the farmer took me to his-- to the nearest station, where I could take the train to Marseille. That was my experience in Vichy. It was absolutely dead. The Vichy I knew was so full of life and full of visitors, you know. But it was absolutely dead. 
INT: What I also want to know, Free France, which was the south, was life free in Free France, especially for the Jews. What was happening to the Jews in so-called 'Free France.' MS: In so-called Free France, it wasn't free. It was a great antisemitism there. It wasn't. Pétain was not a free person. He was very anti-Jewish. And it was-- we could buy food. We could rent a room, and-- in the hotel. Privately you couldn't rent a room.  INT: Why was that? MS: No.  INT: Was that-- MS: Because we are Jewish. We are refugees. And they had no space for refugees, you know. The biggest apartment, they had no space for refugees. So we had to go to Nice. And Nice was the same thing, but it was Free France. And you could feel that we are not wanted there. For instance, the Hotel Negresco, which is the biggest hotel, that was requisitioned by the German officers. And all the German officers came there for a holiday. You could not go into the Negresco. But I must tell you a story about Lyon. Did you know about Lyon? I went to Lyon, because in Paris, when I went back to Paris, we had a very good client.  INT: You say 'when I went back to Paris.' Was that before you went to Lyon? MS: Yeah, I went back.  INT: Yes. Could we-- could we talk about that first, if you don't mind? MS: Yeah. 
INT: First of all, before you went back to Paris, I want to know more about the situation in Free France. Could Jews work in Free France? MS: No. No. No, they didn't work.  INT: And were there any roundups? MS: Not that I know of. The only thing I know, which we saw ourselves, Hitler and Mussolini driving up and down the Promenade des Anglais. I saw them. We had all to go inside and draw the curtains. But my mother and I were very, very anxious to see them. And we lifted a little bit of curtain. We looked out. And we saw them driving into Italy. Mussolini came to invite Hitler to come down to Italy. And then, in the evening, he drove back. And we saw them both. But it was very, very, very difficult.  INT: You told me you went back to Paris. Why did you go back to Paris? MS: Because we were having tea in the Hotel Ruhl, which was the hotel, my mother and I. And we saw somebody coming in who came from Paris-- a friend of ours. And we waved to him. And he came and sat down with us. And I said to him, did you come for visas? He says, yes, we came. We are outside of the south of France, et cetera. And I told him that I'm going-- I'm going next-- next day to Paris to-- He say, why are you going to Paris? I say, I'm going to bring-- persuade Jack to come, with [? Leah ?] and the child. He says, don't bother. I say, what do you mean, 'Don't bother'? Why shouldn't I bother? He says, he has been taken last night by the Gestapo. 2 o'clock at night they knocked at the door. And he knew that that would be the Gestapo. So he jumped through the window onto a terrace down below. But he didn't realize that the whole house was surrounded. And he couldn't escape. And he was taken to the Gestapo. And that why I wanted to go and free him, to try to free him, to do something about it. 
INT: So how did you go back? MS: Oh, well, I had official papers. I went to the police station, and I asked them for papers for visa to go. You had to have a stamp to go to-- to Paris. And I could go back to Paris. A lot of people went back to Paris. And as I am a very spoiled brat, I was traveling sleeping car, first class. And I saw other friends of ours on the station. And they were traveling third class because-- not because they had no money. It's because they were traveling backwards and forwards. Their husbands were traveling backwards and forwards. Their family was here. And they say it is all-- all right. You don't have to put the third class-- when you come to the border, all the people who were in first class, they were arrested by the German. And the third class went through. So I had a look at the third class. I said, my god, I wouldn't like to travel here. If they take, let them take me. And let me have a comfortable night first. And I slept-- went to sleeping car. And I was very, very worried about it. And our friend came over and asked us-- asked me to come back to the third class, because all the people in the first class are being arrested. Well, when I came to Paris, the only car, wagon, which arrived in Paris was my wagon. The rest was all stationed on the border. And I never saw my friends again. They were-- the whole car was taken back right straight to Auschwitz. 
INT: Did anybody check your passport? Any Germans at the border? MS: Oh, yes. Oh, yes. Yes. At the-- on the border, well, I asked the attendant in the sleeping compartment how is it? Do I have to go down to the border, or they come up here? He says, no don't worry. They come up here. And I know that my father greased this path very much. And he asked me if I want coffee. He says, real coffee-- not substitute for coffee. So I had a cup of coffee. He brought a whole jug of coffee. And I thought to myself, that's something I-- he must have been really greased well by my father. He brought me to Jack. And I talked to him. And he gave me tips in conversation, you know, where I have. I caught some tips how to behave. And when he left, I had my identity card. It was like a harmonica that lengths 12 pages. The French card was just a booklet. And I was a foreigner. My father never wanted to take on the French-- French nationality. I don't know why, but he was very stubborn about it. So being a Polish subject, I had this big harmonica, this. So I tore off the two first two pages. That was pale green, and the other is plain yellow. And I put it in a plastic thing. You know? And with my photograph on one side, and the-- all the explanation-- all the date-- births of date, et cetera. And it worked. It worked. I gave that to them. And I prepared myself. Just like for the night, I put my long hair in curlers, et cetera, and take off my makeup. And when they knocked at the door, I was fast asleep. So I pretended I was fast asleep. And I gave him through the door just my card-- you know, the booklet. And I heard one German to the other saying, don't you see, it's all right now. She's OK. Let's go on. I'm tired. So he gave me back my papers. And I went through, right through. I think that he wants you. That's right. 
INT: We'll take a tape break here. Thank you.  INT: This is tape four. I'm interviewing Miriam Stanton. You just described your train journey to Paris. What happened upon arrival? Where did you go? MS: I went to my sister-in-law and-- [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] and I-- I put down my suitcase, and I went out right away. First of all, I heard from her what happened. And--  INT: What had happened? What had happened? MS: What had happened, at 2 o'clock in the morning was a knock at the door, a very hard knock. And Jack went through the window, jumped down to somebody's terrace, and went through there, run away. But they caught him, and he went to jail. And she does not-- what she's worried about, quite rightly, that he most probably will be sent to Auschwitz or to any detention camp. But uncle and aunt, they might find somebody to do it-- to do something about it. So the next day I went to see-- I heard that a cousin of mine-- of my mother's, rather, who was like a brother to me, you know, like an older brother to me, that he was in Paris, as well. He was living in Cannes by now. During the war he had an apartment in Cannes with his wife and little boy. It was in Cannes. So I went to him and-- and I told him what I'm going to do anyhow. I went to the Gestapo building. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] And I did not know what to do. It was a queue outside. And I went through the queue. And when my turn came, I went in. And I was worried out of my life. Where am I going to go? It was a long corridor there. Which door shall I knock? And if I knock the door, what am I saying? What I'm going to say? All of a sudden behind me when I was halfway up, behind me I heard a familiar voice giving orders in German. When I turned around, I nearly had a heart attack. It was the engineer from our factory, Kurt-- I don't remember his second name-- [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] who pleaded with us to stay behind because he got married, and his girlfriend has a baby, et cetera, et cetera. And when I turned around and went over he says, Miss Sanzer, why are you here? You are looking-- you are trying to do something for Jack. He says, meet me at the Cafe de la [? Mort. ?] It is in the Grand Boulevard. And I'll see you after 5 o'clock. Get out of here. So when I went out, I couldn't believe what I have seen. And I was walking the streets in-- in a trauma. And I crossed the road in a trauma, and a policeman grabbed me just before a big lorry or bus was-- nearly killed me because I was in such a state. That he who pleaded with us that he is going to fight with us against his own brother, he is there like a general. So I walked, and walked, and walked, and-- until I got very tired. And I sat down on a cafe on a terrace. And I asked for a coffee. And the-- the-- the waiter asked me to-- you need not a coffee, you need a brandy to pick you up. I said, I don't drink brandy. Just give me a coffee. And all of a sudden I looked at the watch, it was 5 o'clock. Because I walked such a long way and I asked him, where am I? He says, in the [FRENCH]. My God, I grabbed it-- I put a few francs down for the coffee, and I grabbed a taxi. And I went to the [FRENCH]. It was the cafe [FRENCH]. And I was sitting there a few minutes and he came, in not a uniform, in ordinary clothes. And he says, what did you have? A coffee. He says, we can't talk here, let's go. So he took me in his car. And I was sure the he's going to take me straight to the police station. And he took me to another cafe in the [FRENCH]. And we sat there. And he says, you came to save Jack, don't you? I said, yes. He says, don't worry, I'll look after him. He's not going to be sent away, but I need 50,000 francs. And it was a hell of a lot of money-- not for me. 
INT: Why did he need 50,000 francs? MS: To bribe the others. This is not for me, I must bribe the others. So I said, can I meet you tomorrow? He says, but promise me one thing, you won't go home. Don't go home. Your home is surveyed, so just don't go home. So I went to my cousin [NON-ENGLISH]. He had that-- he had the workshop in-- on the Grand Boulevards. And there was [? Vera, ?] the older friend of his. And I was in a terrible state. He says, first of all, come on. Did you eat something today? I say, eat? What do I eat for? He says you have to eat something because you look to me that you are just completely exhausted. Come on, we are going to eat now. So we went to eat across the road. And then I realized how my-- that I haven't eaten all day long. And I was very thirsty. And I drank and whole jug of water. And I told him what happened. So [? Vera ?] said to first of all, don't go home. Stay with me overnight, and we'll see what we can do. So I say, first of all, I must try to get 50,000 francs. So I went to one of our customers, who was an Algerian, non-Jewish people but very wonderful, [NON-ENGLISH], very, very wonderful. And they were very friendly with us. And when I walked in, they couldn't believe their eyes that I am here. Their uncle, who had the business, was a very wealthy unmarried man, and he employed two nephews. And one nephew wanted to marry me, but I wouldn't dream of it. But anyhow. So I say, is your uncle here? So he says, yes, he's here. Wait a minute, I'm going to give him a surprise. I said, well, don't give him a heart attack, but give him just a surprise. And we went into the uncle, and he was so delighted to see me. And I told him what it is. He says, have you got the money? I say, no, I haven't got the money. He says, here is the money. And he went to the safe and gave me the money. And then I decided-- I said to him, look, I have no opportunity to bring back some money. He says, don't worry about it. I say, I do worry about it. What I want you to do, here are the keys of my factory-- of our factory. Take all the goods-- everything you want, plus the machines. He says, what do you mean, plus the machines? I say, take over the whole factory and start working in it. The engineers-- so I told him what Kurt was. He was at the Gestapo. So he says, I have my own engineers, and they will be working for you to come back. And he took over the factory, and he gave me the money. As I went back to my cousin and I said, I don't need your money. I told him what happened. We had that wonderful dinner in a restaurant. And I slept with that lady, with his-- [? Vera ?] was her name. I don't remember her family name, Vera. And she-- she had a apartment, and I slept with her. At the next day, we all went down to the south of France back-- back. Whilst I was there, a lady came in who was the sister of my aunt. They-- they emigrated to Grenoble. And she came back to save something from the German. And she wanted to ask him advice what to do, my cousin. 
INT: What was your cousin's name? Sorry. MS: [? Gerty ?] was her name.  INT: And surname? MS: My cousin's name, [? Sim. ?]  INT: Oh, yes, you said. MS: [? Sim ?] [? Brightboat. ?]  INT: And who-- and the lady who was your aunt's sister, what was her name? MS: That's right, that's right.  INT: What was her name? MS: [? Gerty-- ?] I don't remember her name. Isn't it in the book, her name? I don't remember. She was my aunt's sister, and she was not very well. And she was, I would say, also a little bit-- the mind wasn't 100%. But she had a husband and a lovely boy, a very nice boy. And she came back to also to try to sell her factory. They had some trouser factory or something like that. And she was such a person that she knew that the Germans won't bother with her. So we went together, and we had supper, and-- now what was I telling you?  INT: You were at-- actually leading up to the day that you went back to southern France to the free zone. MS: Anyhow, I went back to [? Perostatin, ?] to the-- to the manufacturer and gave him the keys. And then I went back to my cousin [? Sim, ?] and she invited me to stay with her overnight. And the next day I went to my sister-in-law and told her what I have done, that I went to the Gestapo, and I-- I met Kurt. And she said that she heard that my brother is going to be freed. So he greased their hands, you know, right away. So I had to go because I could not stay longer. Kurt told me, don't stay one night here. They are looking for you-- you and your father. So just keep away. But I must say that the manufacturer at the [? Perostatin ?] the boss of [? Perostatin-- ?] I forgot his name now-- Monsieur [FRENCH], Monsieur [FRENCH]. Monsieur [FRENCH] invited me to stay in the chateau. But I preferred to go down to south of France to be with my mother and my father, you know? I must have felt that I miss them, that I won't have my mother for a long time, because I knew that she was very not well at all, you know? And I wanted to be with them. So I went down, but she had no papers. So she said, look, if you don't take me, come with me. I go straight to the Eiffel Tower, I throw myself down. 
INT: This was [? Gerty? ?] MS: Pardon?  INT: This was [? Gerty ?] who said that to you? MS: [? Gerty. ?]  INT: [? Gerty. ?] MS: Yeah. [? Gerty ?] went to the Eiffel Tower. She's going to the Eiffel Tower if I don't take her with me. So [? Sim ?] said, don't take her with you, she won't go. I say, I know she's mad enough that she will do it. I know she's very mad, but she will do it. And I will have my conscience all my life. And she has a son, a teenage son. So just if you don't want to come with us, we are going to smuggle ourselves across. And he went with us. And we went to a farmhouse.  INT: Where? MS: Because we had to leave Paris.  INT: No, where was the farmhouse? MS: The farmhouse was-- we went to Chartres. From Chartres we took a car. In Chartres she knew some people, in Chartres. And they took-- they told us to stay in Chartres for overnight because first thing in the morning the milk man is coming from the farm and he is bringing urns of milk. And he knows somebody from-- who works at the border. And you will be able to get across.  INT: Were you at that time-- sorry to interrupt you, but you were in France-- in Paris, which was occupied by the Germans. Were-- MS: Just speak a little bit louder. 
INT: You were in-- in the part of France which was occupied by the Germans. Were you, as a Jewess, allowed to use public transport? MS: Yes. Yes.  INT: This was-- when were-- which year are we in now? MS: 1940.  INT: This was still 1940? MS: Yeah, yeah.  INT: OK. MS: We were allowed to take the public transport because they had only part of Paris-- a part of France occupied. The whole of France was not occupied. We were in Free France, remember that.  INT: Yeah, but when you were in Paris you were also allowed to? MS: Yes, yes.  INT: So what happened at-- can we go forward again, what happened at the farm? MS: At the farm-- now, at the farm the milkman came. And he took us-- we were hiding behind the churns. And when we came into the lorry, there were a couple there, as well, behind the churns. And he was very well known. And we went across to the border. And when we came to the border, he said to us, the farmhouse is there. Now, if you go to the farmhouse, one door is occupied France, other door is Free France. So you go into one door and come out the other door. But in the meantime, it was-- he didn't know that the German soldiers were there. And when we came we went over the fields. All of a sudden I heard, halt. Halt. And two soldiers were on horses. And we had to stop. Otherwise they would have shoot us. I showed them I have regular papers. Actually, let me tell you something. I was worst off with actually papers. But they didn't know. They were two innocent soldiers. When they show a stamp from the police, I was very lucky with that. Absolutely luck-- no cleverness, just luck. He saw the police stamp, so he-- it's all right. He didn't read because he couldn't read French. He was only speaking German. And I understand German very well. I went to school in Germany, but I didn't tell them. So I knew what they were talking about. And one said to another, let's go, because they have-- they have official papers, and I am tired, and-- [BACKGROUND NOISE] et cetera. You know. So [PAUSES FOR 6 SECONDS] we went-- we passed them by. They let us go. But in the meantime, I saw that Gerty's missing. So I had to go back to find Gerty. And she was lying fainted in the grass in-- in the high corn. I took her-- where I took the strength for, I don't know. And I put her over my shoulder. And it was-- the field was very wet. And because of the-- because it was raining, and it was very wet. And my feet were going more and more into the mud, especially with a heavy weight. She was very thin and very light, but at the same time was a heavy weight for me. And when the soldiers came again to us, so I said, at least help me to pick her up. I had-- I had insulted him. He says, how dare you are allowing me to-- to carry her? Pick her up for me and put her on the shoulder. And she weighed twice the size with-- with the mud on her. And I-- but my cousin went straight up because we were told before hand, don't hold hands, and don't wait for each other. Just walk. And he walked to the light where they showed him the light that is Free France. And he walked not realizing that I am not behind him. And all of a sudden he realized that I'm not there. And people said, come on [? Sim, ?] don't wait. Don't wait. Don't wait. Well, eventually I came. And when I came, and he took her off my shoulder, I fainted from anxiety. Anxiety, you know? And they took me to a hotel. And I laid down in the mud-- muddy things, whatever I had and on the bed. And the chambermaid came in, and she prepared a bath for me and cleaned my clothes and everything. And from there on we had an easy journey to south of France. 
INT: Which town was this, where you came across into Free France? MS: In my book it is-- I forgot the name. Shall I look it up?  INT: No, it doesn't matter. MS: I forgot the name. It was a little village.  INT: Do you remember at all near which-- which area it was? MS: Yes, near the border. Near the border of Free France. And I can tell you something. That was sheer luck. And when I phoned my mother she fainted when I told her what it is. [LAUGHS] So mother and daughter fainted both on the telephone. And then from there, I-- the farmer took us to the station. She went to Grenoble, to her husband and child. And we continued our journey in-- on the train to Nice, to Marseille. And-- and actually, my parents were in Marseille already to-- to receive us. It was a very, very traumatic journey, that journey. But I didn't go back again.  INT: When was your brother released? MS: A day after that.  INT: And where did-- MS: The next day he phoned.  INT: And where did-- and where did he go? MS: To home to his own wife.  INT: Why didn't he leave Paris? MS: He left Paris shortly afterwards because I brought Argentinian paper for him. Because here we bribed the Argentinian that we-- he had papers. And he could leave.  INT: So did he come to the south? MS: He came to the south, yes. And he came with my family. But it took quite a while because he tried to persuade his wife to come and have the baby, Danielle-- she's a grandmother today. And last week she was here. And [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] she wouldn't. She wouldn't go. 
INT: Why wouldn't she go, your sister-in-law? MS: She didn't want to leave her parents and her sisters-- two sisters and her parents. She wouldn't leave them. And she is not frightened, and she is just-- God knows-- God-- God knows why. And he-- came by himself. And he came also with my parents down to-- to Portugal. And then he went to Brazil and finished his life in Brazil. Well, he came back after the war, but he couldn't get on with his wife. Was always bickering with her, and-- not-- he didn't, but she bickered all the time. It was just impossible to be there. When I went to visit them, I couldn't stand it. So he left her.  INT: To take you back a little bit even before your trip to Paris, as you know, I did read your book. You were talking about an incident at the Spanish-- with the Spanish consul. MS: Yeah.  INT: What can you tell me about that? MS: Well, Spanish consul was a fantastic incident. It was a long queue. People were waiting [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] weeks for him to open. And if he opened, he-- two or three visas he gave, and the rest was closed. But anyhow, when I came was two rows all around the-- the-- not just the building, but you know, the whole-- [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] how shall I say? The whole--  INT: Block? MS: Blocks, block from one street to another, all around it. And it was two-- I was in the second row. By the time in a few days-- a few days later was five rows. And people in wheelchairs, and people in-- in-- brought mattresses. They did not leave the place. Well, I had befriended the-- in the boulangerie-- baker-- across the road. And she took me in the back room and gave me a cup of coffee, et cetera. And one day I came there, and she-- when I left the queue-- we always came back to the same queue. For the weekend I left to go to Nice, and I came back to the same spot. And I brought some presents for all the people who looked after my spot, you know. And when I went in, her husband was in the back. And he showed me to come. I mean, he took me to come. So when I went into the back to have a cup of coffee, he told me [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] here is delivered-- he has delivered bread there to the consulate. They won't open today anymore. In fact, they won't open the week. I overheard them, that they won't open the week. 
INT: We take a tape break here.  INT: This is tape five. I'm interviewing Miriam Stanton. You were just describing that the Spanish consulate only opened for a few visas a day, and was now going to be closed for the next two weeks, I believe. So what happened then, when you found that out? MS: Well, when I found that out, I was very depressed. And I didn't want to go back to tell them, because I knew that it would be a revolution there, because there were people in wheelchairs. This baby, especially-- a lady was highly pregnant, and there's a baby in her arms. And it was pathetic. It was raining, and it was cold, even if it wasn't a cold climate. But it was wet, and people were tired. And the pregnant woman had a little boy of seven. And he was running backwards and forwards to bring stuff. And I told her to go across to the bakery-- Maria is her name-- to Maria. She will warm up the bottle for her. She says, she can't because she might lose her spot. And her husband is in the-- in-- in the defense. And she might-- she-- also, apparently the police is looking for her to intern her, and the-- in the resistance. So I took the bottle. And I went across to warm it up. And the baker who it was delivering the bread, to the-- to the Spanish consulate, he winked me to come in. So when I came in, he says he delivered bread there, and he is delivering now again. But they won't open this week anymore. The whole week will be closed. So I warmed up the bottle, and I gave it to her. But I didn't tell anybody anything. I went to the post office, and I phoned my father. I was determined to open that door. I was determined. And I said to him, bring me my fur coat. Bring me that big hat. And I want some diamond brooches. I think I have that picture somewhere-- some diamond brooches. And I want some rings from my mother. And my father said, I come with the first train tomorrow morning. OK. He came. And I stayed in the estate in the hotel [FRENCH]. And I changed there. And I took a taxi. And I went straight to the consulate, with-- I had 11 passports. I had from-- ours-- ours was five. And then [? Sim ?] was three. And another-- my uncle and aunt, they were four. So I had 11 passports. I had them in my handbag. And I dressed myself up, with two clips in the hat-- two diamond clips in my big hat, with a fur coat, rings on my hands. And I went, took a taxi. And I took two 50 pound notes, took a 50 francs note. And I went to the consulate. And I gave-- And I said to the taxi driver, will you call the-- the doorman for me? Because I was frightened that the people who will-- in the queue will recognize me. So I was frightened. So he went and called the-- called the doorman. He looked like Franco. I have never seen such a image. You would have swore that he is a double Franco. And he came out. And I said, could you help me out of the car, please? I have an appointment with the consul. He says, well, I haven't heard about it. And he says, don't be rude to me, because I am going to report you to the consul. And I gave 50 pound note to the chauffeur. And when he gave me the hand for 50 pair of-- francs stuck in his hand, you know. And he took me in. I was inside, in waiting room. I say, my god, now I'm inside. What am I going to do now? So the consul, that a girl came. And she asked me what it is. I said, I have an appointment with a Monsieur le Consul. And so she, just a minute. Sit down. And Monsieur le Consul came. He looks at me. She says, Madame, come in. I came in. He says, I don't remember having had an appointment with you. I say, if you come for a visa, you have had it. I say, I didn't say that you have-- I didn't say it to you. I know you haven't had an appointment with me. But the only way to come in is to say I have an appointment with you. And I don't want one visa. I want 11 visas. I say-- he says, look if I don't arrest you, it's because I admire your pluck and your-- the courage you have got to come. I say, just a minute. Come with me. Have a look. Have you seen that queue? He says, yes. I haven't got the right to give them a visa. I-- I am-- I-- I will lose my job if I give them the visas. I am forbidden completely to use the visas. 
INT: By whom? MS: By his government. So I said, so you protect your job, and you want all those people to die in concentration camp? Can you have that on your conscience? Have you got a family? Imagine your family would be in that queue. How dare you to protect them, your government. The Portuguese consul is giving visas freely. Stand in the street, he doesn't give a damn about the-- the government. You can have any amount of passports-- a Portuguese visa. Why can't you do that? I say, come and have a look. There's a woman highly pregnant. There's a baby in her arms. She hasn't got a-- a-- a shirt even-- a nappy even to change the baby. She is having it in paper. Have you got a conscience to that? Can you do that? So he looked at me. He says, how many passports, he said. It's 11 passports. He said, I can't do 11 passports. I say, you have to have a few hundred here. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] You better see to that. Because they are-- if the police comes, they are going straight to Auschwitz. And how can your conscience allow it, if you can save all those people? How can you allow it? I just don't understand it. I just don't understand how a human being can do that. And do you know what? He says, give me your passport. I says they're on the desk. He says 11 passports. Did you collect them down there? I said, no, that's my family-- my parents, my brothers, my cousins-- my family. I gave him the 11 passports. Oh, that ring I put on the table. And he refused to have that ring. Quite a few refuse, because the pearl-- apparently a pearl is unlucky. I was very lucky with that pearl. And and he gave me the 11 passports. He says, come tomorrow morning. And I came with my father. And my father had that enormous charm-- enormous charm. I mean, invited him. He gave me the passports back with all stamps. And there was no queue. I say, what did you do with the queue. They are in the police station? They are on the way to Auschwitz? He says, no, they are on the way to the-- to Vichy. You better go to Vichy and help them because they are-- we worked the whole night to empty the queue. They all have visas-- transit visas-- to go to Spain and to go to Portugal. 
INT: Where was this consulate? In Marseille? MS: Pardon?  INT: This consulate-- the Spanish consul was in which town? MS: In Marseille.  INT: Marseille. MS: In Marseille. In Toulouse they didn't have a Spanish consul. They didn't have a Polish consul. But maybe a Spanish consul. But I didn't have any passports. So the Polish passports were given to me in-- in Marseille. And in Marseille was the Spanish consulate. And to get a Portuguese visa was very easy. You just go, and you get it, and that's all to it because the consul was marvelous. He was absolutely wonderful. And I tell you something. The Portuguese people were absolutely wonderful. In the street they stopped you, [NON-ENGLISH]. Are you a refugee? I say, yes. Here is my card. If you need anything, don't hesitate.  INT: Can I just take you back? You've now got-- you're in Marseille with your father. You've got 11 visas in your passport. Now what happened? MS: We went back to Nice.  INT: Mm-hmm. MS: But my parents would not go.  INT: Why not? MS: Because [? Leah ?] would not leave Paris, and Jack would not come without [? Leah ?] and the baby. And my mother said, we have to wait. I say, I'm not going to wait anymore. I waited a couple of weeks, and I spoke to him, to Jack. And he says, Miriam, how can I leave my wife and the baby? [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] I say, Mother, I'm going to Portugal because in case the whole of France is going to be occupied, [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] then we were all trapped. Somebody must be outside to be able to get you out. Just like I'm doing here, I will do in Portugal. Please Mother, come with us. I want you. [? Leah ?] doesn't want us. My mother said, I haven't got the heart. My father said I haven't got the heart too. I wait another week or so. How can I leave Jack behind? How can I leave Jack behind. So I said, right, I'm going-- 
INT: What date are we now? MS: Pardon?  INT: When was this? MS: Must have been 1940, '41, something like that-- '40. It was when France was half-occupied. Wait a minute.  INT: France was occupied-- France became totally occupied by Germany in 1942-- November 1942. MS: Yeah, about-- in 1940-- '41, because I was a year in Portugal.  INT: Ah, now this is before you went to-- right. So this was '40-- 1941 you went to-- MS: '40. No, I think it was '40.  INT: '40. MS: And then-- so I had all the visas then for Spain and Portugal. No, I had to go to Vichy for exit visas. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] And I went to Vichy. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] And when I came to Vichy-- you want to stop me?  INT: No, I just wanted to ask you, to get to Vichy for exit visas, is this what you talk-- talked to me about previously, where you stayed with the hotel owner? And he told you not to go? MS: Yeah, that was in Vichy.  INT: And he got the visas for you-- or somebody did. MS: Yeah.  INT: That was then, wasn't it? MS: Yeah.  INT: Right. So what happened once-- so who got the visas for you? MS: Where? In the Vichy?  INT: In-- yes. MS: His son. His son got the visas for me. And the hotel owner drove me to a farm. And from the farm-- he left me in the farm. And from the farm, the farmer took me to the nearest station. And I took the train from Paris. I don't remember the name of the station. I have it in my book. I don't remember now. And took me to the station. And from the station I went to-- to Nice, via Marseille. And in Marseille, I met my parents. My parents came to me. 
INT: What has happened, in the meanwhile, in Vichy? This hotel was in Vichy, where you were staying. Had anybody come looking for you in Vichy? MS: The next day--  INT: What happened? MS: --after I left it was raided. And they asked, who is the suitcase for? So he says, a client came yesterday, and she disappeared. She went out. She never came back. So they confiscated my things-- my overnight bag.  INT: Why did you leave your bag behind? MS: Because I couldn't go back to the-- there. I couldn't go back. You see? The owner asked me-- now from here, I take you covered up in my car. You cannot go back. Is there anything of value there? I say, no. Just a change of clothes, et cetera. He says, leave it there. Leave it there. [INAUDIBLE] of it. And come with me. And he covered me up. I was lying in the back of the car on the floor. He covered me up with parcels and suitcases-- I don't know what it was on me-- until we came to the farm. And the farmer took me-- they took me out from the car-- farmer's car, and right away he took me down to the station.  INT: So now you are back in Nice with 11 visas-- 11 exit visas. When did you go towards Portugal? MS: I didn't go right away. In the meantime, I had to go to Lyon.  INT: Why? MS: Because the owner wanted to buy the-- all-- all the-- the goods we had. 
INT: Which owner? Of the factory? MS: No, I am mixing it up. I-- I sold-- when I was in Paris, I sold the goods which we had to our customer, who helped me to get out. And he informed us that-- to my father. He warned my father that he's taking the cases out. So my father said to him, take also the machines out. Take the lot out. Don't leave it here. And he says, now, haven't you got a contract for more, for the future deliveries? And my father says, yes, I have. But whether they will deliver, I don't know. He says, you send Miriam there. They will deliver it to me. So I went there. I went to Lyon. Lyon was a free town-- a free city. And when I walked into the hotel in the evening, and I went down to the evening meal. And when I came to the hotel in the-- to the restaurant, I nearly had a heart attack. It was covered with German officers, absolutely covered with German officers. So the waiter gave me a little table in a corner. And now a young girl sitting alone, one of the soldiers came, and knocked his heels, saluted me. Can you join me? I says, with pleasure, but for the moment you must wait till my husband comes. If-- you must ask his permission, and then we can join you, or you can join us. Well, he says, right, we wait for your husband. Salut. And I asked the waiter to call me to the telephone. I went up to the telephone. And I went up to the room, packed my suitcase, ordered a taxi, went straight to the station. And that was about 10 o'clock in the evening. The train was about midnight to 1 o'clock. So I had to sit on the station for two hours. So I decided I'm going in to the-- to the station master's office to phone my parents to tell them to be in Marseille because the train goes to Marseille. And I phoned to Nice, and my brother-- my youngest brother-- answered. And he said that the parents are in Marseille. So I say, phone them to Marseille and tell them that I am taking the night train, and I will be tomorrow morning 7:00 or 8 o'clock in the morning in Marseille, to pick me up from the station. So when the station officer heard it, he says, would you like a cup of coffee? I said, I would love a cup of coffee. So he ordered coffee and sat down. And he says, now tell me the truth. Why are you here? [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] So I had to be very quick.
And I told him I had an aunt, that I looked after her. And she died. And I didn't want to feel-- we had the funeral today, and I didn't want to be in her flat. So I phoned my brother to-- that I'm going to Marseille to meet my parents. Well, he was very sorry for me. So he said, stay here till the train comes. Don't sit by yourself on the-- on the-- on this-- at the station, in the empty station. So I was very delighted, because to a girl on her own, the Gestapo will come, or the policemen will come, [FRENCH] s'il vous plait, and you'll have to prepare everything. So I was with him. And he says, I will give you-- I try and get you a sleeping car-- sleeping department-- compartment. I said, I would be very grateful. When he came back, he says unfortunately-- unfortunately, all the sleeping compartments are taken from London-- from Paris. So it's none left. But we are putting on new wagons. And I ordered you first class, a corner by the window. And you will be able to sit there. I reserved it for you. [SIGHS] So I was very happy with him that, well, I was sitting there. In booth was a evening paper. And I started reading the evening paper. A lady was sitting across from me-- nobody else. And eventually, by the time the train left, the compartment was full. Another couple was sitting by the door. And in between-- first class is only three seats. At the last moment two soldiers came in. Oh, my god. So I saw two soldiers came. But I saw they had funny uniforms. And I realized the hat is not a French hat. It's a Polish hat. So I read the paper. And eventually I understood what they were talking because I speak Polish, and I understand Polish. And they were having an auction, [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] the fellow next to me, and-- across from him, and so it was a fellow next to me. How much would you give her to have a nice time with her? He says, 20 francs. He say, I will give her 30 francs. And I have her first. So it was an auction going on there. And I was keeping my papers up and up and up. And I was saying, my god, what am I hearing here? Eventually we came to a stop. And the couple left. And then the next stop, the lady left. And I was alone with those two soldiers. I didn't tell him I understand Polish. But the-- a soldier next to me said, oh, said, over there. And told me to lie down. I said, not on your Nellie, I'm not going to lie down. And I was sitting and talking to them. I had a dictionary. I gave him a dictionary. And I spoke only French, you know. And I showed him. I kept him busy till we came to Marseille, 7 o'clock in the morning. I was absolutely exhausted. And he said to me in French-- very bad French-- you are a very nice girl. So I answered him in Polish, but you are a nasty bastard. And I went to the window. And I called my mother in Polish. So he said, where the hell are you from? I say, I am from Warsaw. And they disappeared. They disappeared. But that's not the end of it. A few weeks later-- two weeks later-- a friend of ours had told me that he invited me to supper in the Ruhl Hotel. He invited a couple of soldiers-- friends of his who are going to England, to spend a weekend in Nice. So he would like me and his two cousins-- girlfriend cousins as well-- to spend a nice evening, six of us. So I said, yes, with pleasure. And when we were meeting at the Ruhl Hotel, through the door, through the round door, you know, the turning door, came those two soldiers. And when they saw me, they continued, and they ran off. [LAUGHING] So he was running after them. I say, don't run. I will bring them back. And they came back. And they apologized to me for what they did. They didn't discussed it. And-- and that was the end. And I invited them to come to Nice as well. Oh they were-- we were quite good friends. They were going to England. 
INT: So when was it decided, or when did you decide, actually-- when did you decide to go to Spain? MS: To?  INT: To Spain and then to Portugal? MS: Well, after two weeks, when I saw that my brother is-- has no intention of coming without his wife, I said, Mommy, unless I go, we will be all trapped here. Please come with us. Come with me. So my father says, no. I cannot-- haven't got the heart to leave Jack behind and [? Danielle. ?]  INT: We take a tape break here. MS: Yeah.  INT: This is tape six. I'm interviewing Miriam Stanton. MS: Speak a bit louder.  INT: You were just saying your parents wanted to stay to wait for your brother. You decided you wanted to go. So when did you go, and where did you go to? MS: I went to Portugal--  INT: How did you-- MS: --via Spain.  INT: Right. Could you describe the journey from Nice to Spain? MS: Yeah. From Nice to Spain, from Nice, my parents took me to the station. And so did my cousin [? Sim ?] take me to the station. And he gave me as a farewell present a bottle of perfume from [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] never mind-- a bottle of perfume. I-- it will come back to me. And I put it away. Instead of flowers, he gave me the bottle of perfume. And I went to the station. And I had to say goodbye to my parents. It was absolutely terrible. They tore my heart to pieces. I didn't know if I will ever see them again, because that was a time that really and truly, people, if they meet again, they were very lucky. And I-- it was in the apartment was Maria, a lady opposite me. 
INT: On the train? MS: In the train. And she-- no, I made a mistake there. In the train we came to the Spanish border. And when we came off the train, at the station there was one in uniform taking all the passports away to be stamped. And I was sick in my pit of my stomach to give away the passports. It was the most precious things I had. But everybody gave them. So I-- they told us to wait in the restaurant. And after a quarter of an hour, a half an hour, we all got coffee and et cetera. And they came out with the passport. They called out and gave them the passport. And I was sitting there. And nobody called my name out. So I was sure that the Germans have reported me. So I disappeared. So I went in to the office. I say, I am Miriam Sandzer. You haven't called my passport out. He says, oh, yes. I wanted to come to see you. Just wait a minute. And I took out, from underneath the counter, a big black book, like that. And he started to count the-- I look-- Sandzer, Sandzer, Sandzer. The name beats something in my mind. Not in that book, so he put it away, and brought another book. Sandzer, Sandzer, Sandzer, Sandzer, Sandzer is not in that book. Just wait a minute. He went to the office. You can imagine my heart. I had a bunch of flowers. And I buried my face in the flowers. I said, my god, don't tell me that I'm being caught now. Because what I was thinking, that in Vichy, when they requisitioned my suitcase, they knew that I am somewhere leaving because I went for the exit visa. So I was sitting there with my heart breaking. And then he couldn't find it. And he says, just wait a minute, and he went into the office, and came back. He says, where are you staying in Barcelona? I said, I don't know. Where do you suggest I should stay? He says, haven't you booked anything? I said, no. I haven't. So where did you intend to stay? So I say, I didn't intend to stay anywhere especially. But whichever is the nearest one. He says, so how about a dinner tonight? Would you like to come at dinner? Spend the evening with me? [EXHALING] I say, only the evening. You can have the whole evening. Let me go, now, because if you don't let me go the train will leave, and then we won't have an evening together. So he says, you're quite right. And he phoned up right away to the porter to wait, that he's bringing another person-- passengers. And he put me in the first class, where I had second class. Put me in the first class. And I-- when I left-- arrived in Barcelona, I went straight to the cashiers, bought myself a ticket to Madrid. And they had an extra ticket-- extra trip, put on the first train for the next train to put on for the soldiers who run away, to take them to Madrid because the army was there. And also it was 1st of April, and Franco's day-- birthday of the day of Franco taking over Spain. So that I heard only from Maria, who was sitting opposite me. And he says, where have you booked? Because you won't have any space in any hotels, because Barcelona. I say, I haven't booked anywhere. She says, stay with me. I said with pleasure. But I would like to go to Portugal. She says, stay for the parade. It's beautiful, the parade. And she took me to the parade. And she pushed me forwards. And I was sitting opposite Franco. And he was standing with his arm up. And all the soldiers passed by. And I thought to myself, here is Franco. What am I doing here? How can I get out-- the hell out of here? So I went back, and I couldn't find Maria. And I didn't know where she had my suitcase, because-- and I thought to myself, to hell with the suitcase. I'm going straight to the station. And all of a sudden I saw Maria, and I said, I'm going right now. I can't stay in that here. So she says, you-- I'll take you to the station. And she took me to the station. I don't remember how it was. She took me to the station. I went to-- to-- I went straight back to Portugal immediately. I couldn't stand Franco standing there. I couldn't bear [INAUDIBLE] that. To me it was like Hitler standing there, you know. So I went back straight to the station, and I went to the-- to Marseille. 
INT: To Marseilles? MS: No, to Portugal. To Portugal.  INT: Where in Portugal? MS: Yeah. [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] When you came to the border, and you crossed, came out of the station, it was like night and day. It was a clean, beautiful station, and all with the tiles-- all tiles. It was really beautiful. And I went straight to Lisbon with the next train. And when I came to Lisbon, it's, as snob as I am, I went to the best hotel. And [NON-ENGLISH]. And who I met there? Some friends of my father-- [? Schumanns ?] as well. They begged me-- they were leaving for Brazil. They can arrange a paper for me for Brazil. And I didn't want to go to Brazil, because I wanted to go to England. And also, I wanted to bring my parents out first. They says, don't worry. From Brazil you send them the visas. I say, I couldn't go to Brazil and leaving my parents behind. I'm sorry. So they, after a few days, they went to Brazil. And I stayed there. And the [? Schumanns ?] gave me some money, but I didn't want to accept the money, because I couldn't repay them the money. [BACKGROUND NOISE] But they decided--  INT: It's OK. It's OK. MS: No. They decided to-- to go, and not to force me. But they were very, very upset that I didn't go with them. And I stayed there in Portugal. And I left the hotel and rented myself a room on the seventh floor, and no lift, but the right position. And it-- and I told the lady that I am very, very hungry for breakfast. Give me three rolls, not two rolls. So I had one roll for breakfast, one for lunch, and one for supper. 
INT: Why did you do that? MS: Because I couldn't afford. I had only $50, you see? And also-- and I went every day to the Polish consulate to try to arrange something to go away, and to-- to bring my parents over. And in the Polish consulate one day, a lady with two children [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] approached me-- a blonde lady with a boy of 13 and a little boy of 6 or 7. And she says, I heard you calling-- being called Miriam Sandzer. I say, yes. Are you related to the Sandzers in Paris? I say, yes. She says, who are you? I say, I am their daughter. She says, my husband is your mother's cousin. He was [? Schlesinger. ?] And she said, that is [NON-ENGLISH] her husband's child from the first wife. And she had with him a little boy. And she wanted to leave him behind because she couldn't afford to take him with her. And I begged her not to do that. And we were allowed in Portugal to have one escudo a day from the Polish consulate, and one escudo a day from the Jewish American Joint. So I collected the two escudos a day. At the end of the week I had 14 escudos. And I gave it to her to keep the child. And he was a very lovely boy. And he says, why don't you adopt him? Take him. How can I come to my fiancee with an adopted child of 13? I mean, it's ridiculous. And then also not only that, but how will I keep him? I haven't got to eat myself? And she has a visa to Canada. Why not go to Canada? She says she can't afford to take him to Canada. She has no money. So I-- I say, if you promise me to go, I'll give you my $50. She took my $50, and she went to Canada. 
INT: With the child? MS: Yeah. She went to Canada, and she took [NON-ENGLISH] with him. And then we are in correspondence. He's coming next month over to visit me.  INT: So what-- what money did you have left now? MS: Nothing.  INT: What did you do? MS: I took that ring. I pawned it. And I paid for six months rent. I shouldn't have to sleep with somebody or sleep rough. I should have a roof over my head. And I thought, I'm very hungry. Please, please, please give me a lot of breakfast. And I kept it in my drawer, you know? And now the bottle of perfume was Guerlain, Mitsouko from Guerlain, which saved my life. My cousin [? Sim ?] gave me that perfume with a bunch of roses. And the roses saved my life because I buried my face in the-- when I was at the consulate.  INT: At the border. MS: And--  INT: Wasn't that at a border, you had the flowers? MS: At the border. Yeah, that's right. I buried my face. And-- but I went to the Cuban consul. And he said to me, I can give you a fictitious visa. But I can't give you a visa which is valuable because I'm not allowed to. But-- but before that, I-- I had a visa for Portugal for two weeks only. And every two weeks I had to go back to extend it.  INT: Where? MS: Because-- 
INT: No, where? MS: To the police station. And the chief of the police befriended me--  INT: What was his name? MS: --he invited me in. Now you're asking me. I don't-- I forgot. I forgot. Isn't that in my book?  INT: I think it said Mr. [? Ruach ?] MS: Hmm?  INT: Mr. [? Ruach? ?] MS: Mr. [? Ruach, ?] that's it. Mr. [? Ruach. ?] And he introduced me to his family. And he looked after me. And he kept his passport in-- in his pocket. And I didn't have to go to the police station anymore because he kept it. Every two weeks he stamped it for me. One morning, 5 o'clock in the morning, a knock at the door. So I thought maybe a fire or something. And I opened the door. It was Mr. [? Ruach. ?] He threw my passport on the bed, and he said to me, the police has been taken over by the army, and I haven't got the right. You don't know me. You haven't seen me. And he closed the door and run off. So I dressed myself. And when I go-- went down, and we met all the people, we-- I told them what happened. I say, you better go to the police station when you need it. Be careful because Mr. [? Ruach ?] has left now. And he helped a lot of people. No question about it. And [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] when I went, after two weeks, I went. And the policeman said to me, the chief wants to see you. I say, my god. What have I done now? So the chief invited me to come into his office. And we chatted away. And he sat on the settee. He went over to the settee. He says, come sit next to me. I say, oh my god, don't tell me that. And he says, don't mind [NON-ENGLISH] you. Give me a little kiss. So I got up, and I said, I am very sorry. If you don't want to stamp my passports if I don't give you a kiss, I am not selling my body. I'm sorry. I got up, and I took the passports. And I gave them to the man in front. And I say, I want a stamps on it. He said, didn't you get the stamp inside? I said, no, I didn't. And I told Mr. [? Ruach ?] that. What am I to do? He says go to the chief-- the chief is [NON-ENGLISH]. And he will help you. But don't tell him that I told you. You go to [NON-ENGLISH]. So I thought to myself, where is his office? And I remembered what I did in Spain.
So I did the same thing in Portugal. His office was on the way to [NON-ENGLISH]. I took the train. And from the train, I took a taxi. And I went to his-- to his barracks. And the two soldiers crossed it. I couldn't go. So I just opened it. I said, you have no right to stop me. I have an appointment with General [NON-ENGLISH]. And I will tell him that you didn't let me go in. You better take me to his office. And they were shivering. And they took me to his office. One of them took me to his office. And I was sitting there. My god, I thought to myself, my god. It was so cold. It was such a horrible place. It was very high, and on the top was a window with-- with gates on them, you know. I felt like I'm in prison. I say, what am I going to do now? The medaled person came, and I say, mon general, le mon general. He says, I'm not your general. I'm his aide-de-camp. Your general, mon general, wants to see you. So I went in. Was a little man. And his office was very nice, with a carpet, with pictures, and bright light. And he say, sit down. Sit down. He said, would you like a cup of coffee? I say, I would love to. So he gave me-- as he ordered a cup of coffee. He says, I don't remember having had an appointment with you. I never had an appointment with you, have you? I say, no, I have to apologize. He say, if you came for visas, get out. So I got up. He says, but I admire your-- your courage. What do you want? [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] So the-- told the [? admiral ?] to go out. He says they need to go out. And I said to him, I didn't go to the police station. And I told him straight out what it was. He was furious. He was in such a state of fury that I have never seen anybody like. And picked up the phone, and phoned him to come immediately. Then he told me to go out to the other office. [SIGHS] And the door was slightly open for me to hear. The [? admiral, ?] he-- he didn't know that. The general didn't know that. But the [? admiral ?] opened slightly the door to hear it. And he just wiped the floor from him, and tore off his-- his two-- his whatever it is, and degraded him and chucked him out. First of all, he called me in. He said to man, who asked you for [NON-ENGLISH] I say yes. You can get out. And that what he did to him. 
INT: Did you speak Portuguese by then? MS: At that time I spoke Portuguese. I forgot it now, because it's 50 years, and I didn't use the language. But I do understand it, and, well, because a-- a year to be in the country, you learn the language. And I am very easy to learn the English, the language. And if I don't use it, I forget it very easily, you know, because I don't-- for example, I have never had an English lesson, you see. And so that's--  INT: What happened? So now this man was thrown out. MS: So what happen, he asked me what is the problem. And I told him that I needed visas for all my family. And he informed the-- the Portuguese consulate in Nice, and told them to send a letter-- to-- to send a phone call, or a letter, whatever it is, in order to Mr. And Mrs. Sandzer at the Luxembourg Hotel to bring all the passports over and stamp them immediately, and let them come. And they came. And can you imagine? He sent them a basket of flowers standing like that into the hotel room. And you have a very brave daughter. Don't thank me. Thank your daughter. And we were all invited Sunday to lunch to the family.  INT: Who is all of you? MS: My parents.  INT: But your parents were still in-- MS: To the family to the general.  INT: But your parents were still in Nice, weren't they? MS: No, they came-- they came. He sent them visas. That what I said. 
INT: This is after they came. MS: He sent them visas for the whole lot. And they came. And when they came, they sent a big basket to the hotel, and invited them for lunch.  INT: We take a tape break here. Thank you. MS: That's-- that I am [INAUDIBLE].  INT: This is the last part of today's interview. And we will continue-- MS: Speak a bit louder.  INT: --the interview on another day.  INT: It's the 18th of March, 1998. The survivor is Miriam Stanton. Last name at birth was Sandzer-- Sandzer. The interviewer is Emilie Erbmann. The city is London; the country, United Kingdom. The language used is English. And this is a continuation of the interview of March 16. My name is Emilie Erbmann-- E-M-I-L-I-E, E-R-B-M-A-N-N. Today's date is the 18th of March, 1998. I'm conducting an interview with Miriam Stanton in London, United Kingdom. The language used is English. And this is tape one. What is your name, please? MS: Miriam Stanton.  INT: Could you spell that, please? MS: S-T-A-N-T-O-N.  INT: Could you spell Miriam, please? MS: M-I-R-I-A-M.  INT: What is your maiden name? MS: Sandzer.  INT: Could you-- MS: S-A-N-D-Z-E-R.  INT: When were you born? MS: 6th of May, 1914.  INT: How old are you? MS: I think 83 and a-- and 3/4. [LAUGHS]  INT: Where were you born-- which city? MS: Warsaw.  INT: Could you spell that, please? MS: W-A-R-S-O-W.  INT: And which country is that? MS: Poland. 
INT: Thank you. We are now continuing the interview of last Monday, of the 16th of March. You were telling me about your arrival in Lisbon, your help of the-- the help that a policeman, Mr. [? Ruach ?] gave you. What was it like in Lisbon? Did you make any friends with other refugees? MS: Yes, quite a few. We were meeting in the Palladium restaurant-- cafe restaurant. And we were meeting quite a lot of people in and out of Lisbon-- quite a lot of refugees.  INT: What sort of nationalities were they? MS: All kind of nationalities. Every country in-- in Europe had a representative in-- representative in commas-- from that country. You were Czechs and Austrian and Polish and Russian and-- and Yugoslavian and a lot of German Jews and lot-- a lot of Polish Jews as well-- Polish people. Especially we were-- we had quite a lot of the army-- the one who ran away, like the Polish army man in civilian clothes, and all sorts-- the British who were trying to go back to Britain. And all the other countries who were represented there were-- were meeting in those cafes. And everyone had a different cafe, you know. On the Avenida da Liberdade there was several cafes. And we all mixed, more or less.  INT: Would you say that a majority of these refugees were Jews? MS: No, I wouldn't say so, because there were a lot of soldiers in civilian clothes who were in the Maginot Line, who were in-- in the army. And when the German took over, they ran away. And they were the-- were getting civilian clothes. A lot of-- surprising, it is-- a lot of farmers helped them out. They left their uniforms there, and the farmer gave them their clothes. The farmers were a great help in Free France-- enormous help. They were maybe antisemitic in-- in the core of their heart, but at that moment, a refugee was a refugee. And they were trying to help. Especially in Portugal-- they were very, very kind. They stopped you in the street and asked you [NON-ENGLISH]. That means, are you a refugee? And I said, yes. And they say-- took out a card and gave me-- or wrote down on a piece of paper their name and address and telephone number to phone them if I need any help. And that was a big change from France and from the other countries. They were very kind. 
INT: Well, yes. You were telling me, for instance, that in France, the Jews were not allowed to rent an apartment or a room. They had to go into hotels. MS: Yeah.  INT: Was that the case in Portugal? MS: No. In Portugal everybody was equal.  INT: Was there any antisemitism in Portugal? Was there any antisemitism in Portugal? MS: No. None-- what-- not that I knew of-- not that I knew of. I met quite a few Jewish families because I went to synagogue to see who is Jewish and who is not. And they befriended us-- quite a few of us. And I must say that they have behaved beautifully. They-- all the-- all the Portuguese people behaved beautifully. They were-- maybe they were attached to Spain. And they were maybe even talking of camps and things like that. But they were only talking about it. They were not really acting upon it. They were helping the refugees. And one day I was in a restaurant, and I heard a lot of German talking. And I turned around, and I would have sworn that they were German soldiers in civilian clothes, like they did in France. They invaded France, actually, before the army came in. The soldiers were-- have had civilian clothes, and they were all over France. And once Hitler came over the border, they threw away their civilian clothes and put on their uniforms. And surprisingly enough, all of us are-- they were in the streets-- plenty of soldier-- German soldiers. And that was when we knew that we have to get out-- and quickly. 
INT: To-- to get back to Free France, were there many Germans crawling around Free France? MS: Well, I don't know. I don't know. I know that we were settled in-- in-- in Nice. We had in the Hotel Luxembourg three rooms and also a room with a-- with a stove in it that we could cook our own meal-- things which we wanted. And that was on the Promenade des Anglais, just in front. And we saw quite a lot of-- is-- is it of-- first of all, the Negresco Hotel is the best hotel in Nice. And that you could not get a room there because that was requisitioned by the German. And the Germans-- officers-- when they had a holiday, a week's rest or something, they came down there in civilian clothes. And that was full of Germans-- the Negresco. But all the others-- well, we don't know. They mixed with people. We mixed with refugees, more or less. And the ones who spoke German, we didn't know whether they are refugees or soldiers, you know. And that's what they wanted-- the French people.  INT: Now, that-- there were not that many Germans in Free France. MS: No.  INT: Yet, Jews were being rounded up. Who by? MS: That was the Vichy government. Well, that was-- they were rounded up only later on when it was fully occupied by the-- by the German people when they-- when they-- how shall I say-- occupied the Free France as well. And most of the Germans were in-- in civilian clothes. 
INT: Yeah, but you were telling me that when you were going to go to Vichy to get exit papers, you were told not to by the hotelier who was-- MS: Yeah.  INT: --a friend, because they would have kept you and sent you to Auschwitz. So that did happen before France was occupied? MS: It's right.  INT: And-- MS: That's right. Vichy was a very dangerous place because the government was there, you see. And the government actually went to Bordeaux because they wanted to go across to England, you see? And in Vichy, there was a sympathizers in-- sympathizers with Germany. And that was a very dangerous city for us Jews to go-- very dangerous. But the chief of the police was there. The-- and I had for the exit visas to go to-- to Vichy to get my exit visas. And I don't know, if I told you. As I was staying in the hotel--  INT: Yes, you did tell me. MS: I did tell you.  INT: Yes. MS: And that was a very, very nice French man who really liked us very much. And he was certainly not antisemitic because he helped a lot-- a lot of Jewish people.  INT: To go forward again to Lisbon, you were there on your own, waiting for your family to leave. I did read in your book the time about-- of Passover. Could you tell me about your Passover in Lisbon? MS: Yes. It was a very sad thing. We sat all the Jews together in the cafe. And somebody got a few packets of matzahs. And we just put out the matzahs. We couldn't have strictly kosher, because there were no kosher restaurants. And we couldn't have strictly kosher Passover. And so we just took off the matzah and we said a few prayers on the matzah. And that was all we had. That was all we had. And we sat together and we chatted away. We didn't even have any prayer books. We had nothing. Because that was early time before I met the Jewish community. You see? When I met the Jewish community, they were very, very sorry that they didn't meet me beforehand. And they would have invited me for Seder night. But it was too late. It didn't matter anymore. They were very kind to me, especially the Levy family. They were very, very kind, a very nice family. 
INT: Do you remember their first names? MS: I might remember a little bit later when-- when we talk about it.  INT: Now, while you were in Portugal, did you manage to get a entry visa to the United Kingdom, to England? MS: Yes.  INT: How did that go? MS: And there was-- I had difficulties, because I was going backwards and forwards to France, to occupied France. So I had difficulties in getting a visa. But eventually, I got, because I went on a ship, which was specially designed to go to England. And Mr. [? Ruach, ?] especially the Polish consulate, was very antisemitic. But they didn't show it. But they gave the seats-- all the cabins on the ship to the non-Jewish people. And then if there's some empty seats, they sent a few Jewish people away. They had 500 visas a month from England and from Canada. And they could send either to England or to Canada as a Polish people-- because mainly for the soldiers. And when the soldiers were not enough soldiers, they sent a-- Polish refugees. But all the Christian refugees had-- had spaces, but not for the Jews.  INT: And so eventually, you got the visa from the Polish? MS: No. I-- Mr. [? Ruach ?] intervened, and I got a visa from the Polish consulate to go on the ship. But I had another incident there. I walked in the street, and I saw a friend of my father's, a Mr. [? Balsam. ?] And I was so delighted that I hugged him and kissed him. I knew him all my life. And I said, have my-- have you seen my parents? He says, yes. I have seen, yes and the-- your mother and your grandmother. They are all well. They are trying to come. But Jack isn't here-- there. And I said to him, now can-- can we meet each other? He says, I have no time to see you. I have absolutely no time, but when I have time, I'll let you know. And then I spoke to my father, because I used to phone my father every second day-- of the day, or when-- whenever I could reverse charges. And when I told my father that I met Mr. [? Balsam-- ?] because I-- after I met him, I ran quickly to the telephone and to tell my father. So he says, don't tell me you met Mr. [? Balsam. ?] I said, oh, yes. I met Mr. [? Balsam. ?] He says, he is a crook. I say, what you talking about? He's your friend. He says, you know, he came up and borrowed $5,000 for an hour.
At that time, it was $5,000 very much money. And he disappeared. So, ask him for the money. So when I saw Mr. [? Balsam ?] again, I said, I just spoke to Papa, and he told me about the $5,000. He says, I told you, I don't want to talk to you. It is not true. It is absolutely not true. So I said, look. My father wouldn't lie to me. Well, I want some money from you. Well, we argued in the street so much. And I said, at least give me $100 so I should be able to buy myself some food. Because I had no food-- cooked food, I mean. So he says, how can I lend you the $100? I don't know whether you will repay me. [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] So I was terribly upset. You can imagine how upset. And I went up to my room, and I cried my heart out. I didn't know whether I should tell Papa or not. Eventually, I told Mr. [? Ruach. ?] I missed-- I didn't tell him the story, but I told Mr. [? Ruach ?] that I had a lot of unpleasantness with some refugees. And so he says, look. Is a ship going to England with Polish people, and I'm going to put you on that ship. Never mind. You had suffered enough. I'm going to put you on that ship. So he says, go to that-and-that travel agency, and they will give you a ticket. And don't worry about the money. I will see to it. I will make the Polish consulate to pay for it. And I went to the travel agency. And they did give me a ticket. So I was absolutely delighted. And I had a little dog given by somebody. I had to give away my little dog to somebody. And [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] I made farewell-- a-- of-- we-- all farewell party. We-- everybody paid for themselves with a cup of coffee, with a some-- a cake or something. And I went to the ship the next day-- send my luggage and went to the ship. And as I was standing on the quay and talking to all my friends who I met there and chatting away, I saw somebody bringing down some luggage. The stewards were bringing down some luggage. So somebody said, look. They're bringing down some luggage. I wonder what it is. So I said, I don't know what it is. And all of a sudden, I had like a premonition that something is wrong. I say, look. Let me go, say goodbye. Maybe it's-- it's some-- something wrong there. Let me be on the ship. And I went on the ship and it was-- [BACKGROUND NOISE] it's a bomb. [LAUGHS] That was my luggage coming down. And Mr. [? Ruach ?] was there with the captain. And the captain say, are you Mademoiselle Sandzer? I say, yes, I am. He says, you can't board that ship. I say, why not? I have an-- a cabin here. He says, I'm sorry. You cannot board that ship. [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] So I argued with him. So Mr. [? Ruach ?] said, excuse me, Captain, may I have a little word with Miss Sandzer? So he took me away. He says, Miss Sandzer-- Miriam, please. Go off the ship. Otherwise, I have to take you by force. And I don't want to do that. Go voluntarily down off the ship. And I'll tell you all about it. And so I cried. I say, what is it? He said, I tell you all about it in my office. Come later on in the afternoon to my office, and I tell you all about it. And when I turned around, I saw Mr. [? Balsam ?] laughing his head off-- standing there laughing his head off. And I went down. You can imagine how upset I was. And Mr. [? Ruach ?] confronted-- comforted me. And he says, go home. Rest an hour. And then come and see me. And when I came to see him, he told me that, who is Mr. [? Balsam? ?] I told him he's a friend of my father. He say, he is not a friend of your family. He's a enemy of your family. I say, what do you mean with that? He said that you were traveling backwards and forwards to occupied France, and not only to occupied France, to Germany. And you sold dollars to the German soldiers and to the German officers. You were very friendly with them. And none of the people who are friendly with Germans can go to England, because they have no time to investigate. They are busy with the war. After the war, you will be able to go. So I told him the story about the $5,000. So he says, why didn't you tell me? He would have gone off-- not you. But the ship was gone. But when he-- oh-- when I came to England in Finchley Road I saw Mr. [? Balsam. ?] 
INT: When was this? Which year? MS: In-- that was in '46-- '45. I got married '46. I saw Mr. [? Balsam ?] in England, in London. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] No, I am making a mistake. I went to Paris, and I saw him. I was sitting in a restaurant with my brother, my sister-in-law, and my husband, and myself, and my younger brother. We were having a lunch together. And who walks in but Mr. [? Balsam. ?] So my brother ran after him. But I also saw him in Finchley Road sitting in the gutter and washing his feet because he was very tired from walking. Apparently, he was interned in England when he arrived. Because if he knew that I was trading with the-- with the Germans, they thought that he also was trading with the Germans because the Germans wouldn't tell anybody. So he was interned right through the war. And after the war he was released. And then I saw him once in Paris. And then after that I never saw him again. He must have died in the meantime. But that was a friend of my father's who really and truly ruined my life. Oh, he didn't ruin-- he ruined the war years. Because I would have come to England, and I would have been able to bring my parents along, you see? And that's my story why I didn't come to England during the war. After the war I-- I could come easily. 
INT: How did you-- oh, first of all, had you sent a message to your fiancee Ben that you were coming to England? Was he waiting for you? MS: No, well, unfortunately, the post was not very regular. And I did not get any-- very few letters from him to Portugal, especially postcards. And the postcards were all written by hand, you know? And somewhere through the censors they covered it up. Because he didn't know that he was talking things which were wrong. Oh, I live in so and so, and I go so and so-- you know, the addresses to give me. And that was stricken out. And I had a whole bunch of cards and letters, which 50% at least was stricken out.  INT: We take a tape break here. MS: Pardon?  INT: We take a tape break.  INT: This is tape two. I'm interviewing Miriam Stanton. We were talking about-- MS: Lisbon.  INT: --Lisbon. You did not go to England. You were back in Lisbon. Now, how did you manage to-- you say you phoned your parents every other day, or your father. Now, was there any other way that you were in touch with your family? MS: Yes, they wrote to me. But I-- when I went to the-- to the travel agency, I met a gentleman who was very kind to me, like all the Portuguese people were. And he introduced me to a captain, because I wanted to send some food parcels to my parents. Because they had also very little food. So I sent them food like sardines and salmon-- in-- in tins, you know, tin food-- a small parcel, because I couldn't afford very big parcel. And he said to me, where are you going? I said, to the post office to try to send that parcel. He says, don't bother. I'll introduce you to a captain of the ship who travels regularly to Marseille. And he will get in touch with your parents because he's taking a few days in Marseille to deliver some goods-- and if we bring some goods from-- from France. So I was absolutely delighted. And I sent them. I was introduced to the captain. And I gave him the parcel. And he, in turn, told my father. And I told him beforehand. And my father went to Marseille. And they got very friendly-- the captain and my father. And he was traveling two, three times a month to Marseille. And every time he gave a parcel. One day he said to me, Miss Sandzer, don't bother to give me a parcel. I give him-- the stuff you're sending, I can give him from my ship stock-- my food stock. So I was-- so my father invited him to spend the weekend in Nice. And he came to Nice for a weekend and spent in our apartment and enjoyed it very much. And we became very, very friendly. And that was a time that I was trying to get my parents over. And I was in despair, because I could not get any permits at all. It was very difficult. Because one day-- morning, at 5 o'clock in the morning, I had a knock at my door. I had a single room in an apartment on the seventh floor, in the Avenida da Liberdade. And 5 o'clock in the morning, a knock at my door-- it must be a fire or something. So I rushed up, and it was Mr. [? Ruach. ?] And he threw my passports-- passport on my bed. He says, you haven't seen me. It's in two weeks time you have to go in to extend the visas. The police was taken over by the army. Oh, I said, my god. The fascists are here. What are we going to do? And I was very upset. Of course, I couldn't sleep anymore. In the morning, after breakfast, I went down and spoke to some refugees for coffee. And I told them that. And they also heard that the army has taken over the police in this. And it was a very sad day for us. Eventually, I had to go up to extend my visa. 
INT: May I just interrupt you? I'm sorry about it. Can I just ask you for the name of the captain and the gentleman who introduced him to the-- you to the captain? MS: Oh, the gentleman who introduced me, I remember the name, but the captain was Carlos something and another-- I-- a Portuguese name, which I cannot remember.  INT: And-- MS: But the gentleman in the agency was Mr. [? Amzalak. ?] But I don't remember his first name, you know? Mr. [? Amzalak. ?] And he was very kind to me with the permission of the owner-- of the managing director of the travel agency. And what was I telling you?  INT: You were now-- I'm sorry to have interrupted you. You were talking to refugees. You'd heard that the army had taken over. MS: Yeah.  INT: And you had to get out in the next-- MS: Yeah.  INT: --two weeks. MS: So I went after two weeks, because we had all-- all of us had visas for two weeks in Portugal, transit visas. And after two weeks, they extended for another two weeks and another two weeks. So we had, usually, to go practically every two weeks over the year to-- to the Portuguese consul-- police station. And one day, when the army took over, I was-- when my day came, I had to go. My heart was in my mouth. What am I going to do? Will I finish off in a concentration camp? So it was a very nice-- I think it was a colonel or lieutenant, or something like that. And he was a very nice, young man. And he says, leave me your passport. And we'll see to it. So I-- I say, when shall I come back? He says, come back tomorrow. Usually, the-- the ordinary police, you just stamped it for another two week. I come back tomorrow. So I came back the next day. And he says, come into my office. So I went into his office. I says, oh, my God, no, not again. And he said to me, sit down on the settee. He had a large settee there. Don't in the armchair. Sit on the settee. And I sat on the settee. He came next to me. And he says to me, [NON-ENGLISH]. This means give me a kiss. So I looked at him. I say, I had no intention. I have no intention to sell my body for anything. So please, let me go. And I went out and was terribly upset-- terribly upset. So [SIGHS] I met Mr. [? Ruach, ?] and I told him that. And he says-- I said, isn't there anybody higher than that soldier there? So he says, yes.
It is General [NON-ENGLISH]. And don't ask me to spell it, because I wouldn't remember how to spell it-- [NON-ENGLISH]. And I will never forget that name. And when he heard that, I hear of-- and [? Ruach ?] told me that his office is not in Lisbon. It's halfway to Estoril. If you know the coast, it's from Lisbon to Estoril-- halfway to-- to Estoril. And you have to go there if you want to see him. Whether he will help you, I don't know. But tell me the results. But don't tell there anybody that I told you that. So I took the train. I dressed myself. I remembered what I did in the Spanish consulate. I remember that these Portuguese people are the same as the Spanish people. They like beautifully dressed women. So I dressed myself up the best I could. And I took the train, because I couldn't afford a taxi. But from the train to the barracks I took a taxi for a few coppers. And they stopped me outside the barracks. And when I came, two soldiers were standing, and they cross the guns and said, you can't go in. Where you going? I say, I have an appointment with General [NON-ENGLISH]. Oh, they said. And then they're phoning him. They said, oh. They had such a respect for me, because he was a king of Lisbon, you know? So they-- one soldier said to the other, take her to the office. And he took me to the office. And I was sitting there in one terrible state. What am I going to do? So after about 15 minutes waiting, from one of the doors-- to me, it was a general. And he was full of medals. I say, mon generale, mon generale. In French, I told him what-- what I wanted. So he says, I am not General [NON-ENGLISH]. I am his adjutant. But I will tell him that you are here. And so he went in. And after a few minutes, he came out. General [NON-ENGLISH] will receive you. Well, I went in. The general was a lovely man. And he was sitting with his hands folded like that, and got up to greet me, and let me to sit down-- and-- like a gentleman-- and ask me whether I would like a cup of coffee. I say, yeah, I would love to. And he said to me, what did you come for? I don't remember having made an appointment with you. In fact, I don't know you at all. I-- so I bursted out crying. I just couldn't restrain myself any-- so I was sobbing away. And he was very patient to wait for me. And when I did, he says, now drink your coffee, and then you tell me the story. If you came for a permit to stay permanently here-- no way. I will ask you to leave. So I say, I didn't come for that. I came for something else. He says, now, I'm all ears. And I told him the story of the police station-- how I don't want to sell my body. Whilst I love my family, but I know that my father would have been very, very annoyed with me and very cross with me, and quite rightly so. And I don't want to do that. Is there any other way I can bring over my family? He says, when was that? So I told him. He says-- so he rang the bell. And the first officer came-- came through the other door and says, yes. Will you take Miss Sandzer in to your office? And he picked up the telephone. But that other officer left the door a little bit open-- I should hear what is happening. Because by that time I spoke Portuguese. And he was screaming his head off-- absolutely screaming his head off, and threw the telephone out. And then he came in, and he said, I hope you have time. But you have to wait a half an hour. I say, yes, I do have time. I have time all day long if it's necessary to save my family. And after half an hour, my officer came in. And he called me in and say, is that the gentleman who asked you for the [NON-ENGLISH]? I say, yes, that's the fellow. And he said, would you go out? I say, yes. He gave him hell-- absolute hell. And he tore off his lapel, this oh, I don't know what you call that, you know, the-- and told him to get out-- called first two soldiers-- and he was arrested-- and took him out, and then called me in. And he says, will you give me the name and address of your parents? [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] And he called the Spanish-- the Portuguese consulate in France, at Marseille, to send for my parents-- that-- that address. And he says, red carpet for them-- the lot of them. And they-- two weeks later, they came. And he-- [NON-ENGLISH]-- sent me a big basket of flowers to my parents to tell them what a brave daughter they have got. And from that on, I had a very, very easy time. 
INT: So what happened to your brother Jack, meanwhile? MS: Pardon?  INT: What happened-- what had happened to your brother Jack, meanwhile? MS: Well, my brother Jack, in the meantime, came a few days later after I left. He came to Paris.  INT: To Paris? MS: Yes. He came to Paris. Oh-- he had Argentinian papers, because I-- I arranged for him Argentinian papers of the identity card. So he was a Argentinian. And he came to Paris to his wife and-- and child. And we were sending telephone calls and bombing to come for them. And they didn't come. She would not leave, my sister-in-law. She wanted either all her family to come-- her mother, and her father, and her two sisters-- or she's not coming, and the baby is not coming. So [SIGHS] telephones were going backwards and forwards and backwards and forwards. And eventually, I said to my parents-- oh, and I had visas. I was traveling every week-- Monday-- to Marseille-- till Friday-- and from consulate to consulate. We all wanted to go to Cuba because it's near the United States. Because the United States visa was like a million pounds dowry or 10 million pounds dowry-- a United States visa. Only a very few got it. And when I went to the United States consulate, he told me, yes, you can have a visa, but you have to wait-- it's a waiting list for Polish people-- for 10 years. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] So, I did not bother with United States. But I tried any other consulate. Eventually, I heard that Shanghai is giving visas-- Chinese people. 
INT: I think you told me that story. Because they gave you the visa, but the ship had sailed. MS: Yes, but also, I had also to have-- Mr. [? Amzalak ?] gave me also a Cuban piece-- on a ship-- a Cuban paper. And he spoke to the Cuban consul. And also, Mr. [? Ruach ?] spoke to the Cuban consul-- to give me fictitious visas for my family, which we had to-- when they came, we had to go up to the consul. And he-- he canceled them.  INT: And then what happened? MS: Well, we had to do something about it. We had to leave. And we just did not know where to go. It was very, very, very difficult. And it was a desperation-- absolutely desperation. The-- the police was urging us to leave because they wanted somebody-- as they sent out 500 people, 500 soldiers can come in, you know-- other people come over. And it-- it was pathetic what we went through. We were sitting in the cafeteria and discussing helping each other to do something. Eventually-- eventually, we got a Cuban visa-- a fictitious Cuban visa-- on which my parents could come-- but nowhere to go. And the Polish consulate also ships-- which had 500 visa-- free visas to Canada and to England-- sent the-- sent the non-Jewish people-- but not the Jewish people. And there was a accumulation of a couple of thousand of Jewish people. And the police had to clear out-- clear us out somehow or another. [SIGHS] It was very difficult. So, what happened there? So [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] to be frank, it's very difficult for me to talk about it. Because it is choking, like. I have-- we had the visas and all. But we had to do something about it through the Polish consulate. [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] The Polish Jews decided-- one fellow was a Dr. [NON-ENGLISH]. He was a medical doctor from Belgium. And he suggested that we should send a telegram to Churchill. He must have sometimes a birthday. He's born on sometimes. Let's wish him happy birthday to you and all the very best-- great success for the war. But please. We are Polish Jews. Send us somewhere in the world under the British flag. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] And two weeks later, we were called to the Polish consulate to bring the passports. But I had-- a letter was sent. I didn't get with the first post-- the letter from Poland-- from Polish consulate. And I knew that the two weeks are over, and I will probably finish off in a-- in a concentration camp with my family. So I went to the hairdresser to have my hair done. At least let me look decent when I go somewhere. [LAUGHS] I had my hair done. And somebody came running and asked me if I have had a Polish-- call from-- of a-- a letter from Polish consulate. I said, no I didn't have one. So I went quickly home. And I found the letter there. And we all amalgamated. And what happened there was that we decided we are going to-- just a minute. I'm muddling it up, I think. We decided-- [PAUSES FOR 5 SECONDS] I-- oh, [SIGHS] god. We-- we decided that we are going to go-- to-- to go to the Polish-- to the-- [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] to send a telegram to Churchill to help us. 
INT: Yes, you just told me that. MS: Yes, I said that.  INT: Yeah. MS: And we had the help. And I went to the Polish consulate. And I also got a permit to go on the ship.  INT: To where? MS: To-- they told us-- didn't tell us-- but under the British flag. And when we arrived on the ship, they told us we are going to Jamaica. And oh, it was very peculiar that I met some relations of mine as well on the-- on the-- on the quay. And she was going to Canada with a another ship. She was going to Canada. Because the Polish consulate got a telegraph that we have-- we-- that they have really missed out. And they had a bad name for Jewish people not to allow them, you know. And they found that the Nazis have influenced them, you know. But they must have influenced them that we should not have the visas. But we went to Jamaica. And it was a great relief to me that we are going under the British flag.  INT: Who were you with on the ship to Jamaica? MS: Now, the ship-- as it happened, the ship was a cargo ship, which was built especially for the refugees-- three boxes, like three to sleeping beds, you know. But when I came on the ship, the captain, it was my captain, my friend. I didn't realize it. And he said, Miss Sandzer, you and your family are not sleeping in those. You have three cabins. So my grandmother had a cabin. My parents had a cabin. And I had a cabin. And we had three cabins. And we were sitting at the captain's table for-- for the meals. It was very nice trip to Jamaica. 
INT: When were you told you were going to Jamaica? MS: It was, I think, January-- around January.  INT: No, but how long had you been on the ship before you were told that you were going to Jamaica? MS: On the ship? As we arrived on--  INT: As you-- MS: --on the ship.  INT: As you arrived. And when-- what year are we talking about that you were on your way to Jamaica? January of when? MS: I think it was in-- in-- in the-- '41-- '41-- January '41-- something like that.  INT: Now you say you were on the ship with your parents and your grandmother. MS: Yeah.  INT: What about your two brothers? MS: My two brothers were military age, and they had to remain in Portugal.  INT: To fight for which party? MS: So we had to part, and it was a heartbreaking thing. There we were united. All of a sudden, we had to part.  INT: But who did they have to fight for in Portugal? MS: Yes. But they were-- they were of military-- of army-- army--  INT: But did they have to fight on the side of the Portuguese or the Free French, or-- MS: The-- the Free French, I suppose. I don't know. I suppose the Free French.  INT: So the ship-- MS: Went.  INT: --was it a nice journey to Jamaica? MS: It was a very nice journey, and was very, very comfortable for me. But the others were very jealous. And we went to-- the first stop was Casablanca. In Casablanca we took on some more Belgium refugees-- and about 50 or 60 Belgian refugees. And they were-- they were-- kept themselves separately from us Polish people. There were also Jewish people there. And when we came to Casablanca, we saw the ship going backwards and forwards, and backwards. It was a little boat with a captain going backwards and forwards. We didn't stop inside the harbor. We stopped in the outside. And when I asked him what it was-- and say, I can only tell you. But please don't even tell your parents. We have a typhus-- we have-- in Jamaica that was-- a typhus case in-- in Jamaica-- on the ship. We picked him up in Casablanca. It's a Belgian Jewish young fellow. And we are in quarantine. Now, if you go down, I want you to help me. If we go-- of all of you refugees go down, you will be in quarantine. But it's-- and you will be in a camp. And I went to see the camp. And the camp is a very nice place-- not too bad. It's not a concentration camp. It's a camp. 
INT: It was an internment camp. MS: No, in Jamaica. It wasn't a German camp.  INT: No, an internment camp. MS: Internment camp, yes. But not a-- a concentration camp. We could-- were free to go in and out as much as we can. But in Casablanca was that typhus case. So we had to be six weeks in quarantine.  INT: We take a tape break here.  INT: This is tape three. I'm interviewing Miriam Stanton. You were just describing about your arrival and quarantine in the internment camp in Jamaica. Were you made to do any work there? MS: No.  INT: What was the daily routine? MS: Nothing. Just the meals. We had full board, and there were wooden huts. And they were small, little rooms. In each room was a bed and a table and a couple of chairs. And me, as a-- as I am very feminine, and I am really a-- a-- how shall I say? [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] Very-- I like glamorous, lovely things. So I decorated my room very specially. But in the meantime, my mother got very ill. She had-- when we arrived in Jamaica, we were in quarantine for six weeks because we had a typhus case. After six weeks, we all had high temperature. The whole lot. And that was the last day of the six weeks, so we thought that we all caught the typhus back. And the commandant was a Mr. [? Rae. ?] And Mr. [? Rae ?] sent for some nurses and doctors and oh, got-- from Canada came some nurses and doctors as well to see whether it is a full camp of typhus people. And they decided we had dengue fever. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] Dengue fever is a bite from a moth-- from a mosquito. In the back of the camp, down-- downhill, was a tiny little river. Not a river, it was like a little-- 
INT: --brook? MS: Lake with-- with supplies of water. And that was infested with mosquitoes. And the mosquitoes smelled fresh, beautiful blood from Europe. So we had a-- everybody was bitten by it. And dengue fever is you get a red rash, and also you are very depressed. And everybody was sitting and crying, sobbing away. You should have seen it, a thousand people sobbing away. [LAUGHS] It was absolutely terrible. But anyhow, we were-- we had been explained that it is not dangerous. It will take six weeks, and then after six weeks, we will have-- probably have to be a little bit longer in quarantine to make quite sure that we don't bring any illnesses in, et cetera. And that's what it was.  INT: Had you-- you-- did you speak any English when you arrived in Jamaica? MS: No. During the six weeks I was there, we had no books. And I didn't know that we can apply to the commandant for books. But we had newspapers. And I learned my English from the newspapers. And eventually I spoke-- I started to speak English. To the nurses you had to speak English, and to the commandant you had to speak English, because he did not speak any other language but English. And I-- I just had to learn. And I-- I learn very easily a language, you know? So I had to learn to speak English. And afterwards, after six weeks-- or eight weeks, it was, actually. Six weeks in quarantine, and two weeks we had to be sure that it's all all right. We went the first time to town. And there I bought some books to read. 
INT: Once you were out of-- completely out of quarantine, were you were allowed to go out of the camp and into Kingston? MS: Yes. We couldn't go out before 8 o'clock. And we had to be back by 10 o'clock at night. If we wanted to go away for longer, we had to have a permit from the office. And if we wanted to go away for a weekend, we had to have a permit from the office. The one day, I was very lucky because the commandant befriended my family. He love my mother and my grandmother, the commandant, which my granny, she was very, very popular there. She didn't speak English. She didn't speak French. She speak-- spoke only Yiddish. And she was the most popular person in the world, in the whole of Jamaica. And he allowed us to come out. So I went there-- he befriended us, our family and invited us up to his house, which I met his family, his wife and his two children, the son, [? Alan, ?] and daughter, [? Daphne. ?] And she was blonde. The commandant wasn't black. He was-- he was a Jamaican, but he wasn't a black man. And his wife was a charming person. We used to call her the angel because she was a real-- and she was so, so good, I can't begin to tell you.  INT: What was her name? MS: [? Vida. ?] [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] [? Vida ?] [? Rae ?] was absolutely fantastic. And I tell you a story about her in a minute. But so we had to be back by 10 o'clock. And if we wanted, we had to have a permit. But the-- the-- I asked the commandant, why do we have a permit if we are not interned? He says, that is for your security. That if you are not back by 10 o'clock, we have to find out-- if we don't know where you are, we have to find out where you are for your security. Because the camp was situated a mile away from the nearest village, in between Kingston and the camp, you see? So it was quite a long walk to the first bus. We had the first bus in [NON-ENGLISH], where we could take a bus to-- to go to town. So that was for our security. He said, if we are missing like that. 
INT: Did you ever go to a synagogue in Kingston? Was there one? Was there a synagogue in Kingston? MS: Yes. There was a-- there was a synagogue. And the first Sabbath, my parents and myself and Granny went down to the synagogue. And I must tell you something very funny. We were sitting in the back row, because it wasn't very full, but we didn't know how to or whose place we are taking. And after the service was over, the rabbi came over. He was a very nice fellow. And [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] then a-- a-- a gentleman came over. And he introduced himself as Mr. [NON-ENGLISH] and he invited us to Sabbath lunch. He asked us whether we are the refugees from the camp. I said, yes, we are. And he invited us to Sabbath lunch. So I asked my father whether I should accept it. Because my father was a very strict man. A loving, warm man, but very strict. And he says to me, usually I do the inviting. Now I am down that I have been invited to Shabbat lunch. I said, Dad, it's not down. It's up. It's not down, it's one step up. We have impressed Mr. [NON-ENGLISH] to such an extent. And as I was talking to my father, all the youngsters were jumping down, jumping down, from here, here, and here, and here. And he introduced you, my son, my daughter, my son, my daughter. I just couldn't believe it. He had 11 children. [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] And [LAUGHS] they were all introduced to us. And my father accepted the invitation. And we were very, very welcome, made very welcome as a whole family. 
INT: What happened to your mother later on? MS: [SIGHS] Unfortunately, my mother had-- was not well at all. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] My-- we saw the doctor in the camp. We could-- we had a hospital in the camp as well. One hut was made to a hospital. So we asked Dr. [? Gideon ?] what to do. And he said I-- I must report it to Mr. [? Rae, ?] to the commandant. And Mr. Commandant, Mr. [? Rae, ?] called me up, said I should come up. I came to the office, and he says, look, your mother needs a very serious operation. She was bleeding very strongly, and she had a growth on the womb. And they thought it's not malignant. And but he said to me, look, with that operation, we can do it here. But with that operation, I can give you an-- an American visa. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] So I looked at him. I said, are you sure? He says, yes. I can do that. If I guarantee for you, you can go to the States. Well, that was a dream came true. So when I told my father that, he says, yes, let him do that. So when I came the next day, he gave me a letter to the American consul. And I went to the American consul, and-- and again, he sent me down with his own car, with his chauffeur and car. And the consul listened to that. He opened the letter, and he says, yes, come tomorrow, and you'll have the visas. Well, because I have to ring up Washington. I have to find out. We didn't know that the consul, American consul, was a personal friend of Mr. [? Rae. ?] So the next day, we came down, and I had a visa, and my mother had a visa. And I say, what about the other passports? He said, I'm sorry. They don't speak English, and I can't give you the visas. So I went home. Next day, I went down again to the American consul. I made an appointment. And he saw me. He says, anything wrong? I say, yes. I cannot go without my father. Because my mother is a very sick woman, and if there is a big decision to make, I cannot make the decision for him. My father must be with me. And I cannot phone him. From America was no connection, telephone connection, with the-- with Jamaica. Because during the war, they needed all the lines for the-- for they were helping in Europe. And so he says to me, [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] all right. Leave me your passport and come tomorrow, and I'll give you-- try and give you a visa. I must phone up Washington. 
INT: Your father's passport? MS: Pardon?  INT: You already had a visa. You had to leave your father's passport. MS: My-- my-- my father had. Leave me his passport. Right. So I came the next day, and my father's passport was all right. Took it out. The next day, I went again. I said, now look, I have a grandmother of 87. She doesn't speak German, she doesn't speak French, she doesn't speak Polish. How-- so how do you how do you communicate? Is she mute? Is she-- is said, no. She speaks Yiddish. Do you know what Yiddish is? He says, no, I don't. So I told him. It's a dialect, a Jewish dialect. It's a Jewish language. And she doesn't speak anything else but that. And she reads and writes only in Yiddish. So I can't leave her behind. She's 87. And I can't phone her from America. Please, please. So he says, tell me the truth. Have you got another half a dozen kids behind you? I say, no. That's the last one. He said, I'm sorry. If you want to, I have got to apply straightaway to Washington, and it will take several months for your grandmother to be allowed to go in there, because she can't work, and she has no-- not even the language. And she can't even work. At 87, you can't expect her to work, to take a job. So we will have to keep her. And we have a lot of keeping to do. And I'm sorry. So one of-- so I say, what would you do? He says, one of you has to stay behind. So I decided I will stay behind. And I thought to myself, my father will go to Washington. With his charm, he will-- he will be able to send a visa for the two of us. But unfortunately, he could not go to Washington, because my mother was so ill. She had the operation, and a couple weeks later, she died in New York. And he was all by himself, my father. So Ben sent me a note that when I go to New York, to-- to visit his cousin. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] So I wrote to my father to visit that cousin. And he was a great help. He looked after Papa, and he was able to bury my mother. Because he belonged to a society of his own country, you know? And he was a stonemason as well. And so he made a-- 
INT: You mean a Freemason? MS: Stone. He was working with granite and he was a stonemason.  INT: Oh, I'm sorry. MS: He did-- made tombstones as well as figures and all kinds of things. And-- and he was very, very, very helpful. And he paid for the grave. And-- because in America, it was very, very expensive, and my father didn't have the money. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS]  INT: What happened to your grandmother, meanwhile? MS: My grandmother, she lived. She was very happy in Jamaica. And so I had, in the camp, three rooms, because my parents' room, and I decorated one as a lounge. And I had a bedroom and a lounge. And Mr. [NON-ENGLISH] was in the material business, so he gave me some lovely material for curtains, net material. And I had curtains. And I had cover for a-- from a bed, I made a settee. I rolled up some mattress, and I made it. I made a lovely apartment. And my grandmother lived there for three years, until the war broke-- finished. And she was buried in-- I think in [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] February or March, something like that, in Jamaica.  INT: 1945? MS: Pardon?  INT: Was that 1945? MS: 1945. Yes. And I-- then in [INAUDIBLE]-- and I had to apply for another visa. I couldn't get my own visa back. But the consul, Mr. [? Rae ?] arranged again that I should get a visa. And I went to the States. 
INT: Where were you on the day the war was over? MS: The World War was over in New York.  INT: You were already in New York? Before the end of the war? MS: Wait a minute. What-- what was the date of the end of the war?  INT: It was-- was it May or June 1945? MS: Yes. I was in New York already.  INT: When did you go to New York? MS: I-- I think I went in May. No, I left in May a year later, New York. Yes, approximately April or May, something like that.  INT: Could you describe the day the war was over? MS: How-- how shall I describe it? My heart was going out to all those people who were in-- [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] during the war, I saw a lot of injured people. I saw a lot of-- we had a phone call from my brothers, from Portugal. They were not called up to the army, because we were worried that they are in the army. And [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] It was just out-- out-- out-- absolutely outstanding. Absolutely outstanding. I couldn't describe it. I haven't got the words to describe it, my feelings and my thoughts and how sorry I was that so many young people were killed. It was-- it was wonderful to see the parades. And it was wonderful to see the [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] petals flying around or whatever it was. But I was very sad. Not sad that the war is over, but sad what I have lost. [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] 
INT: Where-- when had you-- did you find out what had happened to the rest of the family? When was this? MS: Well, I found that out in New York. In New York, I-- I think my brother phoned us that he is in-- still in Portugal. And also I wrote a letter to Ben. And back came a letter with one big note. You are writing English. And also I phoned him. And he said, I can't believe it. You are speaking English. I said, yes, I am now an English lady. And we kept in correspondence until I could go to-- I couldn't go to-- they still didn't give me an English visa. But I could get an Irish visa. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] That was also a very funny experience I had. I went to the British consulate. And I was sent from door to door, from door to door. Eventually, I spoke to a solicitor who was a friend of my father's. He says, I'll tell you what, I think I can help you. The Irish consulate-- if-- if there is an Irishman here who is-- owes me a favor, several favors. Because he was a solicitor. And I think I can persuade him to guarantee for you to go to Ireland. Well, Ben's father was living in Ireland, in Dublin, with his sisters and his stepmother. And also his brother and sister-in-law and the nieces were in Dublin. And I welcomed that, because I had no family in London except my mother's cousins, my mother's aunt, et cetera. But here, Ben has his father and his brother, which are nearer now. So we went-- I went to Ireland. 
INT: How long had you lived in New York? MS: In New York I was-- [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] no. I came to in '45. I-- I was just turned-- [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] six months.  INT: So what happened when you arrived in Dublin? MS: I was on the ship. And I must tell you, I-- I will be choking when I will be talking about it. I was sitting overnight trip. And when we came to Shannon, I went off. And Shannon was then-- the airport was [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] Nissen huts, just Nissen huts. A couple of Nissen huts. And [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] when I went back to the airplane, I was sitting-- opposite me was a very nice gentleman. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] I must tell you first of all, I had great difficulties in getting a place on an airplane because a lot of refugees were traveling back to England, you see. Because England was bombed, as you know. And so they were-- it was very difficult. One day, the travel agent phoned me up that they have one seat if I want to. An extra plane was put on. So I grabbed it. And that was on Thanksgiving Day. And I didn't know about Thanksgiving Day. I didn't know what it was, Thanksgiving Day. And I arrived-- it was the 24th of November, 26th of November, something like that. And when I was sitting in the plane, opposite me was sitting a gentleman who was going to London. And then he was talking to me and asking me questions. And all of a sudden, [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] I looked out of the window, and it was all dark. And I thought to myself, where am I going? What am I doing? Why am I going? Maybe it was three and 1/2 years, four years, since I have seen Ben. Maybe we grew apart. Letters are all right, but when we get together, maybe we have grown apart. I want to get out. And all of a sudden, it-- an urge. I run to the door. And I'm banging to the door. And I scream my head off, get me out! Get me out of here! I don't want to go back. So the gentleman across from me came over and hugged me and cuddled me and took me back to the seat and said, don't cry. You are going to Ireland. And in Ireland, we will see to it that you should go to England. So don't cry. You are going with us. You can't go out. You can't fly out. And-- and then-- and the stewardess gave me a hot drink. And I was sitting down and-- and crying my heart out. And the gentleman said to me, lift the-- the curtain, the blind. You will see something. And when I lift the blind, I couldn't believe what I am seeing. All green fields. That was Ireland. It was-- all of a sudden, it was day. It was morning, early morning. And there was the green island. I couldn't believe my eyes. He says, aren't you pleased that you didn't fly out? [LAUGHS] Yes, I was very pleased. And then I came down. I hesitated to go out of the plane. I was so frightened to face Ben. I was petrified. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] And I was the last one out of the-- of-- out of the airplane. She chucked me out, the-- the stewardess. She said, look, if you don't leave, we can't clean up the plane, so get out. And there was standing one man, and it was Ben, in despair. He thought that I haven't arrived. And when I walked down, it was just-- we fell in each other's arms, and that was it. 
INT: When did you get married? MS: A month later, I think. I had to be in London-- in Ireland two weeks. Two weeks later. I was in Ireland, on the 9th of December, 1945 was my wedding day.  INT: We'll take a tape break. MS: Mm.  INT: This is tape four. I'm interviewing Miriam Stanton. You got married in December, 1945. Was there any problem now to getting to England? MS: No. It wasn't any problem because my father-in-law-- first of all, I must tell you something. May I just tell you a story about my wedding? When we came to Shannon, I phoned my father, and Ben phoned his father, and I spoke to him. And he say, welcome my daughter. Thank God you are here. And Ben asks, have the invitation gone out? So he says, yes. So I say, excuse me, Ben, what invitation are those? He says to our wedding. I say, but didn't I write to you and tell you that I don't want a big wedding? I just want the-- a ceremony in the synagogue and a drink, and that's all I want. I don't want a wedding. So he says, oh, we have only a small wedding. Don't worry about it. I say, how many people? He says, only 300. I say, that is a small wedding? How can you do that? He says, I didn't do it. My father wants it. He is a very important Jewish fellow in Ireland. And also-- he also a lot of invitation. If his eldest son is getting married, he must make a big wedding, and that's what he want. I say, I have no clothes. I have nothing. He says, don't worry. That will be seen to. And I had the suit I wanted, and also a white dress I bought there. Just a plain evening dress, you know. And we had a very lovely wedding. 
INT: And when did you go on to England? MS: We went to-- in England-- in Ireland, my father-in-law saw to it that I should get an Irish visa-- Irish passport. So I was a Irish citizen for 24 hours. And [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] when I came to England, I had to give it back to the Irish consulate here. And I became right away an English citizen, because automatically, being married to an Englishman, I-- at that time was automatically I became British.  INT: What did your husband do for a living? MS: He was a importer and exporter for food. Actually, he was working in his father's factory as-- beforehand, as a general manager. He had-- his father had a very big gown factory. But since his father-in-law moved to Ireland-- his mother died. And his father-in-law moved to Ireland, and he remarried in Ireland and had two little sisters, two little girls. And so he was a exporter-importer with somebody in food, in bulk, like tinned fruit and tinned food, et cetera. At that time, was very difficult to get in England something, and he was one of the big importers.  INT: When did your father come to England? MS: My father-- Ben sent for him, and he came to England a few months after I got married. I can't remember exactly when it was. But he was traveling between here and Paris, where his two sons were back in Paris. So he was traveling backwards and forwards. And my younger brother were-- had a visa to Canada. So he went to Canada, and he couldn't make a success there. So I brought him over to England. And he was working here with us in England. And then I introduce him to a very nice girl, and he got married. 
INT: What happened to your brother Jack? MS: My brother Jack went back to-- to France. And his wife was very unpleasant, and that was not a happy reunion. And eventually, he left her, went to Portugal. And from Portugal-- he had a lot of friends there-- he went to Brazil. And he settled in Brazil. He died only lately, about five, six years ago.  INT: And your niece? Had she survived the war, little [? Danielle? ?] MS: My niece is very often in England. She was here two weeks ago. Very often in England. She travels between England and Paris. She is a grandmother now.  INT: And you just told me your younger brother-- what was his name again? MS: Jack.  INT: The younger one. MS: Bill.  INT: Bill had-- had met a nice girl through you. What was her name, the girl he married? MS: Stella.  INT: Do you have children? MS: Pardon?  INT: Do you have children? MS: Unfortunately not.  INT: Did you work in England-- MS: Yes.  INT: --over the years? MS: I-- I worked with my husband in the business. And then a friend of his came and opened a coffee shop and wanted me to-- to manage it. And I said to him fairly straight out that I have never had a job in my life. I always worked for my father. So I wouldn't know how to behave as a employee. Unless you make me a partner, I wouldn't work. And I didn't know anything about catering. I could make an omelet, but [LAUGHS] that's all I could make. And he-- [PAUSES FOR 6 SECONDS] [SIGHS] he didn't want me as a partner. But he had to go to Kenya, so it's either that or he resell the place. So he gave me a partnership, 50/50. And after three months, I realized I can't work with him. So we split. And I bought from him the coffee shop in-- that was Mayfair in Brook Street. And we opened other coffee shops. So it was very, very lovely business. I really enjoyed-- because I love people. I love human beings. I don't like papers. And I enjoyed very much my work. And I had to retire because I wasn't well enough. I had several operations, and I had to retire. I had to sell out. 
INT: Did anyone ever ask you about your wartime experiences? MS: About--  INT: Your experience-- experiences during the war? MS: Yes. It was-- was the Wiener-- that my husband will tell you more than I can. Because I was interviewed once, and--  INT: Who-- who by? Who by? Who interviewed you? MS: I can't remember now.  INT: OK, it doesn't-- you're-- and you're not the Wiener library? You-- you started the Wiener-- MS: Yes, it is-- it is in the library somewhere.  INT: Or was it the British Library? MS: I think so. Yes, in London. Yes, a library in-- in London somewhere. It's my tapes.  INT: What effect would you say your experiences in the war have had on the rest of your life? MS: First of all, [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] I-- now that I think back, I don't know how I survived it. But on our honeymoon, we went to Paris. I wanted to see my-- who is left of my family. And I met there my uncle, my father's brother, who was in Belgium when the war broke out from Warsaw. Was buying some goods for his retail shop. And he was caught there, and he couldn't go back to Poland. And his family couldn't come from Poland. So he also came to London-- to Paris to see who is left of the family. And we met in the apartment of my uncle whom we brought over from Paris-- from Poland, my two uncles, youngest brothers of my father. We made them also in the business. And [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] he met-- oh-- so I met him there. And he asked me one day-- one evening when he had supper with us, he says, Miriam, are you a British citizen now? I say, yes, I am. He said to me, [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] I tell you something. I would like-- I heard that my wife, Auntie [? Sala, ?] is in Strasbourg, outside Strasbourg, in a camp, in a alien camp. Would you go and bring her? She has no papers. So I say-- so my husband stepped in. And he say, I will think about it. I won't allow her. Because on my papers, on my passport, is that born in Warsaw. So I am not born British. He says, I am British, and I will go for her. And we decided that he should go. The next day, he came to the hotel, my uncle, with his wife. What was so funny, that when he left us he went to bed, and he had a dream that she's calling him like that, come, come, come. So he got up and went to the [FRENCH]. And the first train went to Strasbourg. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] So he got off the train, and the workmens were queuing up to go into Germany. And he queued up. He also had no paper. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] He queue up. And when he came nearer to the end of the queue, he go-- went back to the-- to the end of the queue to think how he will go through, you know? All of a sudden, he heard, on the other side of the rails, screaming, 'Madame, madame, madame, madame!' And he looked. Everybody looked. And he recognized his wife. So he run over the rails to the other pavement, and he grabbed her. And she hit him, hit him. And he says, I am going to my husband. I don't want to go back. I don't want to go back. And he says, I am here. So that how they met. She had says the story that during that night, she had a dream to come, come, come. So she went, and the first train went to Strasbourg. Now, isn't that-- if that would be a reading in a book, I would say that that is a story just thought of. But it's not. It is a real truth. 
INT: What do you do in your spare time now? MS: What I am doing now? Lounging about. I am embroidering a lot. I do all the tapestry, and-- et cetera.  INT: Did you ever return to Warsaw? MS: Yes.  INT: When was that? MS: I was three times in Warsaw.  INT: How long-- how long did you stay? MS: A-- a week or two. Once I went, and I realized I have a cousin who'd-- unfortunately, he died lately. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] Actually, he's not my cousin-- my mother's cousin. His mother was my favorite aunt, my real favorite aunt. And then I went back to visit him, and once I brought him here. And then I went with Ben to show him where his parents come from, and to show him Sosnowiec and Katowice and all those places where they come from.  INT: What was your reaction the first time you went back to Poland? MS: I tell you something. It was a very, very difficult thing for me to do, but I went. And I went to see the apartment where I was born, where we lived. And the whole house is full of bullets, and the balcony on which we stood was broken. And I was standing there, and I think-- was thinking here I was. Here I was born. And I went up to see the apartment. And the lady wouldn't let me in because she thought that I am somebody who will not go out. Because she must have taken the apartment during the war, you see? And when I told her who I was, during the-- just open on the chain-- she says, you have nothing to do here anymore, and blocked the door-- closed the door. And it's-- it's a-- a very minor thing in my life, very minor thing. 
INT: Do you belong to a refugee organization? MS: I belong to [INAUDIBLE]. I support Israel now.  INT: How about a refugee organization? MS: No.  INT: Have you got a message for future generations? MS: Yes. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] Work. Try and have a success. And be loving to human beings. Help them as far as you can. And that's what I did, and I think I have been recompensed. I have survived that war. And I am now very, very happy in England with my husband. Unfortunately, I have no children. I have had two ectopics, and I have had many operations. And it was very, very sad. And I couldn't adopt a Jewish child because there were no Jewish children to adopt. And when I was-- for my second operation, when I was in hospital, the doctor, gynecologist, came in running to me. And he says, you are not going home empty-handed. There's a little girl here of 13 having a birth any minute, and-- Jewish girl with a Jewish husband-- Jewish boyfriend. And you can have that baby, because they want to give it for adoption. And I was absolutely delighted. And I told Ben about it. We were sitting and waiting. And when the baby was born, her parents wouldn't part with it. So I went home empty-handed. Well, I adopted my nieces, my nephews. But it's not the same.  INT: Is there anything you would like to add to this interview? MS: That I am very happy. My husband make me very happy. And I'm very happy in England. 
INT: Mrs. Stanton, thank you very much. MS: Yeah. I thank you very much for asking me all those questions, interviewing me, because it is a great relief for me. That's my husband. That's-- his name is Benjamin Stanton.  INT: When did you meet your wife? BENJAMIN STANTON: I met my wife in-- in London. It came about in a very peculiar fashion which is too long to tell you now. But it happened to be on the day before the funeral of King George V in 1936.  INT: How much did you know about her circumstances during the war? BENJAMIN STANTON: Very little indeed. The letters that-- that I got were censored, except for a couple that came through Switzerland, which were taken by friends of the family. And otherwise, I knew nothing about really what was happening.  INT: When-- when was the first time that you heard a full account of what had happened to your wife? BENJAMIN STANTON: When she came to Dublin, where we got married, which was in-- in end of November, 1945, when we finally had time to sit down and get to know each other. Because when I saw her coming off the plane at Shannon-- she had come from New York. Really, almost as if I was going to see a stranger, because I hadn't seen her for six years, over six years. And it happened that as she came, walked along the path towards the customs shed, we just waved to each other. And I don't know, but this was-- she-- it was if time had never been. It was yesterday. 
INT: Is there anything you would like to say about your wife? BENJAMIN STANTON: Oh, I could say an awful lot-- MS: [LAUGHS] BENJAMIN STANTON: --which would make you tired and perhaps would make her head swell. I really ought not to say too much, but she's a grand lady. I have been very privileged to have been her husband for as long as the Almighty has spared us, which is over 52 years. And I do hope that we will be-- continue to live together in harmony and in peace, and as we have done up till now, for many years to come.  INT: Mr. Stanton, thank you very much. BENJAMIN STANTON: Not-- MS: That's my paternal grandfather. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] It's his name is-- he was Shia Mendel Sanzer. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] Country was in Poland. Year of the photograph, in about 1930. That's my grandmother, paternal grandmother, Esther Sanzer. And it was taken in Poland, about also 1930, same time that my grandfather. That was my first suit made by my mother's tailor, the grown-up tailor. So I felt very grown up there. And that was in-- BENJAMIN STANTON: Romania. MS: --in Romania, in Chernivtsi. BENJAMIN STANTON: In 19-- MS: It was also in the 19-- BENJAMIN STANTON: '29. MS: '29, something like that. BENJAMIN STANTON: Stage fright. MS: Yeah. That's my parents in-- taken in Nice in 1931 or '32, something like that.  INT: 19-- BENJAMIN STANTON: France. MS: '30--  INT: Wasn't this photo taken during the war, in 1941? MS: It was in-- during the war, yes. 
INT: What are your parents' names, please? MS: My mother's name was Frieda. And my father's Abraham [NON-ENGLISH] Sanzer.  INT: OK. MS: First is me, then my mother, Frieda Sanzer, and Ben's mother, Rosie Silverstein, and taken in France. BENJAMIN STANTON: In?  INT: In which year? MS: In 1930-- BENJAMIN STANTON: '36. MS: '36. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] The first one is my father. And next to him is a captain who was very kind of-- of-- for me in-- on the ship, which was traveling backwards and forwards from Lisbon. And his first name was Carlos, but I don't remember his other name.  INT: What year was this photo taken? MS: In 19-- BENJAMIN STANTON: '41. '41. MS: '41. My grandmother, Sara Majerowicz, and myself, Miriam Stanton, in Jamaica in 1944. Now--  INT: Yeah, please. MS: That I remember very well. That's on my wedding day. That's the outfit I wanted, which my future husband has provided for me. And it was before I was going to the synagogue in 1945.  INT: In which country? MS: In Ireland. That's our wedding picture. And that's me and my husband, Ben Stanton. And it was taken in Dublin in 1945. That was on my wedding day. That's after we got married, after the synagogue. That was at the dinner party. The cake, you can see just the flowers on the right-hand side of the cake. And that's my husband, my new husband, and myself.  INT: And where was it taken? MS: In Dublin. 
INT: When? MS: In the 9th of December, 1945.  INT: Thank you.