INT: March 19, 1998. The survivor is Mr. Egon Peter Stadelman. His name at birth was also Stadelman, but with two N at the end. My name is Elisabeth Pozzi-Thanner-- E-L-I-S-A-B-E-T-H P-O-Z-Z-I T-H-A-N-N-E-R. We in Riverdale, New York, United States of America. Language is going to be English. ES: Yes, ma'am.  INT: March 19, 1998. I am talking with Mr. Egon Stadelman. My name is Elizabeth Pozzi-Thanner. We are in New York, in Riverdale, in the United States of America. And the language of this interview is going to be English. Mr. Stadelman, would you please give me your complete first and last name, and spell it for me. ES: Egon Peter Stadelman-- E-G-O-N P-E-T-E-R S-T-A-D-E-L-M-A-N.  INT: When you were born, was your name the same? ES: Was the same, plus one N.  INT: Stadelmann-- with two N-- ES: Stadelmann was the way in Germany. I lost the one N when I crossed the Atlantic, and threw it in there.  INT: When and where were you born? ES: In Berlin, January 31, 1911.  INT: Where in Berlin did your family live? ES: In Berlin Wilmersdorf, which is a suburb. No, it's not a suburb, it's one of the 20-- [PAUSES FOR 5 SECONDS] [GERMAN] in Berlin-- part-- one of the trendy parts of the city. One is Wilmersdorf, the other is Schoneberg, and so on and so forth. We have 20 of them.  INT: In, in the-- in 1911 and the early years after you were born, how, how did Wilmersdorf look like? Can you-- can you describe it? ES: Well it was a very quiet-- [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] again, I say suburb, though I-- though I shouldn't. A very quiet [PAUSES FOR 5 SECONDS] little-- not little, should be a town, connected directly by subway, by, by bus, by streetcar and [GERMAN] to the-- the center of the city. 
INT: How, how long did it take to get directly to the center of the city? ES: Oh, not more than 30 minutes.  INT: Would you-- would you go often? ES: I don't know how often my parents took me out. I was only very, very young. Later on, I, I very often went into the city and-- for, for work, et cetera.  INT: What was the name of the street you grew up in? ES: [GERMAN].  INT: And the house? The building? ES: Kaiserplatz [GERMAN].  INT: Kaiserplatz means that was a square? Was it? ES: Well, it was a circle in the square. No, it was not a square, it was a-- an elongated park and a-- with a playground for kids. And that's it-- Kaiserplatz [GERMAN]. Now, it's called Bundesplatz, because there never wear German emperors.  INT: Did your family live in a-- in a house, in an apartment? ES: In an apartment.  INT: Which, which floor was that on? ES: The second.  INT: How-- how high-- can you describe it? Because if we would stand in front of, of that building-- is it still there? ES: I could not tell you, because I never was in Berlin again. And it might have been bombed, might not have been bombed.  INT: But if you-- if you and I would walk around in that neighborhood now-- ES: Oh, yes-- oh, yes.  INT: How, how would you describe the building if we were looking for the building? How did it look like? ES: Well, there was a store on the-- on the ground. And there were exactly four [PAUSES FOR 5 SECONDS] [? a turn. ?] 
INT: How, how many apartments were on, on each floor? ES: On each floor there were two.  INT: And the windows of your apartment were-- ES: To the street.  INT: Out to Kaiserplatz. ES: Out to Kaiserplatz.  INT: Did you have your own room? ES: No.  INT: Where, where was your bed? ES: My bed was-- where, where my, my cradle was, I don't know. My bed was then, after my father died in the First World War, 1915, my bed was moved into my mother's room.  INT: How, how big an apartment was it? ES: A three-room apartment.  INT: You mentioned your father's death very prematurely. What was your father's name? ES: Ferdinand.  INT: What, what kind of profession did he have? ES: He had a factory, a leather factory. He used to live in Offenbach, but when he married my mother, they came out and came to Berlin. And there, I was born.  INT: And how, how old were you when your father died? ES: '15-- 1915, so I was three, three years old.  INT: Do you have any-- ES: Three or-- three or four.  INT: Any memories of your father? ES: Oh, yes.  INT: What, what do you remember about him? ES: One very exact memory. I was always wild about newspapers. Whenever he came home, he threw a, a, a newspaper into my little-- what do you call it? [GERMAN], or whatever it is. 
INT: Playpen. ES: Mm?  INT: Playpen. ES: Playpen, yes. And I read that-- I read it, upside down, sideways. And the most interesting thing was that I looked at the pictures, and they interested me greatly. And then my father came and cut a, a little helmet for me, a paper helmet, or silhouettes. And that was all I remember. And one day, [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] he came home, [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] and said, I have to leave again at noon. So my mother was very upset, and, and she said, why? They're-- we are at war-- [SPEAKING GERMAN]. And I had no idea what that meant, not the slightest. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] And then he left, and I thought he was going to his office as usual. But he came back, and was very proud in his chic-- very chic uniform. And I was very proud, too, of course. But my mother was crying, and I couldn't quite understand why. So-- and then, he gave me a kiss, he kissed my mother, he swung me up in the air. This was his [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] manner and way with me. And when he left, he said, well, I'll see you-- I'll be back at-- for Christmas. [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] We never saw him again. He fell in Flanders, 1915. The early part of 1915. And his farewell was August 1st, 1914. That I know now-- at that time, I didn't know the date. 
INT: Do you remember how that was when your mother received the message about your father being dead? ES: No, I do not. But I noticed that she was terribly depressed, and was crying and crying, and put a picture of my father on her dresser. And put the black, white, and red colors around it. And whenever she passed it, she looked at it, and always had, for a long, long time, tears in her eyes.  INT: You haven't told me yet-- what was the name of your mother? ES: Margarita.  INT: What was her maiden name? ES: Engel.  INT: Engel. How, how old was your mother at the time when your father fell? ES: She was born '79, so she was little over 30. And all that happened-- 1879.  INT: When, when did you realize that your father wouldn't come back? ES: I realized-- I realized that when we had to move into her parents'-- my grandparents'-- house. So I asked why, and she explained, well, your father isn't coming back. I asked why, and I got an explanation which was not very satisfying. But I got an explanation, and I understood. In the meantime, I had seen pictures, and illustrated paper, and people dead on, on the battlefield, et cetera, et cetera. So-- [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] and then when we moved to our-- to her parents', my grandparents', my grandfather, whom I loved very much, took--  INT: What was his name? ES: Gustav-- Gustav Engel. And he took over the, the part of father. And he taught me an enormous-- he was very ambitious for me. And taught me, when I was five years old, how to read the time, how, you know, to know the-- where the wind is blowing from. On the opposite house, there was a weather-vane. And if we were standing this way, the wind came from the east. And that way, came from-- so I learned this-- these things long before I went to school. 
INT: Your grandfather-- what kind of professional background-- ES: He was a kauffman-- a merchant.  INT: And by the time you moved in, was-- ES: He was retired. He--  INT: Your grandmother? ES: Berta?  INT: What was her maiden name? ES: Felck.  INT: What kind of-- ES: F-- F-- F-E-L-C-K.  INT: What, what kind of woman was your grandmother? ES: Well, she was a tailor. And [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] she was constantly working on the sewing machine. I remember that very well.  INT: Where was the sewing machine? ES: In one of her-- in, in the living room. It was a combination of living room, and work room.  INT: And who did she work for? ES: Private customers.  INT: Would she go to see the customers, or did the customers come-- ES: The customers came to her.  INT: And were you in any way involved, or did you observe what she was doing? Did she-- ES: No, I wasn't interested.  INT: You were interested in newspapers. [LAUGHTER] ES: Exactly, yes.  INT: How, how did your mother manage? ES: Well, she got a very small pension-- [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] warriors widows mention-- pension. And well, we lived on that. It was not a very rich living, I can assure you that. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] And then, 1917, I was [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] going to school.  INT: Which school was that? ES: [GERMAN] gymnasium.  INT: Was it a public or a private school? ES: Public, public school. There were very few private schools in Berlin at that time. Well, because public schools were very good. 
INT: Do you remember-- ES: It was a-- it was a gymnasium, not a volksschule.  INT: Do you remember your first day of school? ES: Oh, yes. I had hoped very much that now I would learn how to read. Because I wanted to read the newspapers. And I also had hoped for a bag of sweets, which was the usual thing to get for first day at school. But I didn't. Nobody did at that time. I mean, it was the third year of the war, and they had-- there were-- there are no sweets for kids. Anyway, where I-- the first day, my grandfather took me. And he took me for a couple of days. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] And since the school was, as I told you, we lived in [GERMAN] first, then we moved to Kaiserplatz. My mother wanted me to go into school near Kaiserplatz, and avoid the traveling, the commuting. So my father took-- my grandfather took me a couple of times to the school. Told me, this is the street car you have to take. For a while, he still took me to the stop. And then took-- talked to the conductor and said, let him out at [GERMAN] where our school was situated. And [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] he had, I remember, a quarrel with my mother, because she wanted me to-- in a school nearby. But he said, the boy has to be become self-sufficient. And he can't learn early enough. And I'm grateful for that. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] And so we had the first [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] days of school. It was pretty boring, too. 
INT: Why? ES: We had a teacher who was going by the book. If I may say that in German-- [SPEAKING GERMAN]. And that we had to do ad infinitum. And my grandfather taught me on the side. So pretty soon, my-- the, the teacher-- an Herr Mantz-- M-A-N-T-Z-- was quite surprised, how, how do you know this? And I was bored in, in, in the classroom. And he pushed me one class ahead, so that was also the merit of my grandpa.  INT: You-- did you have any brothers or sisters? ES: No, ma'am.  INT: Any cousins nearby? ES: Yes, yes. My [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] mother had a sister, Martha, M-A-R-T-H-A, who was not married. She lived with us. And she had another sister. She was married, [? Clare-- ?] Clare-- C-L-A umlauted-- R-E. And she married a Mr. [? Lindenbaun-- ?] L-I-N-D-E-N-B-A-U-N. And that couple had two children-- in other words, two-- on that side, I had two cousins. One Herbert-- H-E-R-B-E-R-T, and Kate-- K-A umlauted T. And then they-- my grandparents had another-- a son, Leo, L-E-O, Leo Engel, who had two sons. One, Martin-- M-A-R-T-I-N, and one, Kurt, Kurt-- K-U-R-T.  INT: Were they close in age to you? ES: No. Well--  INT: Your cousins? ES: My cousin Kate, yes. She was older, she was older. A couple of years older. Herbert was considerably older-- he was already a-- in-- [? prima ?] when I was going to school. The other one, Martin, my, my uncle's-- Uncle Leo's son, was also considerably older. But little Kurt was an [NON-ENGLISH]. He, on the picture that you will see, he is the one in, in the baby carriage. So I-- he was four years younger than I. No, yeah-- four-- five years, sorry, five years younger. 
INT: Who, who did you like to play with? ES: My favorite was little Kurt. Because I could play with him. The others didn't care-- they didn't give a damn.  INT: And outside the family, who, who were your friends? ES: Oh, in school I had a couple of friends, Gentile and Jewish. And then when I grew older, I attached-- I attached myself to a couple of older boys, whether they wanted to or not. And, well, we, we, we became good friends. One was Robert Lantz-- L-A-N-T-Z-- who, I believe, came to New York and became a film producer. The other perished-- Oskar, Oskar Eisner-- I-- E-I-S-N-E-R. I believe he perished in the Pacific War.  INT: You were mentioning before that you had both Jewish and Gentile friends. What about your own identity? How, how were you brought up at the time? Or-- ES: Well, of, of course, I lived with my Jewish grandparents, and my Jewish mother. The other side, the Stadelmann side, well they, once in a while, called, visited. But then, I think that slowly cooled off-- especially after the end of the war. And they still lived in Offenbach. So they-- I lost complete connection. [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] Absolutely-- my cousin Herbert went to visit them once, and he was very nicely received. But I, I, I had no, no wish to go there. I don't know, I was too, too close to my-- the other part of the family. Because the others, I had never seen, or, or rarely seen, or spoken to. 
INT: So what you're saying, was there-- was there any exchange of visits between your grandparents and you at some time? Or-- ES: My grandparents and who?  INT: The grandparents in, in, in Offenbach? ES: Yes, the-- once in a while they came to Berlin, and looked at their grandchild. But it was not a very close relationship. I do not think that they were particularly enthused about him marrying a Jewish woman. So, and I, I was the, so to speak, the bastard-- half Jewish, half Gentile.  INT: Did you know any other parts of the Stadelmann family-- ES: No--  INT: --when you were young? ES: No-- he had a couple of brothers there. They all went to war, and one came back terribly wounded. The other, I just don't know what happened to him.  INT: At home with your grandparents and your mother, was there any, any religious education that you received? Or-- ES: I'm sorry to say, no.  INT: How, how was it then for you-- or when do you think you, you realized that there were Jewish kids and Gentile kids-- and what, what made the distinction for you when you were-- when you grew up? ES: Oh, yes, when you came into [GERMAN], which is the first grade of the gymnasium, that was when I was nine years old, there were religious classes in gymnasium-- Catholic, Protestant, and Jewish. And my mother said, you go to the Jewish. And there I learned about Jewish history. [PAUSES FOR 5 SECONDS] I had a nice, nice Jewish teacher, and we had one class a week-- no, sorry, two classes a week, religion. 
INT: Did, did your family ever go to the synagogue? ES: Yes, on the high holidays. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] Sometimes on Friday night.  INT: And for you and your relationship with whichever classmates or friends you might have had at this-- in these early years of, of gymnasium, did it make a difference? ES: Not the slightest. Not the slightest. We, we were-- it's-- we were a team, an absolute team. So that question just didn't come up. Either we were too young, or, or didn't understand all this. That came later.  INT: And we will stop tape number one. ES: Oh, yeah.  INT: March 19, 1998. I'm talking with Mr. Egon Stadelman. This is tape number two. In school, which were the subjects that you preferred? ES: History and German. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] So that were my preferred-- history. Unfortunately, in those classes, [NON-ENGLISH], history was taught about the old Romans, the old Greeks, and then god knows what, but not about modern history.  INT: Where did you then get the-- your, your information about the current events from? ES: From newspapers. [LAUGHS]  INT: Was there a radio in the house at the time? ES: Not at that time. 19-- oh, 1918, 1920, 1921, there was no radio, no-- and later on, 19-- I don't know when that was, we got a little detector set. I had to-- there was a crystal in, and you had to put the needle in a certain place. And it never worked very well. 
INT: Which, which newspaper did you read? ES: [GERMAN], [GERMAN], [GERMAN]-- which was a-- oh, occasionally, the [GERMAN], which was a Social Democrat paper.  INT: Who, who provided you with the-- those papers? ES: A very nice lady who had a newsstand on the other side of Kaiserplatz. She gave me the papers left over. [LAUGHS] So I got them. My mother-- or my, my grandparents were subscribers of the [GERMAN]-- that I got.  INT: And which-- ES: All the others on the sly.  INT: And in, in this vast variety of newspapers, which were the articles that you would read first? ES: Always the political.  INT: Political meaning German politics, or foreign politics? ES: German-- yeah, I mean, there was mostly German politics at that time, all the story about the conferences, there was conferences that are going on all over the world. The first German-Russian treaty in Rapallo. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] And then the first [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] treaty between France and Germany, by Stresemann, Briand, and-- Briand, the Frenchman-- the French premier. So actually-- and then I read in the [GERMAN], I loved to read Alfred [? Kell-- ?] Alfred [? Kell's ?] theater reviews. He had a very strange style-- telegraph style, just [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] sentences no longer than eight words at the most. And then that, that was always in the morning paper. The evening paper, then he brought very intensive and very close review.  INT: Did you get to see some of the plays he, he wrote about? ES: Unfortunately, no. There was no money for that-- to go to theater. However, [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] in [GERMAN], the next grades in, in, in school, the school went to Shakespeare plays. And that, of course, was wonderful for me. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] Of course, the next day we had to write about it, that it-- had to analyze the play, and this and that. And that was less amusing, I should say. 
INT: Did you like to write? ES: Yeah. But not analysis of, of, of a play.  INT: What would you like to write? ES: Oh, I would have liked to, to write-- going to the theater, and about the actors, and whom I liked and whom I didn't like. And the [INAUDIBLE]-- I would like to play all these things. But no dice.  INT: As you said, the, the economic situation in the house was not so good. ES: It was not good at all. [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] There were-- well, my grandfather passed away in 1920, so there was one person less-- one less breadwinner. I mean, he still had some, some, some income from-- I don't know where from, but he had it. My grandmother got older and older, and my aunt Martha-- M-A-R-T-H-A-- took over the tailoring business. And my mother lived on, on her income as a widow.  INT: How would your mother [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] spend her days? What, what did she do during the-- ES: Well, she tried--  INT: --apart of taking care of you, certainly. ES: Yeah, well, I was in school in the morning, from, from, from 9:00-- no, from, from 8:00 to 1:00, and the upper classes from 8:00 to 2:00. And then, in the afternoon, I'd do, do schoolwork, naturally. And there was not much free time. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] What she did is she represented some sort of a firm. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] They sold doctors' [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] equipment. And she went from-- to various doctors. And I think it was Henkel, I'm not quite sure. But that is the only, only greater firm that made good medical instruments. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] And so the situation got worse and worse when inflation came. 
INT: But when there was leisure time, with the little money that you had, what, what, what do you do in leisure time? How would you-- what would you do? ES: A friend of my aunt's in Copenhagen sent me a bike. [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] And it was a little bit too big for me at that time yet, but nevertheless, I used it and I was traveling all over-- Wilmersdorf was not too far from [GERMAN]. So we [? trailed ?] out, and was in the green as much as I possibly could.  INT: We meaning yourself-- ES: Myself first alone, and then my friend, Oskar. We both were lovers of nature and we didn't play football-- I mean, soccer-- or anything. And so we took the bikes, and out we went. Sometimes, on Sunday-- Saturdays, far out along the [GERMAN]-- which was the auto [GERMAN], in Berlin, along the [GERMAN]-- out to Wansee, all the way out to Wansee and back. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] And we were-- this was good exercise. I wish I had it now.  INT: And I would like to, to somehow understand also a little bit more still what, what-- how your mother was. What, what did she like to do if she-- if she had a moment for herself? ES: Oh, she loved to go to the movies. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] There was a movie across, across the street. It was cheap enough. And well, if there were good films, she went. I couldn't, couldn't take to the movies, at first. And later on, [LAUGHS] I got it-- became a movie buff. 
INT: Did you go with her later on? ES: Yeah, yes, there was-- that was considerably later, though. There was an American film coming-- the first song film, with Al Jolson. And that one had to see-- everybody had to see that. And there, the-- my aunt Martha, again, my mother, and I, and we were absolutely baffled by the sound coming from the screen. It was quite something. And I-- it's-- I don't know when that was, '28-- must have been '28 or '27. I could look it up.  INT: No, it's fine. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] Yeah, you mentioned inflation before when I interrupted you. How did that affect your life and that of your family? ES: Well, it affected it in a very, very sad way. [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] The mark wasn't worth anything anymore. And from day to day, the dollar got higher and higher. And the last stamps to send a letter out was 50 billion-- 50 milliarden, which is-- in English, means billion. And people went-- this-- seriously, with [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] cases, or, or suitcases full of paper money to get whatever they could get for that [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] worthless paper. And I still have one of these old stamps in my catalog-- they are now worth-- catalog worth-- unused, $0.30, but used, $40. Because they are-- they are not around. Nobody could, could afford 50, 50 milliarden, 50 billions for, for a lousy postage stamp. And of, of course, when the rent came, the [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] soldiers, the rent for the widow-- well, that might have been 120,000 marks. But for those 120,000 marks, you couldn't get anything, because the next day, the, the-- it was already a million. So it-- that was a terrible time. And-- 
INT: What, what did you do? Or what did your mother, aunt, and grandmother do? ES: They tried to go on. There were a couple of newly, newly riches-- people who made money on, on, on the entire situation. And they ordered this or that. Doctors still needed their instruments. And-- but again, let's say on Thursday, my mother got her-- the money from the firm, the commission. But on, on, on Saturday, the same $100,000, or $200,000-- they're worth nothing. So that was this rapid inflation was killing Germany. And the German people, and everyone. And I was lucky inasmuch as the Hoover plan came into being. And [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] in every long interval in-- during school, school time-- I got fed. He came-- the, the Hoover people came, and fed needy children.  INT: What did you get? ES: Sandwiches, mostly porridge. Cereal-- which we-- I was glad to be introduced to cereal, which I'm now very much used to. And--  INT: We'll stop the tape. ES: Oh, I see it blinking.  INT: March 19, 1998. Survivor is Mr. Egon Stadelman. Tape number three. When inflation really hit, what grade were you in? ES: 1923, that-- I was in-- [GERMAN].  INT: And how often did you get a meal in school? ES: Every day.  INT: Once? ES: Every school day.  INT: One meal? ES: One meal. Right.  INT: And at home, did they manage to-- ES: Well, they managed, yeah. They had a bread, or this, or some-- some cabbage, or this or that. There was always something in the house. I-- I didn't exactly starve, but I, of course, I was still underweight. I was-- OK. 
INT: And then? ES: Well, at the end of 1923, there were two great happenings in Germany. Number one, a man by the name of Hjalmar Schact had the first [PAUSES FOR 5 SECONDS] reform-- complete [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] economic reform. And the Rentenmark was introduced. That was one. And with that, we had the first [GERMAN]-- the other one that [GERMAN] came about after the Second World War. And then, things stabilized a bit. But almost on the same day that this went into effect, Adolf Hitler and General [? Field Marshall ?] [? von ?] Ludendorff putsched in Munich. But that putsch, of course, was-- they wanted to get rid of the [GERMAN]. So-- but that putsch was suppressed. And [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] as you probably know, Hitler was sent to Landsberg. That was not a prison, but a fortress. And he could see anybody he wanted to, and he could write his infamous And that was the beginning of the downfall. And he-- not of the downfall of the republic, but the beginning of the [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] Nazi movement. Then it became more and more intensive, and-- and stronger.  INT: Do you remember when you became first aware of the Nazi movement? ES: Yeah, but it was not directly with the Hitler movement. 1920, there was another putsch and Ludendorff and a General Ehrhardt and an East Prussian-- East Prussian land-- land owner by the name of Kapp, putsched and marched into Berlin. And in the street next to the Kaiser-Platz and into the Hildegardstrasse, was one of their-- their-- where they put up [? bivouac. ?] And I had to see that. I have walked there and saw all these soldiers, and all. And they had kitchens there, field kitchens. And they were-- oh, want something to eat? I said, yes. And they-- they fed me. Then an officer came, and asked, is your father a commie, meaning communist? Or is he a [NON-ENGLISH]? Or is he a red? I had no idea what they-- what he meant. So I said, my father died in the World War, fell-- [INAUDIBLE], then you are one of us. I said, OK, I'm one of you. And we came and the soldiers fed me, and gave me a very good meal. I said, I want to take something home for-- for my mother, and my aunt, and my grandmother. They gave me a big portion. And I carried it home. And then I asked one-- what is this you have on your helmet and on your arm? This is the sign of the new Germany. I said, OK, the new Germany? The old Germany is good enough for me. That was 1920. The next day, that putsch was suppressed, too. The only thing was, there was no newspaper, which I regretted. [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] OK. 
INT: And then? ES: Well, then--  INT: I mean, when-- when-- when was it that you became aware of-- of-- ES: Then--  INT: The new political ideas that came up? ES: Then I learned that the strange signs on the helmet, and on the armband was a swastika. And from now on I knew that-- that became-- every day was something about it in the-- in the papers. And while there was a relatively quiet period from 1924 to 1928, I-- I, well, I went to school, and tried to become the publisher of a school paper-- which was a fiasco. Because the little boys wanted to-- to read something funny. And the older-- older ones, the one in [? primo, ?] and in [GERMAN]-- they didn't give a damn about the-- the stupid little [GERMAN], had to say. But another one came up, much later, another paper, which was also a fiasco, but not because of the kids, but of the director. The [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] constitution of Weimar [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] had ordered that on [GERMAN], the day the constitution was signed, all public buildings had to be-- [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] show the flag, which was then black, red, and gold-- or yellow. And my-- our director pulled up the-- the black, white, and red-- the flag of the empire, the German empire. And my chief editor and I-- chief editor-- [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] wrote a story why on the [GERMAN], the German flag was not shown, but the flag of the old Kaiserreich, the old empire. And that was the end of the paper. It was hardly distributed when the director of the school, the-- came into the classroom, and yelled and yelled and yelled. And I got two hours of arrest-- which was-- I had to stay two longer, two hours longer in school. And I never want to see this piece of paper-- he used another expression-- again. And that seemed to be the end of my newspaper career, I was afraid. Until we had a very nice young [GERMAN], and he said, well, Stadelman, think of the consequences. Whatever you do, think of the consequences. The consequence of this paper is what you just got-- think before you do anything. It was a good advice. It was very good advice. I used it for the rest of my life. I think before I talk, or do something. [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] So-- 
INT: Do you-- do you remember an event in these times and later, where, at the first time it became a problem, that you were Jewish and not a Gentile? ES: Only one, only once in school. There was a-- a little boy whose parents obviously were Jew haters. And when he saw me, he said, [SPEAKING GERMAN]. So I thought, I thought-- got some [INAUDIBLE]. And forgot about it. But that was the first-- first and only time, before '33.  INT: What year was it that you graduated from school? ES: 1929.  INT: And what were your plans for-- for after school? ES: I.  INT: What would you want to do? ES: I wanted to get into newspaper business-- into the newspaper business. I applied at three [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] publishers-- publishing firms. There was [GERMAN], there was Ullstein, and there was [GERMAN]. [GERMAN] didn't answer at all. Ullstein said we don't need anybody. And [GERMAN] asked me for an interview. And four days after having the Abitur, on April 1st, 1929, I had my first job at the [GERMAN]. However, I was terribly disappointed, because I was not put into the editorial department. The personnel chief said, well, you are going to learn what a newspaper is about from the bottom up. And so I went to the [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] advertising department, to the distribution department, to the-- all-- all departments there are, until April, 1931. Then he came again and said, now. And then I came and became, for the [GERMAN], one of their young men. 
INT: What were the first tasks that you were-- ES: Oh, the first-- the first assignments, fires and [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] little things, car-- car accidents, happenings, accidents of the street car, or this or that, unimportant things.  INT: The readers of the [GERMAN], what part of the-- of the Berlin population read the [GERMAN]? Can you describe that? ES: I would see the bourgeois-- the-- good burghers of-- no, no, I-- I don't mean hamburgers, either. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] Middle class, middle class. And it had a better [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] circulation than the Because it was cheaper. had every day, and sub-- [PAUSES FOR 5 SECONDS] what do you call it, the [GERMAN]--  INT: Supplement. ES: Supplement, yeah. So--  INT: And your-- your goal, though as a-- as a journalist, and as a writer, what-- what was your goal at that time? What did you-- ES: I wanted to become the editor. [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] No, of course not the chief editor right away, but I wanted to become the editor. And that came after I had really passed my tests for writing, and in writing. My-- my-- the-- the editor in chief said, I don't want to see you longer than three hours a day in the office. The rest of the day, walk around Berlin, and you'll find stories. And even if you come home-- come back with no story at all, fine. But I don't want you to sit here on your four letters and write what the-- the agencies-- rewrite for the agencies. So I went around, and I really saw a lot of things. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] That was it. That-- he-- he called it [GERMAN]. 
INT: As you said, you saw a lot of things. ES: Yes. Things which--  INT: Did you-- did you see things that were changing politically in the attitudes-- ES: That, I saw later, yes.  INT: When-- when did that-- when-- when did it start to-- to become really something that you were aware of? ES: Hmm--  INT: Can you pinpoint it? ES: That was in 19-- let me see, 1930, yeah, 1932. When there was-- when von Papen took over the government, and there were elections, and-- twice. And so I went out. The boss said, look, see what the-- the-- what is the mood is in the-- in the city. And there was the custom at that time in-- in Berlin, that everybody hung out a flag. The Nazis put out the swastika flag, the German nationals put out the [GERMAN], the black, white, and red. The republicans, black, red, and gold, and the communists, and many socialists, the red flag. So I came home, and went-- went through the city, and saw, very much to my surprise, that the so-called Red Wedding-- that was-- Wedding was a part of Berlin-- these burghers-- that they, all of a sudden, instead of the red flags they had, had suddenly swastikas. So I grabbed one of the young guys and said, look, why [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] swastikas? You are probably or were a member of the Communist Party, or the [GERMAN], [GERMAN]. So, yes, I was. But you know, it's-- and-- and then he quoted [GERMAN], [SPEAKING GERMAN]. Well, that's the reason. It was a reason for hundreds of thousands of people to vote for the Nazis. And then the-- at the-- at the-- [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] on election day-- oh, I wrote a long story about the various parts of Berlin, even the-- in-- in Dahlem, which was one of the richest, all of a sudden, swastika flags. Well, I mean, they couldn't say, [SPEAKING GERMAN] anymore. Why? I raised that question in the story I wrote. Then when election day came, for the first time, Hitler and the National Socialists, had 107 deputies in the Reichstag. They had-- whereas they had about 12 before. And my boss said, this is the end. Well, I didn't believe that. But it came to-- slowly but surely. The first time I-- I was really involved politically was on the 20th of July, 1932. One of our police reporters got some wind that Unter den Linden, where the Ministry of the Interior was situated-- the Prussian Ministry of the Interior-- would be occupied by the [GERMAN] and the German nationals. So my boss said, you stand there on the other side, and just watch. I came there, and I came from the side of the Brandenburger Tor, and there were masses and masses of Social Democrats, who wanted to-- obviously had heard the same story. And on the other side, there was-- the other side of Unter den Linden was a schloss, the-- the imperial castle. There were lots and lots of all the [GERMAN] communists. And they were there ready to call a general strike, and chase these troops, away these few. But as always, the socialists and the communists couldn't get together. And at 12 o'clock sharp, one lieutenant and 10 men came, marched into the Ministry of the Interior, and the policemen in front were standing guard. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] Greeted the lieutenant like a good Prussian. And 10 minutes later, Minister Severing, the minister, the social-- the Social Democrat minister of the interior, came out, and left without a shot, without a word-- giving up the republic. Because from now on, von Papen and the authoritarian government took over. This [GERMAN], and all kinds of things. 
INT: What were the thoughts in-- in your paper, among the other journalists? ES: Oh, at that time-- at that time, the press was still rather free. They didn't interfere with the press, because old Hindenburg wouldn't have liked that. Of course, there was already Nazi papers, the [GERMAN] was very [GERMAN]. And then the left-- and [GERMAN] were in the middle. Some other papers, too, the [GERMAN] papers, [GERMAN].  INT: Were-- were there other Jewish journalists in-- that you were working together? ES: Yeah, Karl, Kurt Karl-- he was the-- the editor in chief. All the others, we are none-- except me was--  INT: So what was-- was the mood among you? What-- what were the thoughts? ES: Well, we, the people working at the [GERMAN], they were all liberals. They couldn't understand that [? favoring ?] left without putting up any resistance. He just walked out. And the-- it was absolute-- just as the Kaiser walked out in-- in-- in November, '18. So the-- the Nationals had their revenge. It was-- without a word, without a shot, this guy walked out and gave-- gave up, which was a shame. Especially since both on the Brandenburger Tor, and at the-- at the castle, there were masses and masses of people who would have wanted to call a general strike.  INT: And-- and what were your thoughts? I mean, were those thoughts of concern, or of anger, or of-- of-- of? ES: Of anger.  INT: What-- what-- what did you think? ES: Oh, anger at the Social Democrats and the communists. Because they didn't act. They let it go. They had it in their hand to-- to-- to stop that nonsense. But they didn't. We were all-- so long, communists. So their leaders were incredible, dumb. And I-- I say that knowingly and without any mental reservation. They were dumb. 
INT: Did you feel you-- there was anything you could do? ES: Yes.  INT: In that situation? ES: Now, the only thing I could do is write a story, and write that story, just as I told it to you. Why was there no resistance? Why didn't the communists and the socialists get together and-- and-- and save the republic. From now on, when I-- well, I-- the story was printed, and Kurt Karl said, well, it's nice of you to write that, but that's the end. Well, it wasn't the end yet. There were six more months to go, before July, '32-- July, '32.  INT: Did-- did he stay? ES: Hmm?  INT: Did he stay? Did your colleague-- yeah. ES: He stayed, yes. And then-- [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] Papen was dismissed by Hindenburg and General von Schleicher became chancellor. And he was a man who wanted to bring all parties together to get from the communists, to the [GERMAN], with the exception of the Nazis. He didn't want the Nazis. And [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] he became chancellor, and called a new election. And on that, that was on the 6th of November, '32, about four months after July. And that is one of the strangest stories in German politics. [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] Shortly before the election day, the Communist party and the National Socialist party-- the Nazi party-- called a strike together-- [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] a traffic strike. In other words, Berlin was completely dead-- no streetcar, no bus, no subway, no railway-- city railway. And the astonishing thing was that on the left side, there was a Nazi strike person. And on the right side, there was a communist strike person. They were together for the first time, just like they got together in 1939, when Stalin signed the pact with Hitler-- with Ribbentrop and Hitler. 
INT: Were you sent there as a reporter to-- to write about that? ES: Yes, at-- at Unter den Linden?  INT: Yeah. ES: Yes, I watched it, from A to Z.  INT: OK. We'll stop the tape. ES: Oh.  INT: March 19, 1998, survivor is Mr. Egon Stadelman. This is tape number four. In these events that you were covering for the newspaper-- ES:  INT: were there events, I'm sure, when you came across Hitler himself? ES: Yes.  INT: Did you ever see him? ES: Yes.  INT: When-- when was the first time that you saw-- ES: It was much later, though. It was after [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] he took over, he took over the power of-- and it was on January 30, 1933, unforgettable day. And on the 21st of March, 1933, in Potsdam, I saw him.  INT: Where was that? ES: In Potsdam?  INT: Yeah, where-- what was the-- what-- ES: We--  INT: --what kind of circumstance was it? ES: The March 30th was the day when he was nominated, or [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] Hindenburg made him chancellor. And there was a long, long march, a victory parade, through the [GERMAN], through Wilhelmstrasse, and past the Reichscounselor-- chancellor's [GERMAN]. And he was standing in the window with thousands of people on the [GERMAN] in front of the Reich Chancellery. And I was there as a reporter.  INT: Where were you standing? ES: In the middle of-- of all that, [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] and well, then later on, I went home. 
INT: What-- ES: Oh, no, no, to the office, wrote my story, and was in morning edition, for the morning edition of January 31st. And that was it.  INT: What-- what was your impression about this man? ES: Well, that is very difficult to define simply because I was overwhelmed by the sudden change of mood in seemingly all the Berliners. We were all of a sudden all for [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] the Nazis and for Hitler, just as the Viennese were when-- when Hitler marched into Vienna. We were no difference. And-- and that surprised me and disappointed me greatly, enormously. I did not believe that the Berliner would fall for such a [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] clown.  INT: Did you-- did you perceive him as a clown-- ES: Yes.  INT: --when he was standing in the window? ES: Yes.  INT: Why? ES: Every three seconds, whenever one of the banners, the Standarten marched by, then he turned around and then grinned, grinned at his-- Goebbels was there and Goering was there and probably some others behind him. But that the-- the man could stand there for hours and-- and just always again, it was incredible.  INT: Did you talk with the people around you? ES: No, I didn't dare, because he would have killed me right then and there. Because they were all jubilant, and I-- they wanted me to-- to raise my hand too. But I was making notes. And when I didn't make notes, I just scribbled something there. I didn't have to-- to raise my arm, so-- 
INT: So you went and wrote your story? ES: Wrote the story.  INT: When did you see Hitler again? ES: On [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] 28th of February, 1938-- sorry, 1933. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] I was having night shift. And [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] my-- Karl came and said, look, here's a bulletin from [GERMAN]. There's a little fire in one of the offices of the Reichstag. You are the-- the expert on fires from long ago when I started out. See what's going on there. There is not a-- a fire in the Reichstag every day. So I walked over. This was not too far. And when I came to crossroads on the [GERMAN], I smelled the smoke. And a few steps more, few meters more, 100 meters or so, I saw the building completely going up in flames, police cars, fire engines coming. Fortunately, I still had my press card. The-- the-- the police had shut off completely, but with my-- my press card, I still could go through. And they're-- they're all there, Adolf Hitler, Joseph Goebbels, Hermann Goering, and the rest of them. And I went back to the [GERMAN], which had [GERMAN], which is very close by, called the office and said, look, this is something very serious. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] And Karl says, well, how serious? I said, very serious. And I was-- I said the entire-- true, true to the story, the Reichstag is burning down to the ground. Well, and [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] next morning, I came. I-- about 12 o'clock, he-- he-- he stopped the presses. And about 12 o'clock, I-- we heard from [GERMAN], from [GERMAN], and all-- all kinds. And I wrote the-- the story as I saw it [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] and went home. Next morning, Karl was gone. He left overnight because-- 
INT: Did you know where he went? ES: Yes, he went to Prague and lived there for a while.  INT: Did he-- did you know-- I mean, did he let you know where he went, or did you learn about that later? ES: His-- no, no, his associate, the managing editor, a Dr. Krüger-- K-R-U umlauted G-E-R-- Alfred Krüger said, well, Karl is gone. So was what was our photo man or photographer--  INT: Who was that? ES: Ludwig Wronkow, W-R-O-N-K-O-W.  INT: Why did he leave? ES: He had-- he was a-- he was-- it was drawing to-- it had made countless anti-Hitler [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] caricatures and--  INT: Published or not published? ES: Oh, published-- you want to see them? I can show them to you. I have some in a book.  INT: Was he Jewish? ES: Yes, yes, he was. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] And he left. And so I asked Dr. Krüger, well, does it mean that I have to leave too? He said, no, you have never written any anti-Hitler or anti-German stories. You are half Jew. You stay. And I stayed. And I stayed until the [GERMAN] came into-- that was 1935.  INT: I would like to ask something in between. ES: Yes.  INT: You mentioned before that several [GERMAN] bureaus-- ES: Yes.  INT: --news offices, you got-- ES: Yes.  INT: --news from. After-- ES: Reports. Reports, yeah.  INT: --or reports from, yeah, so after Hitler becoming Reichschancellor, [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] did you, in-- in-- in-- in your office feel any changes in what kind of information you got in and in which way you were-- ES: The kind of information? Yes, it was completely [GERMAN]. You know what's [GERMAN]? You were also [GERMAN] later on. No, this were-- were all-- [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] the leftist people, [GERMAN], and the [GERMAN], the newspaper of the Communist Party, immediately out. They were forbidden. And-- 
INT: But for you in your office, the-- the different sources of information, did they remain the same? ES: They remained--  INT: Was-- ES: --for a while, yes. [GERMAN] was around for a while yet. And then it was changed to [GERMAN]. It was all put together in one. It was all consolidated. And the-- the-- well, there was no negative reporting anymore about Hitler. Everything Hitler did was wonderful.  INT: You were covering so many local Berlin stories. ES: Yes. After--  INT: Was there-- did that remain the same before and after? ES: No, I did not write political stories anymore, with the exception of the meeting, the-- the-- [GERMAN] in Potsdam, when old Hindenburg in his general field marshal's uniform and Adolf Hitler for the first time, first and only time, in cylinder, you know, a top hat and black suit, shook hands, and he, Hitler, deeply [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] bowing before-- before old Hindenburg. And as long as Hindenburg was still alive, he kept [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] the antisemitism and all these things as quiet as possible. However, Hindenburg did not stop the Jews-- the Jew boycott on April 1st, when the SA people had smeared all windows, store windows of Jewish stores, [GERMAN], and even small stores, Jude, do not-- [GERMAN]. So--  INT: What about your mother and her-- or your-- your aunt? ES: Well, they-- they still had their old customers, strangely enough. There was-- I could never explain it. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] But they had. I mean, more and more of my mother's customers, the doctors, the-- the-- [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] left. And therefore, the circle of customers grew smaller and smaller. 
INT: Did you still live with your mother at that time? ES: Yes, yes, with my mother and my aunt, yes.  INT: Did you feel that that made any difference for you, how you were perceived by-- ES: No.  INT: --by the people? ES: Well, my-- my-- my--  INT: Because you are half Jewish, your mother full Jewish. ES: Pardon?  INT: You-- you were the-- the half Jewish-- ES: Yes.  INT: --young man. ES: Yeah.  INT: And your mother was Jewish. ES: Yeah.  INT: So-- ES: But until Kristallnacht, Berlin wasn't touched too much by antisemitism. Yes, the-- the-- the-- [PAUSES FOR 5 SECONDS] the Polish Jews, which were plentiful in-- in Berlin at that time, were shipped back to Poland. But German-- most-- I cannot say that I personally or any member of my family until after Kristallnacht was touched or in-- in any way in that. Of course, the circle of customers grew smaller and smaller and smaller. And I know that my aunt, after I left, and my mother had to apply for-- for public substance, for public help.  INT: When-- when the first people started to leave, the first Jewish-- ES: Yeah.  INT: --be it customers, be it friends or acquaintances-- ES: Yes.  INT: --started to leave, did you and your mother ever discuss-- ES: Yes.  INT: --leaving Berlin. ES: Yes, my mother, unfortunately, had one standard sentence, one standard answer to me-- for me. Nobody will touch the widow of a German officer who fell-- who died in the war. She was wrong. And I saw that when I went to England. And I wrote it to her. And I wrote to her, please come. Do anything you can possibly do to come over. She wrote to me, should I, an old woman-- she was 49 at the time, an old woman-- start to scrub other people's floors? Well, the English, the British, allowed only domestics in at that time, nobody else, unless you had a lot of money. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] So-- but we have to go back to-- 
INT: Yeah, so you were still in-- in Berlin. ES: I lived in Berlin until-- and wrote my-- went to the office, [PAUSES FOR 5 SECONDS] as always, until 1945.  INT: Did you feel safe? Did you feel safe? ES: Yes, one of the reporters [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] turned out to be an SS Obersturmführer, believe it or not. And he was as much an SS Obersturmführer as I was. He was a beefsteak, on the outside brown, in the inside, inside red. So it was the theater of the absurd. So he [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] covered for me when we-- we got in commission-- commissioner to-- moved into the [GERMAN]. But he was an Obersturmführer, which was quite something in the-- in the SS. And so the commission-- commissioner didn't do too much. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] There was one-- one lady there, Gusti Hecht, a Jewish woman, an absolute beauty. And she stayed also. She was the editor of one of the supplements. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] And the commissioner took a fancy to her. And, seemingly to soothe his Aryan soul, he said, she is a beautiful Asiatic. She is a beautiful Asian. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] And so that was in Berlin. Nobody else in this, with the possible exception of Frankfurt, would that have been possible, nowhere.  INT: Did you get to travel anywhere-- ES: No.  INT: --in these years? ES: No, I didn't. I did not travel anymore. 
INT: You stayed in-- ES: Because I knew three miles out of the-- the border of Berlin, it-- it really wasn't safe anymore, certainly not.  INT: Did you-- did you come across any-- any personal attacks towards you for-- for ES: No.  INT: --being what you were? ES: No, I cannot say that. I would lie. I was untouched until the day of my emigration. So was the rest of my family, until later. We lived in Berlin. It was-- OK, we couldn't go to the theater anymore or movies, but there was a Jewish Kulturbund-- Jüdischer Kulturbund. This is a-- a name whom you probably-- which you probably know-- Rosenstock, Joseph Rosenstock, and Franz Allers. They run this-- run this organization. And there was-- there were films were shown, theater plays, and so on. And that went on until Kristallnacht.  INT: Did you-- what-- what were the thoughts that you had about the future before Kristallnacht? Was before Kristallnacht-- ES: I always--  INT: --still some hope or some-- what-- what were the developments that you were expecting? ES: I knew that I wanted to leave, because [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] that is [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] [GERMAN]. And I knew what was coming. I felt it, and I knew it. After the Rohm, after the Rohm Affair, after-- after all these horrible things had happened, there-- and after Hindenburg died, it was-- everything was forbidden. Even the-- the German nationals were forbidden. There was no party anymore, nothing. It was all [GERMAN], like in the Soviet Union. I mean, he-- he took-- the good man took a example from Stalin. 
INT: Did you-- did you ever witness any obvious antisemitism in the streets? ES: Yes, that I saw when-- on April 1st when-- the day of the boycott. I saw the-- the guys [PAUSES FOR 5 SECONDS] painting the swastikas on-- on showcases and show windows. There I did. But physical, no, I did not.  INT: And towards any of your-- your friends that were Jewish, did you-- ES: My friend Eisner left '34. He went to California, tried to-- to finish his studies because he was not allowed to attend the Berlin university anymore. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] And all the others, my-- my Aunt Claire, whom I mentioned, and her son and daughter went to Sweden because the son had married. Herbert had married a Swedish girl. But my mother and my Aunt Martha stayed in Berlin. And after the Kristallnacht, which was one of the horrible nights--  INT: Where were you during Kristallnacht? ES: I was-- since 1935, I couldn't work anymore at the paper, nothing anymore.  INT: What-- what did you live off? ES: It's a rather long and personal story. I [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] was a lifelong admirer of stamps. I collected stamps, and I-- so I came one day to one of my stamp dealers. And he said, look, what are you doing? I said, I'm doing-- right now, I do nothing. I'm waiting for a chance to-- to emigrate. Said, look, why don't you work for me for a while? And so I worked for him in-- in his-- in his shop, in his stamp shop, which fortunately, was not a shop but on the first floor. So that was not touched in-- because there were other people living in there during Kristallnacht. 
INT: What was that man's name? Do you remember? ES: Yes, Julius Hirsch, H-I-R-S-C-H, Julius. And he had a fantastic [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] store and collection-- collections of stamps, so there. And then I went-- there was a Jewish school in Berlin, to Goldschmidt Schule. And I went in there asked whether they could use somebody, young teacher.  INT: What did you teach? ES: I, believe it or not, I taught-- I taught Latin and was always one lesson ahead of the-- of the kids, so-- because I had-- had not taken it. I took the English road in the-- at the gymnasium. So the English--  INT: And you said you were waiting for-- ES: Yes.  INT: --papers to emigrate? ES: Yes, I had written to, well, [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] relatives who were not really relatives, I mean, over your left ear. And they said--  INT: Where were they? ES: New York, and they had-- I had written to them in '36 already. And they said, no, they are not in the position to give an affidavit. They could not sign the papers that they would [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] stand up for me.  INT: OK, we'll stop the tape.  INT: March 19, 1998, survivor is Mr. Egon Stadelman. This is tape number five. So you were planning to get papers for the United States? ES: Yes, yes, ma'am.  INT: Did you try-- did your mother try also? ES: No, she did not, because these people-- those people who sent-- said no to me the first, said, we cannot do anything. But after Kristallnacht, I wrote again. And they obviously had read about what was going on. And they said, yes, we are sending an affidavit. However, again, you have to promise us in writing that we do not have to [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] subsidize you financially. I said yes. I was my own man. And I, I was sure, the optimism of, of a young man. Then [PAUSES FOR 5 SECONDS] the day came when I had to get my passport. And this is a story which might be of great interest to you. I went to the [GERMAN], where I got my-- [INAUDIBLE] passport. I had to wait, of course, a long time. And then when I was finally called, the man took my personal data. And well, he asked, [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] what's your profession? And I was naive enough to say, I'm a journalist. He says, you are what? You idiot. You are, now let's see, [SPEAKING GERMAN]. I understood. And he, he just whispered to me [INAUDIBLE], do you know what would happen to you in Cuxhaven or wherever you leave and the SS men would see journalist? They wouldn't let you-- wouldn't let you go. So I said, write J in, in, in my passport. So that was one-- another experience with a so-called Nazi. He was not a Nazi, obviously not. So that's where I got my passport. And on [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] April 19, 1939, I left Germany. I left Berlin, went to Cuxhaven, to Hamburg first, and from Hamburg to Cuxhaven. And I had friends from my [? mostly ?] years in London-- sorry. I said London, in England, in north-- northwestern part of England, in Blackburn, Lancashire. And I had written to them that I could go to America, but my visa is only in the year 1950 or something like that. The number was very high. But I could stay in England, could come to them. I would work, whatever. Of course, I could come. And they sent me. So the-- so I went to the American consulate, got my American visa for-- no, [GERMAN]. I went to the British consulate, got a visa, an [GERMAN] visa [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] for England. And there I was. 
INT: How was it for your mother when you left? ES: I-- it was a sad goodbye. Because by that time, they had to put the J on or the, the Magen David. And well, by then, she probably knew that there was no out for her. But she still maintained, [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] nothing is going to happen to me. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] Now, I was in England. And from-- in London, I was-- went to a relief committee. And they gave me a ticket. I was only allowed to take 10 marks out. That was all. I mean, 10 marks, I wouldn't get very, very far. And [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] so they gave me a couple of pounds and a ticket to Blackburn, where my friends were waiting for me. And I became the, the, the assistant to the repairman of refrigerators. Now, I have 10 left thumbs. And-- but nobody ever said a word. I was taken along. Some, some customer called. Their refrigerator, refrigerator is on the blink. I went around and helped them. My help was he said, give me a, a screwdriver. I gave him a screwdriver. Now, I need a larger size, so I gave him a larger size, and so on and so forth. But that went on until November, October '39. I was in London the day war broke out to get-- to inquire at the consulate, the American consulate, if something could be done, because I definitely didn't want to stay a repairman for refrigerators all my life or for the rest of the-- And then I hoped I would-- could get back to, to Blackburn. And I, I did. But I saw the-- all the red buses full with kids. They were evacuated already. That was a miserable time. I came back. My friends were at the station. They were afraid that I would, would be interned, but I wasn't. And months later came a letter from the director of the Jewish school in Berlin, who had emigrated with lots of her kids to Folkestone, which is the channel coast. And she said, would you come again and, and help us out? Well, I-- 
INT: What was her name? ES: Lori Goldschmidt-- [? G-O-L-D-S-C-H-M-E-D-T. ?]  INT: Do you know how she had heard about you being up there? ES: Yes, I-- she was in touch with my mother, obviously, and got my-- got my address in, in, in Blackburn.  INT: Were you in touch with your mother at that time? ES: Not after September 1st.  INT: Obviously, yeah. ES: Obviously-- from the minute I came to London, I-- we were in touch, we wrote to each other. I'd write Frau Sara [? Margarete ?] [GERMAN]. So that was [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] well, until-- and, and so the, the, the-- Lori Goldschmidt had rented part of a school, a boarding school. And since the kids were all without parents, [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] I would say three dozen boys and girls were without parents-- parents had gone to South America, to Australia, to Canada, to the United States, we were, we really were, their parents. We replaced their parents. And there was such a close relationship developed. Some of them, I, I still write-- write to meet today, [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] so-- of these kids.  INT: How-- what age group were, were they? ES: The youngest was six. And the oldest was 16.  INT: And were those all pupils from the former Jewish school in Berlin-- ES: Yes, yes.  INT: --that all together-- ES: Yes, yes, they mixed with the, the English classes, the, the English children. However, they stayed in school while, while the British kids could go home. 
INT: And the part of the director or principal who then called you, and you yourself, were there other-- ES: Yes.  INT: --Jewish grownups taking care of these children? ES: Yes, there was a fellow by the name Sawadi, [INAUDIBLE]. I don't remember his first name. S--  INT: What-- ES: He was a teacher--  INT: And where-- what did he-- ES: --professional teacher,  INT: Did he come from Berlin also? Where was he from? ES: He came from Berlin also, yes.  INT: And his name was? ES: Sawadi.  INT: OK. ES: S-A-W-A-D-I. There was [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] a couple whom Dr., Dr. Goldschmidt had imported from Berlin. I really don't remember their name. They were English teachers. [PAUSES FOR 5 SECONDS] So we were all together. And it was very nice.  INT: For how long a period did that last? ES: That lasted until March 10, 1940.  INT: And then? ES: On-- I got a letter from the-- from the American consulate that, thanks to FDR, there was an extra quota. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] And my number would fall under that quota. And I could leave on the 10th of March on the Dutch ship, [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] To be honest, I didn't want to leave, because I loved England. I really did. I loved the kids. The kids loved me. And this entire life in England appealed to me very much. It was civilized, even during the war, to an extent which I never saw again anywhere, not even in the United States, except in some places in Connecticut or in other places in New England. 
INT: Who, who supported financially the stay of all these children? Who-- where, where did the money come from to-- ES: That came from a Jewish committee in London. The-- some of them, they're children of very rich people who had paid Dr. Goldschmidt. And one way or the other, she had brought out the money. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] And so-- and then the, the Jewish National Refugee Committee helped out for those who couldn't pay. I had room and board and got a few pounds.  INT: And what was the plan for these children? ES: Well, the plan for these children was that as soon as their parents were settled, we would come. They would-- they would call for them. Some did. Some didn't. One was the case, [PAUSES FOR 5 SECONDS] Goldschmidt got a telegram from the Red Cross that the ship on which the parents of one of-- one of the boys was sunk. There are no survivors.  INT: Do you remember the name of the boy? ES: Yeah, [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] I will, just let me think. I'll, I'll come to it.  INT: And what happened of him then? ES: We, Dr. Goldschmidt and I, were sitting together in her office and tried to find out what-- how to bring it to the child. And then she said to one of the teachers, bring him in. My god, I have to fight-- remember the name. [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] And the boy came in crying, crying, crying. Nobody had said a word to him yet. You don't have to tell me. I know my parents are dead. And I mean, that was, I should say, one of the blackest, blackest days in my life. I still see that, that child in front of me. And we don't know what to do. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] I do not know what happened to him. I will still remember the name. [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] It's in one of the-- I had it in one of the letters. I got sick one day, a sore throat or so, and all the kids wrote a little note to me. And his name is on there, too. So after [INAUDIBLE] and we are through this interview, I'll go to my thing and pick it out, yeah, and then-- 
INT: That was the first incidence-- was that the first incident among these children that a child knew about-- ES: Yes, it was the first.  INT: --the parents not coming back? ES: However, I mean, they, they had experienced war and bombing raids. I mean. I'm sorry, no bombing raids, but raids. They are flyovers. The Luftwaffe came over. But Folkestone was not important enough. They-- but we had to crawl under tables. And I was always thinking, if a bomb falls, how much protection would these tables be? They wouldn't be any. But it was just a gesture.  INT: And later on, the children that could not be reunited with their parents, do you know what happened to them? ES: Yes, some were shipped. You know, we-- Folkestone was on the-- as I told you, on the Channel coast. On a clear day, you could see, see Boulogne, the lights of Boulogne. So [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] when the invasion fear came, when Germany and the Nazis walked-- marched into France and Belgium and the Netherlands, the school was, of course, closed. The children were distributed among foster parents. And some could-- were shipped to Canada to refugee camps, the older ones. Well, the, the smaller ones went to English families. The English were great at that, in that.  INT: Yeah, and you? ES: And I took the boat from-- the from Southampton, no, no questions asked by the British police. I was never interned. I was never-- as a matter of fact, I got ration, ration cards, like everybody else. And, well, I applied to the Home Ministry, which is the British Ministry of the Interior, whether I could stay, please stay, serve in the army if necessary. They say, we have enough mouths to feed. You have a chance to go to America. Go. We cannot. OK, so the was a 14,000 ton ship, passenger ship. And I don't think crossing the Atlantic, even on the would be a pleasure in March. And on that 14,000 ton ship, I was sick as a dog all 10 days. It took 10 days to cross from, from Southampton to Hoboken on the Holland America Line. The ship was lit brightly. The Dutch colors were painted on the sides. And the ship-- the captain had given orders, very slow, very slow so that a German U-boat commander could identify the colors and not shoot it down. You might remember that I told you I arrived in New York on the 20-- 20th of March-- [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] no, no, no, yeah, 21st of March, and came to Hoboken. However, none of my savings, which I had made at school, were allowed to go out of England.
They said, you can take, take 10 units of the country to which you go. And that was $10. And I have-- had splurged $1.20 [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] on a boat deck chair, because I couldn't go into my cabin, [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] and slept there day and night. And so I came to Hoboken with a little more than, than $8. There was nobody there to pick me up, nobody there to direct me. The people of the Holland America Line said, you have to go to New York via the ferry. [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] That costs you a nickel. I had no idea what a nickel was, but I, I made it, my little suitcase. And I had-- the London committee had given me the address of the National Refugee Committee here in New York. It was at-- in 44th Street, west of Broadway. So it was near Times Square. There was a trolley running from the bottom of 42nd Street to Times Square, another nickel. And so I went to my-- to the lady in-- at the committee. And there was a lady who said, oh, you are newcomer. You want to work? I said, yeah, sure, I want to work. Oh, I have a great job for you. There is a, a watchmaker in Omaha, Nebraska. He, he looks for an, an assistant. So I now was in America. And I said, madam, I cannot do that. I'm sorry. It would be imposing on the nice man who wants to give a job to somebody, but I can't do that. So she says, I'm sorry. Then I can't, can't help you. I left. And downstairs, I got mad, walked back to her, and said, look, isn't there anything you can do? Aren't there German papers in New York? I had heard there are German papers. She said, yeah, there are three, [GERMAN], and the, the the So I said, where are the addresses? [GERMAN] somehow impressed me. I wanted to build up. So where's the address of the [GERMAN]? The [GERMAN] is there and there. Close by. And, and it was in 44th Street. And the [GERMAN] address was up in 96th. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] And was at the Brooklyn Bridge. Where's the Brooklyn Bridge? Oh, you have to take this. She didn't know. The I knew that was a party paper. And I had enough of parties and all politics. I did just didn't want to anymore, not here in America. And so I went to the [GERMAN] and with my little suitcase. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] The first man I met was Ludwig Wronkow, the old photographer from [GERMAN]. And if I may quote [? Sheila, ?] [SPEAKING GERMAN] It was a auf wiedersehen that really gave me courage. And so he said, well, we have no, no job for me, but do what you did at [GERMAN]. Go through city and, and write small stories. And I told him the first story I had in New York and encountered the policeman. I asked him in my great British accent, which I had took on, which I had-- which I had taken on with all these British teachers, and said, oh, could you please direct me to the next underground? He said, look, buddy, what do you mean underground? So I told him, [? [GERMAN] ?] the stories. Here is your first story. They printed it. So the next thing was I want to go to post office. Said, why do you want to go to a post office? Says, I wanted to send a telegram to my mother that I have arrived safely in the United States. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] After September to March was half a year. Says, why do you want to go to post office? I want to [INAUDIBLE]. Says, let's-- you are still European. You'll go to a post [? man. ?] You have to go to Western Union. Said, why, doesn't the post-- post office take it? No, that was the second story. Immigrant looks-- mixes up post office and Western Union. That was that. I came-- then came the question, the cardinal question. Why-- where am I going to sleep? Oh, that's nothing. We have so many advertising-- people advertising their furnished rooms that I'll call one of them. He called and again, it was Mr. Hirsch, 600 West 40-- 141st-- 140th Street. It was not the same Hirsch, of course not. But-- so I took my [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] little suitcase. And you can imagine, it was about 6 o'clock in the afternoon. I had arrived in Hoboken at 8:00 in the morning until all the immigration procedures were through. It was 10:00 or 11:00 at the refugee service. And so there was a subway on 77th Street. And you might-- you might know 77th Street subway station. And it-- at that time, it was not better than it was today, [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] rush hour, people wall to wall. And I, with my little suitcase, pressed myself in. The, the faceless men aren't very friendly, because I stepped in them. But I, I made it to 137th Street. And then I walked to Mr. Hirsch's apartment, where I got a room. 
INT: And we will stop this tape. ES: Mhm.  INT: March 19, 1998. Survivor is Egon Stadelman. This is tape number six. And you were just telling me about going to the and-- ES: Meeting Wronkow.  INT: Start to write some, and read-- writing some little stories. ES: Yes.  INT: But you did not end up staying with the forever, did you? ES: No. That was in, as I told you, in March and April. And then one day, Wronkow asked me, what did you do in Germany and England for all-- all that time? Well, I worked with children, and-- oh, I have a great job for you. There is a children's camp in the Catskill Mountains. And Frau Dr. Grottewit-- G-R-O-T-T-E-W-I-T is the director, and she is looking for a head counselor. And I think you would be the man. So I walked-- called up, walked in, and left half an hour later and was head counselor of the camp. I had no idea what a children's camp was, but I learned it very fast. It's-- they're children. We came to the camp on June 29, 1940. [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] Yes. We-- in Tannsersville, New York. And at the bus station, on 50th Street, were two buses-- one bus for boys, one bus for girls. All of a sudden I see young 16, 17-year-old lady, girl, with her group coming into my bus-- into the boys' bus. It was like, OK, let her come [INAUDIBLE], as far as I'm concerned, it's OK. So-- [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] I didn't say a word. We had pleasant-- pleasant drive out to the Catskills. And [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] so it happened that-- that-- there is bunks. It was a main house, and about 50 meters away from it, there are two bunks for the older boys, and one for the older girls. And in the evening, we had to stay with the kids, of course. And while those counselors in the house, we had one on duty, and-- but we had to be in the bunks. Next evening, the same young lady who came with the girls' group in my bus came to the bungalow. She said, ah, it's so terribly boring. Have you got something to read? I said, yes, I have something. And that was the beginning of a friendship, and the beginning of my life with Maryann. 
INT: So who was the young woman? ES: That was-- that was that young kid, and though I was--  INT: Tell me about her. ES: She was a very cute kid.  INT: What-- what was her name at the time? ES: Maryann.  INT: And her last name? ES: Stern.  INT: Stern. ES: S-T-E-R-N.  INT: And where did she come from? ES: Frankfurt. And her-- she came with her parents. And-- long before-- [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] November, '38, if I remember correctly. She'll verify that. So-- [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] and, well, we became inseparable. When camp was over-- well, we spent every-- every evening together. We could watch the-- the girls' bunk from my bunk, and-- so we-- my-- my bunk had two chairs, and so we-- we talked about [INAUDIBLE] the world, and everything. She was 10 years younger than I am-- 11 years. And so I was a cradle robber. Anyway, after camp was over, I came back to New York and did a little volunteer service for the National Refugee Service. And a Miss Kirschbaum-- K-I-R-S-C-H-B-A-U-M-- I came and asked her some questions. She said, won't you do some volunteer work here? I said, yes, sure. So [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] I went there, and met many-- no-- not-- not met, quite a few of my old acquaintances coming from Berlin with their little kids. They wanted to place their children in-- in the kindergartens. And that we could do. So I work-- was working for the National Refugee Service for a while-- later on, and not volunteer-- as a volunteer anymore. And then, October, '41-- October, '40, sorry, I got a postcard from my UNCLE Leo, my brother's-- my mother's brother-- but just with a few words. [SPEAKING GERMAN] He was [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] deported too, and I never heard from them again-- except after the war, from the Red Cross. They all died in someplace in Poland. 
INT: Do you know where? ES: Probably Auschwitz. I cannot-- I cannot say for sure. But no-- the-- the Red Cross said, place of death unknown. [DRINKS] But they weren't so many places. Except Lubianka, yeah, sure, and-- and [NON-ENGLISH], and Latvia and Lithuania. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] But that-- and later on, this cousin of mine, the son of Uncle Leo-- he's on that picture-- [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] and [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] two more members of the family, they got to Theresienstadt-- they were second cousins. But anyway, my entire Jewish family was wiped out with the exception of the ones who were in Stockholm, in Sweden. After the war--  INT: Excuse me with a question-- did you have any other contact later on with your non-Jewish family? ES: No, no. They wrote to me once after they had heard me over the radio, Egon Stadelman-- I identified myself always. And wrote for a care package, which I sent to them.  INT: They, being your grandparents, or who-- who--who-- who? ES: No, no-- that-- some cousins-- or-- my-- the grandparents most likely were dead. So I sent them a care package, and that was all. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] They went to Offenbach.  INT: So here you were, in-- in 1940, doing what, professionally? You were still with the-- with the refugee-- ES: National Refugee--  INT: Refugee ES: --Service.  INT: OK. ES: It was. And also for the refugee service, I ran three kindergarten things-- well, I was the administrator there. Next to that, I always wrote for Then Maryann and I got married. 
INT: When was that? ES: That was in [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] December 19, 1941. So I didn't want to. I said, look, I know I have to go to war. Will I come back? Will I not come back? I don't want you, young kid, alone. I don't know how long it's-- I'm going to stay away. But she insisted, and so we got married. And still are. [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] December 7th, 1941, war came. I had had-- for me it was a-- a duty to enlist. Didn't wait for being called up. And was a [INAUDIBLE] recruit in Alabama, Fort McClellan, Alabama, which was a rear-end of America. I can assure you that. Then we came to a fort in Maryland, then to Wisconsin. And in Maryland, I did my first journalistic thing as a-- as an army private-- I was still a private. And Helen Hayes, and her-- you have heard of her-- and-- and her troupe came for a USO performance with Queen Elizabeth. And-- was it Queen Elizabeth? Yes-- no-- Queen Victoria, Queen Victoria, of course. And I wrote a story on that-- of course, I had to show it to my commanding officer, because no mail was going out without OK. And the printed it. And-- well, that was my last for a long time. In 1943, the first prisoners of war came over, and then the commanding officer remembered that I was speaking German. And he wanted to get some intelligence out of him-- out of them. So I was called again, and again, and again. And one day, he said, put on your-- meantime, I had had stripes. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] Put on your Class A uniform, we are going to court. There was a-- an SS man [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] who had killed one of the dancers-- Wehrmacht-- who were not necessarily all Nazis-- in the barracks. And you have to translate for him. 
INT: Do you remember that man's name? ES: No.  INT: No. ES: No. Sorry. It was such an unpleasant-- it's Freudian, right? Freudian. I forgot it. It was such an unpleasant experience. I had to translate for him, and then try to translate back. And when [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] the judgment came, and the sentence was-- bent over to me. He said, they are all Jews. Said, [SPEAKING GERMAN]-- The-- the the officers. He did not identify me as a Jew, probably because I didn't have a Magen David on. And the name wasn't Jewish. So [SPEAKING GERMAN]. He was sentenced to life and hard-- hard labor. But I am sure that by 1950, he was home in Germany. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] With the American policy of [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] [SPEAKING GERMAN].  INT: Did you translate in any other prisoner of war-- ES: No.  INT: That was the only one? ES: Oh, for prisoners, yes. Yes, sure. I-- when they were-- when they were interrogated, always, I was always there.  INT: Where-- where-- where specifically was that? ES: It was in-- in-- it was in Arkansas, that was in Wisconsin, that was in France, that was [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] when I came-- no, when I came back I didn't anymore.  INT: When did you go to France? ES: '44-- first to London, to-- to England, I'm sorry. First to England. Again, to my beloved London, which I saw for one day, or two days. And we were stationed outside London. And-- 
INT: And then to-- to France, where-- where in France? The-- ES: The 76th Infantry Division.  INT: Did you ever get to Germany? ES: No. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] I [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] got a little shrapnel in here and was shipped back to-- first to field-- field hospital, and then, believe it or not, back to Wisconsin, where some-- some veterinarian-- he couldn't have-- couldn't have been more than a veterinarian, fooled around with that wound. And next day, I had 106.2 fever. And the chaplain called Maryann, you better come. And that was a low point of my army life. Then when I was discharged in a month or two later, I went to OWI, Officer for Information, and they had, of course, a job for me-- radio propaganda. And there I stayed until 19-- the OWI had rented space at NBC-- the National Broadcasting Company-- and CBS, Columbia Broadcasting. And we went under the name, this is the National Broadcasting Company in New York-- [SPEAKING GERMAN]. [SPEAKING GERMAN]  INT: Which-- which-- what kind of program did you cover? ES: I covered news-- there were plenty of news at the time-- and [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] commentary. News-- I got into the news division simply because I was familiar with the military terms-- [PAUSES FOR 5 SECONDS] and-- and-- and could relate those into German-- the American terms into German. So-- and that NBC business lasted until 1948. And then, OWI was taken over by USIA-- United States Information Agency-- and they took me, too. And now began a long period of trying to be the good Americans-- the nice Americans, talk about American theater, talk about American music. And he-- then I-- the boss had an idea, [SPEAKING GERMAN]-- the broadcasting van through America. And we drove from the Canadian border to the Mexican border, from-- from the Atlantic to the Pacific with stops overall-- all over the place. 
INT: So you really learned to get to know your country, your [INAUDIBLE]. ES: Yes, I did. And I saw an awful lot of things-- pleasant things, all these pleasant things. We-- when the period started when the German [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] re-educated people came over, so-called re-educated-- [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] and I had to show them to the hospitals, or to schools, or there or there. And again translated for them and-- or explained to them what is to-- what there is in-- what method used at school, or-- oh, it's a-- a special hospital, or there or there. Most interested they were all in-- of course, in Hollywood at-- was-- yeah.  INT: Did you ever have a desire to go back to Germany? ES: No, never.  INT: Did you ever go? ES: No, never.  INT: Did your wife? ES: Yes, she did. As a reporter for the voice of America, and later for the I got dozens and dozens of invitations from Berlin, from Lufthansa, from all kinds. I said, no. I didn't go to the German Democratic Republic, or to the Bundesrepublik. I didn't want to see them anymore.  INT: What about your relationship with other Germans-- ES: Here?  INT: Here. ES: Fortress. [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] The-- [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] you must not mix up the Germans of my generation, and the generation before me. There's a young German generation. There's a young generation who is completely different in any which way. They are lovable, decent, politically decent people. I've worked with them, hand-in-hand, now and have worked with them ever since 1989, when the first wave of young German journalists came over. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] So you want to know about my-- how I got to 
INT: Mhm. ES: That was a strange [SIGHS] coincidence. As a-- my title was special events officer. And when the first German soccer team came over, that was a event, a special event, and I had to cover it on Randall Stadium at Triborough Bridge. I didn't understand much about football-- or soccer. They had my table built up, front of me. The sound engineer put out all the equipment like-- like here. And then I said, yes, yes, here comes the-- the team, the German team. Here's the American team. The German national anthem was played, the American anthem. And then, [? pff, ?] somebody whistled. And I was completely lost. There was a gentleman next-- at the next table, who said, you seem to be lost. Would you want me to help you? I said, yes, please. [SPEAKING GERMAN]. Started-- he was the publisher of the Mr. Erwin Singlele S-I-N-G-L-E-L-E. And from then on, yeah, he says, any-- whenever you have any difficulties, that-- come over. So we became really friends. He always said, come, come-- stop this voice business, come to us. I didn't until 1960. In 1960, I thought that the re-education of Germany had taken place enough already. I had seen Willy Brandt, I had seen Weizsacker, President Weizsacker, and interviewed them over the VO-- the Voice of America. And now they were a-- a nation again, and so I went to And first, I was lucky. The theater critic got sick, and didn't come back. And so I got that job. And that was heaven for me. That was a highlight and the high point of my career at-- in the '60s. And well, then, I became a general reporter and-- but never gave up music, theater, and movie. And since I was all three in one, we were-- Maryann and I-- were not home one single night. And I wrote altogether-- we figured it out the other day, because they're now writing the series on my career-- 18-- 
INT: But you are still active, aren't you? ES: Hmm?  INT: You are still writing. ES: Yes, I--  INT: You are still active, yeah? ES: Yes, yes. I still go to the opera. I still go to concerts. And the last one was It's-- OK. [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS]  INT: I interrupted you-- your wife and you were never home. ES: We're not home once a week. Because-- and we were young, and didn't-- didn't-- today, I couldn't do it anymore. I'm at 87, take it a little-- step a little on the brakes.  INT: But you still go to the office, don't you? ES: Oh, yes. I get to go to the office twice a week, and-- and help my young colleagues out. And they love it. And I love them.  INT: You never had children, have you? ES: No. The reason? The war. I did not want to have a child mother. [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] And when I came back, well, we first had to build up a little. So it took a while, and then, all of a sudden, it was too late. So we are childless, but I have many children.  INT: Who are your children? ES: The kids in the office, the kids I still correspond with, the kids-- one lady is now 70, my favorite. She--  INT: Who is that? ES: A young lady by the name of Ellen Schiff-- S-C-H-I-F-F.  INT: Where did you meet her? ES: In the Berlin School. Then I met her in Folkestone. And then I wrote to her-- she went to a certain place in San Francisco, in California. It was not San Francisco, it was Berkeley-- is that possible? Yes. And we corresponded. And then she got married, the war came, she became an army nurse. And when she came back, [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] no-- no contact. It was about three years ago, by chance, she was in-- in New York, and by chance picked up the saw my name. Voila. 
INT: As you were sharing the contact that you have with other younger generation Germans, and maybe some Germans from the older generation, also-- what-- what are your feelings towards Germany today? ES: Indifferent-- absolutely indifferent. I couldn't care less. [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] I lived through the rape of Austria. I lived through the rape of Germany. The older-- older generation Germans, the [? Deutsche Americana-- ?] [PAUSES FOR 5 SECONDS] I have no contact with them. Professionally, I have to go once a year to the Steuben Parade, but that is all.  INT: And-- and young Germans that come across your way? ES: They come across my way, and-- and they [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] make fun of me that I still go to the Steuben Parade. They wouldn't go, not if they were paid for.  INT: Are-- are these young people interested in what you have to say? ES: Yes, very much so. Very much so.  INT: Do you-- do you think there is a change between now and 30 years ago, in what you are asked about the past? ES: Yes, there is.  INT: We will stop.  INT: March 19, 1998. Survivor is Mr. Egon Stadelman. This is tape number seven. You and the Germans today-- you and that what happened between '33 and '45 in Germany. How-- how do you look at these years today, if somebody asks you? ES: As a catastrophe for Germany, and for the Jewish people. 
INT: Do you think it could happen again? ES: Look to Germany now. There are neo-Nazis all over the place. And especially, and especially in eastern Germany, which was, for such a long time, under the communist regime.  INT: So if you sit and have a discussion with young Germans-- ES: Yeah.  INT: --that come to talk with you, what-- what do you tell them? ES: Well, they ask me questions. And I give them straight answers. The other asked straight questions, I answer it. We-- we are not holding back anything-- neither they nor I.  INT: But in terms of-- of how you look at their country, how you look at them, how you look at our recent history-- ES: They-- they know exactly that I would never have been back, and never will go back. They know that. They take it. But they say, look, this is not Germany you left. Do come over, look at it. Have a look. I still don't want to. And when we talk about these things, they are all liberal young people. They are not-- they-- they-- they laugh at the-- at any party. They laugh at Kohl, and they-- they-- they think Schmidt was a Social Democrat chancellor-- he was nothing, either. They want more-- they want America's freedom altogether, and they don't know that too much freedom is no good either-- too much, as we can see in today's headlines, where the sex life of a president is daily described in detail. 
INT: Well, do you have suggestions or advice to give young people from Germany that come to talk with you, about how to go about their future, and their children's future? What-- what do you tell them? ES: I-- if I am asked, I tell them, if you can possibly make it, try to get a career here-- but not in the newspaper business, but in the television news-- news business. Because that is the-- the print media will die out slowly, but surely. Soon everything will be by computer, by television, or radio.  INT: And in terms of racism, antisemitism, in terms of how to relate to one another, what-- what do you advise them? ES: I tell them to think of what happened to me and my family. That I never saw my mother again, which was the result of racism, or religious persecution-- persecution. Or [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] and what happened to the long years when I was in limbo, not doing one thing, and not doing the other. I was doing nothing what-- what I really wanted to do. And then, they-- they take heed, and [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] it-- they call-- call up here and ask, how should we do this? How should we do this? Or would you want to have a picture in there, or this-- I-- I tell them.  INT: You started off as you defined yourself before-- you started off as a half Jew in Germany. ES: Yes. 
INT: Political circumstances, Nazi-- ES: Yes.  INT: --indoctrination [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] pushed you out of the country. ES: Yes.  INT: Now you are here in the United States. Has your-- in the core identity gone through changes because of all of this? ES: Well, of course I [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] think more of my mother and my Jewish relatives who disappeared than I think of the other side, of whom I have just heard once after the war. And who, most likely, would not-- I say most likely-- would not have accepted me during the Hitler years as a half Jew.  INT: What are you now? ES: Agnostic.  INT: In terms of your religious belief? ES: I'm a complete agnostic.  INT: But in terms of-- ES: Well, like I say, I'm I'm--  INT: --or do-- do-- do you-- do you feel any-- any sense of belonging to-- to-- ES: No.  INT: Whichever-- ES: Certainly not. I belong to-- I'm an American citizen. I belong to America, which is something concrete.  INT: OK. ES: And I found my life here, and I found my wife here. And [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] I cannot possibly say that I got-- with the exception of Wronkow and George, Manfred George-- [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] that I found very much help from the Jewish side. Most of her friends are Jewish. My friends are Jews and Gentiles. I don't give a damn what they are-- what they are, they are. I have never talked to anybody about religion. And I hate if [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] I hear racist remarks in the streets, be they anti-Negro, anti-Hispanic, anti-Jewish-- because I know what's-- what-- what is-- the end is going to be. 
INT: Yeah. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] So-- ES: So--  INT: Anything that you think you would want to say to people-- ES: Yes.  INT: --in the future who will maybe listen to this story of yours? ES: Yes, don't hate. Do not hate. I did not go back to Germany, but I don't hate them. Hate is not in my-- is not in my vocabulary. [PAUSES FOR 5 SECONDS] If-- [PAUSES FOR 5 SECONDS] when I had to interrogate German POWs, [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] I usually forgot my cigarettes.  INT: OK. ES: So left them on the table. I was not allowed to, but forgotten, sorry, just left them there. Couldn't hate. Yeah. This SS man, this SS guy in-- in McCoy, who had to kill that-- that [? Lancer-- ?] that Wehrmacht [GERMAN], that old Wehrmacht was an elderly man-- must have been in his early 40s. [INAUDIBLE] cruelly murdered him. And then he got away with-- as I said, a-- a life sentence. But on the other hand, I am sure he is back in Germany, or was shipped back to Germany, as so many others.  INT: So-- ES: So.  INT: I think we'll call your wife. ES: OK, [? Bubbe! ?]  INT: We'll-- we'll stop for a moment. ES: Mm-hmm, yeah, let's make a-- Hello, this is my wife, Maryann, whom I know for over 55 years. She-- we-- I-- I met her at the bus station on 50th Street and Broadway, going to camp together, to children's camp. And there she was, and there I was, and there it was. It was there and never left us, all over the years. Have you to tell something? To add something to that? MARYANN STADELMAN: Well, just to talk about my time in Nazi Germany-- it actually started-- the Nazi era actually started for me when I realized that my school chums, of whom I knew from age six to 12, all of a sudden didn't talk to me anymore. They didn't know me anymore. And in school, I was molested-- had to eat my lunch in the toilet. And this went on until I finally-- the rabbi persuaded me to go to a Jewish school. And-- ES: And that was a [GERMAN]. 
INT: Was a [GERMAN] in Frankfurt. And things were fine there. I met many-- made many friends, whom I even met here in George Washington High School in Washington Heights. We-- ES: May I interrupt there and say that, Washington Heights, where all the Jewish people lived was called the Fourth Reich. MARYANN STADELMAN: Right. And the sad part that my parents, due to the fact that they had to leave home and family, and my father his good position, both got sick pretty early on here in the United States. And the good part was that I met Egon, and we had a wonderful life together. ES: Yes. MARYANN STADELMAN: Productive, very productive life. Very busy. ES: Except for the army years, [INAUDIBLE]. MARYANN STADELMAN: Well, I was working while you were in the army. ES: Yeah, right. MARYANN STADELMAN: Right? ES: Yes. MARYANN STADELMAN: I was working, and I visited you. ES: Mhm. MARYANN STADELMAN: And even once, when you were wounded, the chaplain called me and said-- ES: I told them. MARYANN STADELMAN: Oh, you-- you told the story. So I don't want to repeat that. So otherwise, it's-- it's been wonderful. And I still love him. ES: The most important thing is that we share core interests-- we are on the same level. She loves music, I love music. She loves theater, I love theater. So she is an opera buff, I am an opera-- opera buff. So there's nothing [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] dividing our interests. I'm not watching football games on Sunday afternoons. 
INT: What about your relationship to the country you were born in? What-- what is your-- what are your thoughts and feelings towards Germany? MARYANN STADELMAN: I still love it, in spite of it all. I'm still homesick. [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] And I've been a few times, I've been back a few times. And it was very emotional every time. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] And in my-- in my dreams, I still go back, very, very often.  INT: Do the two of you talk about Germany, and the years just before both of you left the country? MARYANN STADELMAN: Yes, oh, yes, sure. ES: Yeah, we do talk. MARYANN STADELMAN: Mhm. ES: There are times when we talk about it. [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] Let's say-- let's say we are invited for the day of the-- when the Federal Republic was founded, after the East German-- the German Democratic Republic folded up, the 3rd of October. We are always invited to-- to come to some sort of a festivity. And that, of-- of course brings-- MARYANN STADELMAN: Brings back memories, yes. ES: --back memories, and we talk. Last time, we met [? [NON-ENGLISH] ?] there, which was quite interesting. And--  INT: Mrs-- ES: But I can-- this is the only thing we don't share, is I will not go back to Germany. She wants to, and has-- has been. MARYANN STADELMAN: I have been, yeah. Yeah. But you were very interested to hear what I had to tell. [LAUGHS] ES: Of course. Naturally. MARYANN STADELMAN: And my experiences. ES: Naturally. Yes. MARYANN STADELMAN: And also, we had many German artists here in our-- ES: Oh, yes. MARYANN STADELMAN: --in our home in the '60s. ES: '60s and '70s. MARYANN STADELMAN: When when they first came-- came over here and didn't know anyone, and needed help to get around New York, they came here, and we helped them and made them feel comfortable. And that-- that was a good time, too. ES: Oh, yes, it was a good time. MARYANN STADELMAN: Interesting, good time. ES: But [INAUDIBLE] is the only reason I can-- all these-- MARYANN STADELMAN: [GERMAN], [GERMAN]-- ES: You name them-- MARYANN STADELMAN: [GERMAN], they were all here, and-- ES: Including-- MARYANN STADELMAN: [? Kurt Brunn. ?] ES: [? Kurt Brunn-- ?] Karl [? Brunn-- ?] MARYANN STADELMAN: [? Karl, Karl Brunn, ?] sorry. Once we had the whole cast of [GERMAN] here. ES: Yeah. MARYANN STADELMAN: Egon drove them home. And I said, my god, if anything happens to that car, there won't be a performance tomorrow. ES: [NON-ENGLISH] . MARYANN STADELMAN: [NON-ENGLISH]. [? Barry. ?] Ludwig. ES: [? Barry. ?] MARYANN STADELMAN: They were all in the-- next day in the cast. ES: [GERMAN] had a very funny thing to say, in his Viennese dialect, he said-- dialect, he said-- [SPEAKING GERMAN]. 
INT: Yeah, OK. MARYANN STADELMAN: He was [GERMAN]-- ES: [GERMAN] MARYANN STADELMAN: [GERMAN], yeah.  INT: OK. MARYANN STADELMAN: So we had-- we had very good times with these people. ES: Oh, yes. MARYANN STADELMAN: Yes, and-- and we helped them feel comfortable in New York.  INT: OK. ES: That was the reason why I got the Austrian cross and the German [GERMAN]. With that, and the token, I get into the subway. MARYANN STADELMAN: [LAUGHS]  INT: So both of you, when you look back, you-- how do you feel about these years? MARYANN STADELMAN: It's good, it's good-- yeah.  INT: Yeah, OK. ES: The years of what?  INT: The years together. ES: Oh, they were great.  INT: Good. MARYANN STADELMAN: They still are.  INT: So for many more to come. MARYANN STADELMAN: Knock, knock wood.  INT: Thank you very, very much. MARYANN STADELMAN: Thank you. ES: [? Hopefully ?] we thank you very, very much. MARYANN STADELMAN: Thank you. ES: For coming here, for giving us your time. Thank you. This is my father, Ferdinand Stadelmann, Lieutenant Ferdinand Stadelmann in the Army of the Kaiser, 1914. That picture was taken either at the end of 1914, or early 1915. This is my mother, Margaret Stadelmann, and myself, Egon Stadelman. I don't know, I must have been about two years old, judging from the picture. This is my grandfather, Gustav Engel. The man in uniform is my uncle, Leopold Engel. The medium-sized boy with the-- with the hat on is my cousin, Martin Engel. And the [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] boy in front of my grandfather, the-- that's me. And the baby in the carriage is my cousin, Kurt Engel. 
INT: The boy-- yeah. ES: The other, the one in the middle, I don't know. On the right is my cousin, Hilde Engel. On the left, it's me. This take-- was taken 1919, or 1920 at some professional photographer. She is still alive in Copenhagen.  INT: What's her name now? ES: Hilde Korzen-- K-O-R-Z-E-N. On the right, of course, it's me. On the left, my mother. I must have been about 10 years old, or something like that. 10, 11.  INT: Would you identify by name, please? ES: Margaret, my mother, Margaret. This is, from the right, Mrs. Emi Stern, their daughter-- her daughter, Maryann Stern, and Willi Stern, taken 1936 in [? Marienbad. ?] Let me remark that Maryann, six years later, became my wife. This is my beloved grandmother, Berta Engel, who lived in Berlin until 1936, and was 95 years old when she passed away. Fortunately, she did not have the-- [? had ?] [? towards ?] the Hitler years. On the left is Maryann Stern, later Maryann Stadelman, and her mother, Emi Stern. I think it's aboard the ship.  INT: 1938. ES: In 1938. This is Maryann, my wife, actually a few hours after she became Maryann Stadelman, instead of Stern. And this, on the left, is me, Egon. This is me on vacation, shortly after the war. I would say 1948.  INT: And on the right it's your wife, right? Is that correct? It's not-- you can't-- ES: I'm-- I'm sorry. I can't see it. 
INT: Yeah, it is-- it is-- ES: OK, I'm sorry. Can we start again? On the right is my wife, Maryann. On the left is me, in the white shirt, on vacation shortly after I came back from the war. I am not sure whether it was 19-- taken '46 or '47. This picture was taken at the same place, with Maryann Stadelman on the right, and me in the white shirt on the left. Same place, same station. Sitting on the right is Michael Ingram, one on the-- one of the announcers at the Voice of America. The next to him is Heidi. I don't remember a second name. I don't remember the name of the white-haired lady, whom we are interviewing. The one with the earphone is me. And standing on the right, is Hans-- Dr. Hans [? Heinzeimer, ?] a great Viennese musicologist. And on his left, on his right, Herbert Nelson, the son of the cabaret artist, Rudolf Nelson. This was at an invitation in city hall. On the right, that's me. On-- next to me, Mayor Koch, with the paper which we published in his hand. The next one is the publisher of [GERMAN]. And the next one [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] is one of the helpers of Mayor Koch, whose name I forgot. This was at a celebration of the [GERMAN]. On the right, it's me. And the-- the next one is Kurt Masur, presently the conductor of the New York Philharmonic.  INT: Thank you. ES: I thank you.