INT: The beginning of the interview is kind of formalized. I'm gonna ask you to say your name and spell it. I'm gonna ask you if it was your name at birth. ES: Mm-hmm.  INT: And-- and you'll give me your name at birth and spell that-- very simple stuff-- the date you were born, the city and country you were born in, and how old you are at this taping. OK? Today is April 26, 1998. The survivor is Esia Shor, maiden name, Levine. The interviewer is Ruth Meyer. We are in the Bronx, New York, in the United States. And this interview will be conducted in English. Hello. I'm Ruth Meyer-- M-E-Y-E-R. Today is April 26, 1998. We are with Esia Shor, maiden name, Levine, in the Bronx, New York, in the United States. And this interview will be conducted in English. Could you state your name at birth and spell it, please? ES: My name is Esia Shor-- E-S-I-A, S-H-O-R.  INT: Was that your name when you were born? ES: No.  INT: What was your name at birth? ES: My first name was Esia-- the same way and pronounced the same way-- more or less, of course. And my last name was S-Z-O-R, pronounced Shor.  INT: And when you were born-- your maiden name? ES: Was Levin-- L-E-V-I-N-- without the E at the end.  INT: And what is your date of birth? ES: December 3, 1925.  INT: And what city and country were you born in? ES: I was born Nowogródek, Poland. 
INT: What part of Poland is that in? ES: Eastern part of Poland.  INT: What's a large city near Nowogródek? ES: Vilna and Lida and Baranowicze.  INT: And how old are you at this taping today? ES: I am 72 years old.  INT: I'd like to hear about your family. What was your father's name? ES: Shmuel Levine.  INT: And when and where was he born? ES: He was born in [NON-ENGLISH], which was a small town by Nowogródek-- near Nowogródek.  INT: Do you know when he was born, approximately? ES: Well, in 1901 or 1903. I'm not sure.  INT: And what was his family like? Do you remember grandparents on your father's side? ES: Yes. My grandfather was a bookbinder, and of course, my grandmother was a housewife.  INT: Did they live near you? ES: Religious people. Yes-- in a walking distance.  INT: Did you spend a lot of time with them? ES: Yes, because this was part of our life at that time-- the family and religion.  INT: You said your grandparents were religious people. ES: Yes.  INT: Were they Modern Orthodox? Where they Hasidic? What was the level of their observance? ES: I would say Modern Orthodox.  INT: OK. What was your relationship with your paternal grandparents? ES: It was a very good relationship-- very good. I used to come to them and watch how my grandfather used to bind books. And of course, my father was also in the same line of work at the time. 
INT: So your father, you said, was a bookbinder by profession? ES: Right. He was a bookbinder.  INT: What is your strongest childhood memory of your father? When you think of your childhood and-- and how you related to him, what comes to mind-- what picture? ES: Very closely knit family-- helpful. As a matter of fact, I knew how to bind a book at the time, and so did my brothers and sister. I was 10 years at the time-- not my younger one. She was only six.  INT: Was your whole family helping in the business? ES: Yes, we-- we didn't have a big business, but everything was done in-- at home. And my mother would go out to the offices and get books. And my father would bind the books.  INT: What was your mother's name? ES: Ciral.  INT: And what was her maiden name? ES: Mendelevich.  INT: And where did she come from? ES: She came from a village not far from Nowogródek. To be exact-- 10 miles. [NON-ENGLISH], it was called.  INT: Do you know how your parents met? ES: Well, in-- from what I understand, they were introduced. And that's how they met.  INT: Was it an arranged marriage or-- ES: [LAUGHS] Well, in those days, if you want to call it arranged, it was when you say, well, I-- I know a girl that lives in the village, and they would introduce them-- meaning my father and my mother. So that's how they met. 
INT: Did your maternal grandparents live in that village still-- 10 miles away? ES: No.  INT: No? Where did they-- ES: I never knew my maternal grandparents.  INT: Oh. ES: They passed away.  INT: I see. How many brothers and sisters did you have? ES: I had two brothers, and we were three girls-- or I had two sisters-- and of course, myself.  INT: And who were your-- what are your brothers' names? ES: Israel was the older one. The younger one was Aaron. My sister's name was Riva. And my younger sister's name was [? Mariashka, ?] or Miriam, we called her.  INT: Were they all born in Nowogródek? ES: Yes.  INT: What was your relationship like with them? ES: The relationship was siblings. We-- we loved each other. And at times we disagreed and fought too-- called each others names-- you know, when we were angry-- each other names when we got angry. But we-- we loved each other very much.  INT: Did you always live in the same home? ES: Yes.  INT: Do you remember the address? ES: 55 [NON-ENGLISH].  INT: And what kind of a house was it that you lived in? ES: That was a-- what we'd call it-- one-- here-- a one family house-- a small house, with three rooms and a kitchen, which we call it here four rooms-- small rooms. And we were-- my parents were struggling to make a living, because we weren't comfortable money wise. And we were all very helpful. 
INT: Where did the family congregate in the house? ES: You would call it here a dining room, because the kitchen in those days didn't have a table, you know. It just were-- it was a large kitchen, but it was only for cooking and baking.  INT: And how was the cooking and baking done? What kind of oven or stove did your mother have? ES: Very-- I would say, as compared to now, very primitive. We were using wood. There was no coal or-- or that-- I-- I forget. Yeah, it was called turf. We didn't have this. So my mother and my father would chop the wood and prepare, and that's how they heated the house. And the big oven, that my mother used to bake for Saturday and also bread.  INT: Was there indoor plumbing in the house? ES: No, no indoor plumbing. We used to carry the water. The children used to help. On the shoulders we had some kind of a device that carried two pails of water. And myself and my brothers used to carry the water.  INT: At-- where did-- where was the well? ES: It was not a well. It was a pump that we pumped. And we used to go there early in the morning to avoid the line, because sometimes there was a line. And one needed to wait for one next-- one's next.  INT: And where-- where was this pump located? ES: About-- I would call it a block away from the house. 
INT: Mm-hmm. ES: One was even nearer-- half a block, thereabout.  INT: I'd like to hear a little bit about the atmosphere in your home. Let's say-- or tell me about the preparations for Shabbes. What do you remember? ES: My mother used to get up at 5 o'clock in the morning and bake the challahs and bake the cakes.  INT: What kind of cake-- ES: And that was--  INT: --did she bake? ES: It used to be like a babka, predominantly, and sometimes for the holidays, a fruitcake. But we always had baked challahs and fruit cake, or a babka for holiday. My father used to go to the synagogue early in the morning.  INT: Did he go to synagogue every day? ES: I-- I would say whenever he had time. But he did go every day. So if he didn't go in the morning, he would go, like, for Mincha-- we call it Mincha-- during the day or in the evening.  INT: And where was the synagogue, and what kind of synagogue was it? ES: It was a-- the synagogue was located-- we call it on the [NON-ENGLISH], because a shul in Hebrew means a synagogue or school, so there were a number of synagogues. And my grandfather and my father and my family belonged to one of them. And it was made out of wood, of course. It wasn't made out of brick. And we loved the synagogue. It was an Orthodox synagogue. The women sat separately from the men. 
INT: Did you go to synagogue with your father? ES: On Saturday, yes.  INT: And when you were a-- a young child, where did you sit when he went-- when you went with him? ES: On a bench. My father was-- had like a stand, and he would stand up and pray-- and had the siddur on that stand.  INT: So did you sit with him, or did you go with-- did you sit with the women or with your mother when you went? ES: As a child, we used to go in and out of the shul. Only for the holidays I used to sit with my mother. And my sisters would sit with me, and my brothers would sit with my father. And it was like a flight up. But it was open. We could hear the rabbi and see our father.  INT: Do you remember who the rabbi was or what kind of a man he was? ES: Well, a rabbi, at that time, to me, as a child-- 40 years old seemed to be old. Because they used to wear the beards, you know. But I don't remember his name.  INT: Did your father have a beard? ES: At one time, yes. But then they got more modern, and he just had a mustache.  INT: What about your mother? Did she keep her head covered or wear a sheitel every day? ES: No. No. She just was a redhead and had long hair in a bun and-- in the back of her head. And then she would put on a-- a-- a shawl on top of the head. 
INT: Tell me a little bit more about Shabbes in your home. You said your mother baked challah and cake. ES: Yes.  INT: What did the meal consist of on Friday night? ES: Fish, chicken soup with noodles. She used to make her own noodles during the week. And there was no dessert. Tea.  INT: So there was fish-- ES: And--  INT: --chicken soup. What-- was there anything-- ES: Yes, and of course, meat-- chicken or meat-- small pieces.  INT: And where'd she get-- ES: And a tzimmes-- we called it the tzimmes--  INT: --what-- ES: --a carrot tzimmes-- made out of carrots.  INT: --and what else? ES: And sometimes she would put a piece of meat in this tzimmes. This was the main-- very tasty meal that we would wait, you know, sort of a whole week for this special meal.  INT: Did you have meat every day or chicken every day? ES: Well, we were-- my mother and my father also many a times would buy geese, and they would, you know, have the shochet. Then they would sell pieces privately. You didn't need to have a permission to sell it. You didn't need to have a store. And that's how they supplement-- supplemented for us. So we did have meat for the most part. So if it wasn't meat, it was chicken or geese-- I mean, a goose-- parts of a goose-- because she would sell most of it. So we would raise the geese for a short period of time. And then, of course, we had a shochet, and they plucked them. Everything was done in the house in that kitchen. As I mentioned, we had a big kitchen. 
INT: Do you remember any of the other holidays? What was your favorite holiday as a child? ES: Passover. [LAUGHS]  INT: Tell me. ES: Because we were waiting for the matzahs a whole year. It was done by ourself-- not by ourselves-- but it was done in a place where-- special place. And we used to come and help to roll out the matzahs. And it was really very expensive at that time. We couldn't touch it before the holidays. It wasn't allowed, according to our religion. But we couldn't wait until that big, wooden box would be open-- as children-- to taste the matzahs. So that was a very nice holiday. And of course the-- the matzah balls and all those preparation, it took place about a-- 10 days or so. We all worked very hard to make kosher the utensils and take them to the [NON-ENGLISH], as I mentioned before, where our synagogues were located. And then they had a very big fire and a very big-- a pot made of-- made out of, I guess, steel. And we would throw-- we-- it was tied-- all those utensils-- would-- nobody should lose a-- a spoon or-- everything was very costly for us. So they would put it in to that big, tremendous pot. It was-- I don't know how to say it in-- in English. A [NON-ENGLISH]. It's like a big--  INT: A kettle? ES: Yeah.  INT: Like a kettle? ES: Yeah, a very big one. Maybe-- 
INT: Did everybody in the town come and bring-- ES: Yeah, most of--  INT: --their things there? ES: --them-- the ones that were religious, yes. Of course, there were people who were more comfortable economically. They had additional sets. So they wouldn't come or send their children. But we were sent to the [NON-ENGLISH] to do this--  INT: And how-- ES: --ritual.  INT: --what-- what was the actual ritual of koshering? You said that you put it in the pot. ES: A tremendous pot. It was maybe, I would say, six feet in diameter and-- and you know, they would put wood underneath and boil it. And then a lot of people would put in-- not only mine-- ours-- meaning-- meaning ours. And this was the way we did it in those days. And the children were very helpful, because there was no other way to-- to make it kosher for that particular holiday. And then there was Hanukkah, of course. That was a beautiful holiday. We loved it-- pancakes and all the schmaltz. And [LAUGHS] we used-- you know, they used to use it from the geese that we got. It was delicious.  INT: Was there an exchange of presents at Hanukkah time? ES: No. It was only Hanukkah money, because we played the dreidel. So our parents would give us some money to be able to play the dreidel. And this was a lot of fun to win, you know-- the challenge of winning the few-- at that time-- you know, that-- that you would call it here pennies-- but the change, anyway. 
INT: What language do-- was spoken in your home? ES: Yiddish. That was our native language. And I knew how to speak and write Yiddish, of course.  INT: What kind of school did you go to? ES: When I was a-- a child at seven years of age, I couldn't wait to go to school, because that's when our school started. There was no kindergarten. There was maybe for the richer people the private kindergarten, but it was no kindergarten like here-- that the state and city paid for it. I went to [NON-ENGLISH] it was called-- elementary school.  INT: Was this a public school? ES: Yes.  INT: Were there Jewish and non-Jewish children in this school? ES: Right. Yes. There were.  INT: How many Jewish children were in the class in comparison to the rest of the class? What was the percentage? ES: Small percentage. I would say about 25%. Because there were a number of public schools. The public school I went to was-- must have been about 20%-- not even.  INT: 20% Jewish? ES: Maybe less. I'm sorry. I have to correct this. I would say about 10% in that school-- that particular school that I went to.  INT: What about in the neighborhood that you lived in in Nowogródek? Oh-- what was the proportion of Jews to non-Jews there? ES: I really don't remember exactly the proportion. But if I'm not mistaken, there were around 7,000 Jews, thereabout.  INT: 7,000 Jews in Nowogródek? ES: Yeah, it was a small town. 
INT: And what was the-- what was the total population? Do you know? ES: In the like, city proper, you know, it must have been around 20,000 thereabout.  INT: There-- ES: Jews were very visible in my hometown.  INT: There were-- so there were 20,000-- ES: Yes.  INT: --people living in Nowogródek and 7,000-- ES: Yeah.  INT: --of them were Jewish? ES: There. I would say so.  INT: What was the Jewish community life like in Nowogródek? ES: It was a very closely knit community life. [PAUSES FOR 6 SECONDS] Well, especially when the holidays came, you know, I had friends. We used to go out to organizations.  INT: What organizations? ES: There was Hashomer Hatzair and Bais Yaakov.  INT: And what kind of organizations were those? ES: One was a Zionist organization, and the other one was a religious organization.  INT: And what kind of activities did you participate in? ES: Well, in the Hashomer Hatzair, they were encouraging the younger people to immigrate to Israel-- at that time, Palestine. So they were, for example, having some outings. And it was emphasized the social way of getting along with people-- of-- well, young-- well, I mean, young people-- one's age group. They were in age groups. So that was a lot of fun.  INT: Did you ever think of emigrating to Palestine? ES: No, at that time I was kind of young. And I-- I loved my hometown. I was very comfortable where I was. But I like this-- they used to call it a [NON-ENGLISH]-- to take on a-- on an outing. And especially when I was a little older, like about 11, I liked the sleepover, you know. Because there was no sleeping over in somebody's house. So [LAUGHS] I-- it was very enjoyable to mingle with one's friends and sleep over. It was a lot of fun. 
INT: What was the social life like for youngsters in a small town like that? ES: Well, most of our neighbors on the street I lived were Jewish. So you went outside. It was a social [LAUGHS] life. I played ball. We-- we played house when we were little, you know. It's just-- it was very free. And as far as sports, the-- the children whose parents were more comfortable, they could buy skis and skates. But I wasn't in this. I didn't belong to this group, because my parents, as I mentioned before, were working very hard and struggled to keep ends meet. So we used to have one pair of skis. So my brothers used to use it predominantly.  INT: In school, in the elementary school, what were your favorite subjects? ES: I happened to be a good student, but I worked very hard for it. It didn't come easy to me. As I mentioned before, my native language was Yiddish. So I needed to be sort of perfect to pronounce the Polish words correctly. And I somehow mastered it at the time, with a lot of work.  INT: So were you taught Polish as a foreign language? ES: No. That was the--  INT: Was school conducted-- ES: --school.  INT: --in Polish? ES: There was no excuse like saying, well, this is my second language, and it comes difficult to [LAUGHS] me. You needed to know it. You needed to know it correctly. And if you didn't, the other students would make fun of you. You know, it-- that was very painful if one mispronounced a word in-- in the public school. Because at that time, even the younger children knew about that-- partially antisemitism-- in the sense that they-- it was instilled in them that the Jews killed Jesus. And therefore, they are not really our friends. So this was felt, even in public school. And of course, at times, I-- [LAUGHS] I remember one incident-- that one of the students called me Jew in Polish-- [POLISH]. So in my childish way, I said to her, well, your brothers are Jewish. Because what happened was, her mother was divorced and got married to a prominent Jewish person, meaning prominent-- that he was educated in Polish. So this was my, you know, I would say my defense at that time. And she was taken aback, because she thought that nobody knows that her brothers-- they were really her stepbrothers-- I mean, her stepbrothers-- her father's children from a Jewish marriage. So you can imagine. And this was in the third grade of public school, which I must have been 10 years old. 
INT: Did you ever play after school with non-Jewish children? ES: No. As I mentioned, on our street were predominantly Jewish children.  INT: Was there any religious education in the public school? ES: For the Catholics, yes.  INT: And what did you do when they were having their religious instruction? ES: I didn't-- I didn't go in at that time, because in the morning they used to say the prayer. And this was acceptable. If you're Jewish, and you don't want to go in when they say the prayer, you could stay out. So I wasn't there. And then, if I remember it correctly, we had a Jewish teacher that I could go once a week, I think. We had, like, religious instructions there.  INT: In the public school? ES: Well, I-- I really am not sure of it, you know, where it took place-- if it took place in the public school or not.  INT: We'll stop here and change tape. ES: OK. Thank you.  INT: Esia Shor a interview, tape two. I'd like to continue a little bit about religious education in Nowogródek. You said that you had some religious instruction, and you weren't sure if it was in the school or outside. Tell me a little bit about your Jewish education. ES: Well, when I was younger, and my mother had a yeshiva bocher, which would call us yeshiva student that used to come to our house. And for the price of a meal he would teach me some Hebrew. And then this was for a short period of time. But this was basis-- from a basis for me to learn how to-- how to pray in the shul. And then I went to Bais Yaakov, which was also a religious school. And-- 
INT: At what age did you go there? ES: I must have been around eight, nine years old. Started early.  INT: What did you learn there? ES: About our religion. It was also an organization they used to call [NON-ENGLISH] and [NON-ENGLISH], which was the younger child. And then you sort of progressed [INAUDIBLE] when you grow older. This organization was part of the Bais Yaakov school. So that's where I really learned how to pray somewhat. Because I did not understand the words, but I still knew how to sound out the Hebrew words. And some of it I learned later the meaning of. So this was my limited experience in Hebrew, or Judaism.  INT: Were girls and boys taught separately, or together? ES: Separately. See, the emphasis was that a boy must know how to daven-- how to pray. The emphasis was for the boys. And they used to go to cheder. And cheder was expensive. So--  INT: Did your brothers go to cheder? ES: Yes, they did go to cheder-- both of them. And they learned how to pray. And the girls were just, you know, they needed to know all this [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] well, I don't know how to express myself. When a holiday came, [NON-ENGLISH], how to go about the home, and how to say the prayer over their candles on Shabbat. And also kashrut. And this will taught at home, the kashrut, because my mother was kosher. So I knew how to go about it. I learned, rather, how to go about it. And this was the way of life for young girls. Of course, there were some of my friends that went to Tarbut, which was expensive for us. 
INT: What kind of school was Tarbut? ES: Tarbut was a Hebrew school. The subjects were taught predominantly in Hebrew-- except, of course, for Polish as a subject. That was taught in Polish. [LAUGHS] But starting from math and physics and all the other subjects were taught in Hebrew.  INT: You mentioned that kashrut was taught in the home by your mother. Tell me a little bit more about what you remember of her. What kind of woman was she? ES: Very hard working. I-- I really don't think that I could have done what she did in her-- at her time. We had five children. I mean, she had five children. There were five children in the house. And she would help out the-- my father in all the way she could. They used to even sell grain. It seemed to be more profitable than other things.  INT: Where did they get it from? Did they-- ES: From the village. My mother was born in the village. So she knew some people from-- Gentile people from the village. And they used to bring to our house the grain. And it was sold on the market. And then from some of the grains, oil was made. We didn't have like here, you know, the oil. Everything is-- was made differently-- in a primitive way. And we were very helpful as children, because my mother and father couldn't have done what they did, meaning providing for us just the everyday [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] things, like clothes were bought only for the holidays. And we used to take good care of it. And then, as far as helping the mother later on, my brother was older. He used to help chop the wood, you know, prepare for cooking and baking. 
INT: Tell me about getting new clothes. ES: It was only for the holidays.  INT: Which holidays? ES: Well, of course, since we're just-- we-- you are taping after Passover. I mentioned before, Passover was my favorite holiday. I used to get patent shoes-- patent leather shoes-- and a nice outfit, you know-- within limits, of course. And then we would go out, and sort of show off to our friends across the street. They were richer Jewish families. And I felt rich, because I had those patent leather shoes. And I also had a pretty dress. I didn't need a coat at that time, because it wasn't cold. Specially Rosh Hashanah, we had better clothes, and for Passover. Because Rosh Hashanah, my mother would buy already the special brown shoes that we would wear for school. And also Rosh Hashanah, it was a little bit cold already. So we used to get a coat, a sweater. Very limited in clothes.  INT: Where did you get the clothing? ES: There were stores. We needed to-- of course, everything took time. It wasn't like I-- my mother could go into the store and buy a ready-made dress. She used to buy fabric, and then take it to a dressmaker. And it was very expensive for our family to have it done. But this was the way they would sort of put away some money. It was very important for the holidays, too. The children should have new clothes. And that's how they went about it. 
INT: Did you know, as a child in Poland, about the rise of the Nazis in Germany, the rise to power in 1933? ES: Yes. Yes, we knew about it. Because the Poles were showing more antisemitism. They used to sing antisemitic songs that was so good-- the-- to listen to, that I even knew the melody. I couldn't carry a-- a tune if my life would depend on it. But as a young child, it sounded so good--  INT: Do you-- ES: --antisemitic songs.  INT: Do you remember any of the words? ES: No.  INT: I don't know if you want to sing. But do you remember? [LAUGHS] ES: No, I-- as I mentioned before, I can't carry a tune. But I-- it was so--  INT: Do you remember the words, or-- or the theme-- ES: No.  INT: --of the songs that-- that-- ES: Antisemitic, that, you know, they did it not like every time, but when-- whenever they would get angry, you know, they would sing that-- say those words. That specifically that Jews aren't good. They killed Jesus. Their religion was very-- like it was-- the main focus was on religion. It was a homogeneous society. There were no other people. Only, of course, if I remember correctly, about 3 million Jews. And it was 32 million Poles. And some gypsies, but very few. And some were Muslims, but very few. We used to call them [? Mohammedanas. ?]  INT: Did they live in your town? ES: Yes, they did-- but very few. 
INT: Were they persecuted for their religious beliefs? ES: No. Not at all.  INT: What about the gypsies? How were they treated? ES: There weren't too many. But the Poles did not persecute them. They didn't like what they were doing, because they sometimes used to rob other people to-- in order to survive, because they lived in the woods, I would say. They used to ride horses. And also they used to come sometimes to the houses to predict your future, these gypsies. They felt when they look at your palm, they can tell what your future might be.  INT: Did they ever come to your house and predict your-- ES: They did. But my mother said, no. She doesn't believe in it. And she even told us, never let them in for this purpose in our house.  INT: Why do you think she didn't want them? ES: Because for psychological reasons. We were young. And she felt, ah, they're going to think, yes, the gypsy told them, and, you know, sort of think that this will happen. You know, she felt very much that human beings are the same, more or less, because she grew up in a village. She wasn't afraid of the-- of the villagers. She always-- she was very courageous. She grew up with this idea. And so was her sister, that was Tuvia Bielski's mother. They were very courageous. If I may bring they-- the time when we-- the war started, we ran away to the Bielskis. To the-- 
INT: Where did they live? ES: In [? Stankiewicz. ?]  INT: And how far was that? ES: Oh, 10 miles away. And I remember like today when we were in-- sleeping over, our family, which we were seven people-- and also my uncle was there with his two children and wife-- four people. So we were 11 people at that time. So they couldn't put it up-- put us up to sleep. So we slept in the-- on the straw in the [NON-ENGLISH] it was called--  INT: What's a-- ES: --separated from the animals. And there was straw. So we slept on the-- on the straw. And my-- his-- Tuvia's mother said to the-- her sons, you better stand outside of this [NON-ENGLISH] where we were sleeping, and take your-- like, to cut the-- the-- I forget what's the name of it in English. The [INAUDIBLE] that you cut the-- the wheat and the corn, and stand with this. And also with the-- there were another tool that they used. And stand. And-- and you should watch that the Gentile people shouldn't come to rob us. It wasn't at that time they were going to kill us, but take away what we have. But that-- that was my Aunt Bella's courage to-- and idea, already instilled in her sons. Because she had nine sons and two daughters. So-- and they were all healthy. They grew up in the village. So this remained in my mind. And my mother was the same way-- very courageous. Because they all grew up in the village. 
INT: When was it that you ran away-- ES: That was in--  INT: --to the Bielskis? ES: That was when the war started, in '41. They were bombing in the cities. So we ran away. And we knew already that the Germans will come. But we didn't know that they can do what they did-- that--  INT: OK, before we get that-- ES: --as Jews.  INT: Before we get that far, I'd like to hear a little bit more about earlier on. Did you know about Kristallnacht? ES: No.  INT: What happened in 1939, when Poland was invaded by Germany? What happened in Nowogródek ES: Well, it didn't affect us, because Stalin and Hitler made a pact-- a pact-- and divided Poland at that time. So the Russians took over the part where I was born. And basically it didn't affect us.  INT: What did-- did you continue your schooling at-- ES: Yes.  INT: --that point? ES: As a matter of fact, at the time, it seemed to be better for us.  INT: Why was that? ES: Because we were poor. And, you know, the school was free. Everything was free. So we felt good about it at the time.  INT: Did the schools then become Russian? ES: Yes. Russian Jewish.  INT: So how-- what language did you learn? And you had been learning in Polish. ES: In Jewish. All the subjects were in Jewish, the school I went to. Yiddish. 
INT: Was this all after the Russians came? ES: Yes. They send in teachers from Russia that taught us Yiddish. They didn't teach us any Hebrew. They weren't for Hebrew. But all the subjects were taught in Yiddish-- except for Russian, of course.  INT: So you said that when the Russians came at that point, that life got better for you? ES: Yes. For my family. And for myself.  INT: And how long-- how long did that last? ES: Till 1941.  INT: Between 1939 and 1941, did you have any awareness of what was going on in Europe, and for the Jews in the rest of Europe? ES: Yes, we were aware, because we-- there were some people that came to our part. They were called [NON-ENGLISH]. They ran away from those parts of Poland.  INT: What did-- ES: But we didn't know of these atrocities.  INT: What did they tell you, those people-- ES: They told us that they knew about Hitler more than us, from the large cities they came. But it was still not believable to us that he-- they can do what they did.  INT: Was there anything in the newspapers about it? ES: No.  INT: What-- what newspapers did your father and mother read? Do you remember? ES: They weren't really reading newspapers. They were just struggling to make a living. And the synagogue was the-- the part that they socialized and got the information from.  INT: Mm-hm. So was there ever any discussion, or concept of leaving your hometown? ES: At the time, no. 
INT: Did you have any family in the United States, or in any other part of the world? ES: Yes, we had family here, in New York.  INT: Were you corresponding with them? ES: Yes, we did, until the war started.  INT: And what did they say in their letters? Did they talk about the situation in Europe and the war? ES: No, this was-- it wasn't during the time that the Russians occupied this part of Poland. We didn't get any correspondence then from the United States.  INT: So tell me what happened in your hometown. When did the Germans come? ES: They-- they came in-- during 1941.  INT: What do you remember? ES: Fear. Already it was fear, because I remember my mother sent me to-- we had a tenant in my uncle's house, because our house was bombed out. And--  INT: When was your house bombed? ES: In 1941. So--  INT: Do you remember that day? Where were you? ES: We-- we were at the Bielskis. We were in-- in the--  INT: Oh, so when did you leave the town? ES: When it was-- we knew where they going to bomb at the town. We were afraid.  INT: How did you know they were going to bomb-- ES: Well, they did bomb before. But our-- no, our house was bombed out in the first bombing. So we were living with my uncle. It was in a street that his house remained. 
INT: What-- what were your mother's and your-- your family's emotions when your house was bombed? ES: We-- we threw everything into the basement, and we ran away, too. And then-- then we came to the outskirts of the city, because we were afraid we'll get killed. So when we came back, our house was demolished, except for the basement. We-- there was in our basement, we always used to get water. So the water was still there. So we threw in some valuables in the water, like a pan-- this was the valuables-- a pot, the candlesticks. All those things that could be thrown into water. So that's what we did. And we found it afterwards. Of course, we went away to my uncle. And then they said they going to bomb again. And we ran away repeating to [? Stankiewicz. ?] And then we came back. And--  INT: When did you come back? ES: --we lived there in my uncle's house. Like after a week or so. Because they took over. The Germans were there already.  INT: What was it like for you? You must have been about 16-- ES: Right.  INT: --at the time? ES: OK. I had a terrible experience going-- my mother, I started telling you, my mother sent me to an office to attend something, because she was afraid to go. And I had light hair at that time, too-- reddish something, brown. So I passed by the market place, and there were my teachers that's standing on the marketplace from the town. And some other man-- old man-- I remember. And on the way back, going from the office, I heard some shots, and they were all killed. So that was a terrible experience. I ran home through a different street. And I came. And I tell my-- told my mother. So of course, it was unbelievable. We thought maybe because they were professional people-- which they were-- all of them-- I recognized my teachers. I said hello to them passing by. 
INT: Were they Jews? ES: Jews. All Jews, of course. So-- so my mother and my uncle at the time said, well, they are killing the-- the educated people. You know, they wanted to push it away from their minds that unbelievable things like this can happen. And then, of course, shortly, they took us to this courthouse. I-- must have been about two, three months after. Maybe not even that long.  INT: So was this the summer, then, of 1941-- ES: The winter, see? So that's why I said--  INT: It was in the winter. ES: --that it might have been about three, four months. It was in December. So it was longer than three months.  INT: Of 1941? ES: Yeah, from June until December. So it already about six months.  INT: What-- what was life like in Nowogródek from June to December? ES: Well.  INT: You mentioned that one incident. ES: Yes.  INT: What was your day-to-day existence like at that point? ES: Well, they did it already in some of the smaller towns. Like [? Horodyszcze, ?] they already killed out the people there. Because--  INT: Did you know that they were killing the Jews? ES: Well, we-- we saw it. I saw it myself, as I mentioned, on the market. And then my brother-- my older brother-- was called by the Germans to take some cows to [? Horodyszcze. ?] That was a-- a small town nearby. And we had a-- an uncle there. So he stopped over at the uncle's house. And, you know, he passed us that town. I don't recall what town he was really taking those cows. It took probably more than a week to-- to take the cows there. And I-- I really don't know the reason for sending them there with the cows-- sending my brother, and other Jewish boys. He was 18 and 1/2 years old at the time. But on the way back, when they got the destination, on the way back he stopped again. He wanted to stop at my uncle's house. But he was killed already. And most of the people in that small town, [? Horodyszcze, ?] was-- were killed. So we knew about it, you know. Of course, again, there were always excuses. They were saying, well, they collected the gold, and maybe they didn't give enough of their gold-- meaning gold jewelery-- not coins. Nobody had coins at that time. Maybe that town-- in that town the Jews didn't give right away their-- their-- their jewelery. So that's why they killed them. 
INT: When-- when-- ES: So this was the information that we had--  INT: When-- ES: --that they killed Jews.  INT: When the Germans came into Nowogródek, did they ask for your gold? ES: Not right away. After a while. And we did give all the jewelry that we had. We didn't have any, except for the wedding bands that my mother and father had. We did give. But it-- this wasn't their purpose. I mean, we just interpreted it that maybe that town didn't give them as fast as they, you know, anticipated.  INT: Was there-- were you still going to school? ES: When the Germans went in? No. There was no school.  INT: What were you doing every day? ES: Well, just worrying, and helping the parents just to-- to survive.  INT: How were they managing to feed the family at that point? ES: Well, partially my uncle had a garden there. So he grew some of the, you know, necessary vegetables, like we had potatoes and carrots.  INT: Were you-- ES: Other than that, you know, it was bartering. You know, [? giving away ?] something.  INT: Were you able to be out on the streets? Were there Germans in the streets? ES: There were. Where we lived, there were Germans. Because there was a school nearby. So they were in that school nearby. They took up that-- it was like a tennis court you would call it. So it-- they were there. We saw them all over, and were very much scared of them. And then the one day, which was in December, they organized the family, and they took us to the courthouse. We were supposed to go to the courthouse, and of course we went to the courthouse. 
INT: We'll stop here and change tape. ES: OK.  INT: Esia Shor, interview, tape three. Mrs. Shor, tell me about what happened that day in December when you were called to the courthouse with your family. ES: We were told that we can only take our belongings that can be carried.  INT: Who told you? ES: The Germans. They-- they put announcements all over-- written announcements-- that we must only have the things that we wear; must-- meaning that that's all what we can have, and also-- whatever we can carry in our hands. So of course, my mother selected the most important things, like the clothing that we should have. And each child was carrying the most they can carry in their hands, including my six-years-old-- forgive me-- sister. So anyway, that's what we had.  INT: Were all of you together at that point? ES: Yes, we were marching together to the courthouse-- us first, and then my uncle and his family. And doing the same thing.  INT: What was-- what was your perception of what was going to happen next? [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] Do you remember-- ES: We were--  INT: --what you were thinking as you were marching there? ES: I didn't think that I'm going to get killed. I thought that maybe we'll go to work. Maybe they will-- they want our whatever we own. As a matter of fact, some of the stuff we gave to Gentile people-- neighbors-- willingly, to, you know, we gave them to keep if we will come back one day. 
INT: Tell me what their reaction was to your having to leave your homes. ES: There was no reaction. Because every time-- they feared the Germans, too, I would say. Of course, they were probably happy that this happened to us. But I cannot [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] say that this neighbor of ours was happy, because she didn't express any feelings. And at one time, she really helped me out. So I would say that she was OK.  INT: What was her name? ES: She was a-- a widow with children. I don't remember her name.  INT: How did she help you out? ES: This was afterwards, when I-- that was the second action. So when we'll get to it, I will explain--  INT: OK. You'll tell me then. Good. ES: Yeah, because right now it wouldn't make any sense.  INT: OK. OK. So you marched to the courthouse. Tell me what happened. ES: We marched to the courthouse, and we were in a basement there. And as a matter of fact, my mother somehow found a way how to do some cooking one day. She-- and there were some other men. We were, you know, a group of people in a small room.  INT: How many people? ES: Oh, must have been about 20 people in a room like this.  INT: And how-- how long were you there in the courthouse? ES: We were there one day. I mean, overnight, I would say. I would say two days-- two nights, right, to be exact. And so she did some cooking for all of the children there. And we were just whatever we had, we shared. All of the people that were in that room, the 20 people, if we had some bread, we would help out-- especially the children. There were young children. 
INT: Did you bring food with you, in-- ES: Well, some of it. Very little. Because the food, we-- we thought we'll get there, you know. They take us to the courthouse, and they-- they didn't think us-- think, I'm sorry. They didn't tell us that they will do what they will do. They just said some of us might go to work. So, figured that we'll get food there. And we couldn't carry, like, potatoes, or whatever. There-- there was no canned food at that time. So one could carry was-- would only last probably for one day. Whatever. That's how we were herded there like cattle in this particular room that we stayed. And, of course, there was some hope. But the night before, my uncle was called to dig graves. We didn't know that he was called to dig graves. To work, they said. And, of course, he secretly told my mother that they-- they did dig a very big grave. And my mother right away jumped to the conclusion. She said, [? Josef ?] Iossel, this is for [INAUDIBLE] they will throw us in there. She somehow had this foresight that this will happen to us. Of course, there were incidents, judging by what I said before, that to kill a Jew was nothing to them. Nobody had to account for it, including the Poles, or Byelorussians at that time-- White Russians, they were called.  INT: Were the White Russians also violent against the Jews? ES: They were antisemitic, just the same. And at times seemed worse. So this was the experience of being afraid that they will kill us. And my uncle, at the time, that got him angry. He said, why are you jumping to conclusions? We don't know what for these graves are. And sure enough, the next, I think it was the next day, or a day after that. I would say one more day. So they just separated us-- right, left. They came with dogs-- with big dogs. And we didn't even have toilet facilities. They had one room that we went there to attend to our biological needs. And they closed the door in the room. [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] And then we-- 
INT: So you said the next day. ES: The next day they came in with the dogs. And, oh, my mother was at that time 41, 42, I think. And we made ourself presentable the best we could. I remember she borrowed the lipstick. She never wore lipsticks, and wanted to look younger. And of course at the time in the courthouse, we were only three children, because my brothers ran away to the Bielskis-- my older brothers. I mean, my two brothers.  INT: When did-- ES: This was before they took us. I don't remember the day of the week. There were signs that we need to be in the houses, and so on outside in the-- I mean, pasted on all over. So my mother said, this is not a good sign. You run to the-- to my sister; to the village. But as I mentioned before, we were very closely knit family. So they waited for us, because my mother said at the time that we will go after. She wanted to take something from the house. So as soon as my father came from work with my younger brother, she said you-- the two of you-- you run to the, again, the Bielskis in Stankiewicze. And we'll meet you there. We'll-- we'll be right after. We'll walk out right after you. But when we walked out with the family, the-- the town was surrounded already by Byelorussian and Polish police. So we had to go back. And they waited for us in a village about three miles away from the town called [NON-ENGLISH]. And a Jewish family, they slept over there. And unfortunately in the morning, they-- early in the morning, they went out with the idea to go to my uncle and aunt's house in Stankiewicze. And two of the policemen pointed them out as Jews. And the Germans killed them and threw them into a ditch, and even killed their dog, and threw him on top of them. So this was-- 
INT: Did you know about-- ES: --the loss of my brothers.  INT: Did you know about that when you went to the courthouse? Did you know they were dead? ES: My mother did get the idea, for the simple reason, these two policemen stopped in our house. And they stayed in our neighbor's house. And when my mother in Belarusian language asked them what's doing on the road? So they just gestured with their hand-- that in other words, it's bad. And she somehow sensed it, but she wasn't sure that her sons were killed. [SOBBING] And she started to cry. So, I guess she did feel that they killed them. In other words, they were killed. And as I mentioned before, back to the courthouse, [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] we were-- my father, and my mother, and my three sisters, we were taking outside of the courthouse. Sent outside. And very few people remained in that room. I don't remember who remained at this time. And we're all herded on-- in the courthouse. And at that time, my mother said-- she saw what was taking place. [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] They were taking the people that were nearer to the open trucks. And they were loading them. And, of course, there was some commotions, as some of the people got hurt. They were hurting them with their rifles-- with the back of the rifles. And I sort of pushed myself in back of the-- of this mob. You can't call it a crowd. It was a mob of people. And everybody was running, and screaming, and save me, and the-- and there was just the-- the people who made more noise got hurt. And I said-- I sort of pushed myself as a natural reflex back of the mob. And I said to my mother, [SOBBING] I want to live a little longer. And then my mother said, whoever can save themselves, try to do this. And my sister, the 10-year-old sister that stood next to me, said, Ma, she-- they will really kill us? She couldn't comprehend-- a child. And this remained in my mind, her questions. The little one was crying, by seeing how they push the people. Because human beings don't want to go on these trucks. They knew that there was nothing-- [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] nothing good, that they are not taking them to work, because we had already ideas that they took to work on trucks, and they never came back-- way back-- these people. They took people-- Jews, of course-- on trucks. And they never came back. Amongst them was one of my uncles. Especially the teachers they took. And professional people. So we knew what the trucks meant. But it's still unbelievable. We felt, maybe they'll still select the younger people, whatever, when we'll get there. [PAUSES FOR 11 SECONDS] But then my mother-- again, I'm repeating-- said, whoever can save themselves, try to save yourself. Don't look at me. So then, by-- by sheer luck, [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] a car came, and a [GERMAN] another Germans-- German officers-- came out of that car. His name was Wolf Mayer-- if I'm not mistaken, because I might have mixed him up with another German name. Anyway, my father used to work for him as a bookbinder. And my father at the time was the only bookbinder in town. So I [SOBBING] separated myself from my mother and my two sisters. And I ran over to him. And I pulled him by his belt. And I said to him, my father's the only bookbinder in town. You'll need him. So he said, yeah, [GERMAN]. And then he yelled out, 'Bookbinder, come here.' So my father ran out by himself [SOBBING] without my mother and my sisters. And then the people who saw it said, [NON-ENGLISH] sister. [NON-ENGLISH] mother. The ones that were closer to me, standing near me. But of course, one likes to save one-- the family. And then this [GERMAN] also saved another 10 people. He called them [GERMAN]. They were people that were sewing for them fur-- fur coats for the-- some of the officers. So 10 of the people got saved and with my father and myself at that time. And then-- 
INT: Were-- ES: The [GERMAN] said to a German, take them to the [NON-ENGLISH], meaning to the building where there were still Jews, when they sort of selected some to leave, and some to die. So I started kissing the German, and telling him my [SOBBING] own way, I'm telling you the truth. I'll show you where my mother and sisters are. And another German ran over. And he said, [GERMAN]. In other words, you'll get killed like a Jew, [NON-ENGLISH]. And he take-- took away that German, and gave me a different-- gave us a different German to take us back to the [NON-ENGLISH]. And my father, of course, was hit over the head at that time, too. [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] And when they took us to the [NON-ENGLISH], the [NON-ENGLISH] didn't want to let us in, because they were afraid for-- for self-preservation, for-- because they saw my father was bleeding from his head. But then the Germans said, you must let them in. So that's how I survived this first action-- [? aktia, ?] they called it. This was my experience at that time.  INT: What was your father doing while you were begging them to take your family along with you? ES: He was helping me. And-- and the other German hit him over the head with-- with a rifle. So he was bleeding profusely. And this was the experience. Out of thousands of people, they probably had at the time 500; they were dead. More people. Five or a thousand people. Who knows? We were one on top of the other, standing. And that's how I lost my mother and my dear sisters. [PAUSES FOR 6 SECONDS] [SOBBING] It was questioning my sister. It was questioning if they would really kill us. [PAUSES FOR 9 SECONDS] So many a times I can see her in the-- in the line, in front of the grave, before they killed them. 
INT: Did you see them being taken away? ES: No. [PAUSES FOR 6 SECONDS] I never saw them again. [PAUSES FOR 10 SECONDS] But this picture always remains in my mind. That's why I never-- you know, whenever possible, I feel it's not for me to review this.  INT: Tell me what happened then. ES: Then, they, a day later or so, they organized us-- 'organized' meaning they took us to a-- a ghetto. They--  INT: Were you with your father? ES: Yes. All the time.  INT: And-- and how were the two of you? What was your mental, emotional state? ES: Terrible. Undescribable. Because especially I-- I couldn't accept it as a-- I wasn't even 16-- as a teenager that all those things happened. And because of my sister's questions, and because of my mother's courage, I always felt, had I held them by the hand, you know, I felt kind of guilty until this day. I feel like why wouldn't I hold them, and run with them? They would have survived. At one point, I even made my father feel guilty. I felt, why did he run out by himself? Why didn't he-- he was standing next to them? But it was unjustifiable, because the older I grew, I understood that he called, 'Bookbinder.' So he just, you know, ran out without thinking. Not that he didn't love my mother. They had a very good marriage and everything. Or his children. But this-- I felt for-- for a while the guilt. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] Myself, and even my father. But especially myself. [SOBBING] I felt, why did I [INAUDIBLE]? I mean, the courage would have been if I would have all of them with me. But I very seldom think about it now, because this would make me terribly depressed. And I couldn't function with whatever portion of my life is left for me. So I think, in a way, it makes me strong that I am not thinking about this part of my life. 
INT: So tell me about what happened. You said you were organized, and taken to the ghetto. ES: Right. And--  INT: Tell me. ES: We were in one of the-- of-- of the houses there. Because they designated a part that this is going to be the ghetto. And there were maybe 25 people or so in one room, and a kitchen.  INT: How many Jews-- ES: We had--  INT: --were left in Nowogródek at that point? ES: Well, I-- most of them were killed in this first action. So it must have been around 2,500 were left. Maybe less. I would say roughly.  INT: And they-- were they all put into this ghetto? ES: There was some that I think remained in that courthouse. No, this was later. I'm a little bit confused with the two ghettos. There was a ghetto formed later in the courthouse, to the ones that [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] made a-- a tunnel underneath to leave that ghetto. But I wasn't in that ghetto. I was in the ghetto in [NON-ENGLISH]. And in the house, of course, I-- I never did any cooking. So we had one stove. And I used to wait for my turn to put a little cooking for myself and my father. My father was working, and I was working for--  INT: What were you doing? ES: At the beginning I was working for putting together the-- from the houses, parts-- that bricks that were bombed out-- not even houses. They were court-- not a courthouse. In the market, they were big, brick houses. So I was working there to put together the brick. And then I was-- I went to work to a-- a house-- a engineer that worked for the Germans. He was a civil engineer, with his-- he lived with a woman, that I perceived this way, at the beginning as his wife. But she was really his girlfriend. 
INT: What was his name? ES: Jerzy Foltanski and [INAUDIBLE]. I don't know her name. But I called them both Foltanski.  INT: Did you work outside the ghetto? ES: This was outside the ghetto.  INT: And how did you go back and forth? ES: What happened was we were a few girls sent to this house to do domestic work. And most of the girls were children. A few, I mean. We were four girls to be exact. Were children of the organizers of the ghetto. Because this was perceived as a very good job to organize.  INT: And who were the organizers? ES: I don't remember their name. Judenrate, they were called. They were really, you know, more prominent Jews that were selected to be-- to help the Germans, really, indirectly, of course, to organize the Jews to go to work. And then we had Jewish police also within the ghetto.  INT: What were the living conditions in the ghetto, and what was the atmosphere? ES: Well, I-- the living conditions were very bad, because some people could manage to get some of-- some food from good, Gentile people outside of the ghetto, including myself later on. And we were given some rations, you know, to live on by the Germans.  INT: Was it enough? ES: No. It was just for survival, sort of, like some grains, some things. I don't remember exactly. It was-- I don't remember any meat given to us at the time. Anyway, when I went with these-- we were four girls, by sheer luck-- we always were working very-- they were [INAUDIBLE] and everything. But I was lucky he selected me. And I, thanks to this part of my life, working meaning from outside of the ghetto, I really survived afterwards. So I worked there close to a year, I would say. 
INT: What was your father-- ES: Close to eight months or so.  INT: What was your father doing? ES: Well, he was taken for odd jobs, and not bookbinding, just manual work. They would take a group of people. So they would take him. Because he wasn't that old. He was about-- he was about 42 years-- no, 40 years old. Because he was a little younger than my mother-- a year younger than my mother. So my mother must have been 41. He was 40 years old, thereabout.  INT: And did you both come back to the ghetto each night after work? ES: Yes, we did.  INT: Did life have any sense of routine or normalcy while you were in the ghetto? ES: No. Fear. Fear. And the mind was always occupied-- or preoccupied-- with how to survive. We knew that there is no way. We work, and we'll be killed. At that time we knew already.  INT: Were people dying in the Nowogródek ghetto? ES: Because of what?  INT: From hunger, or were they being killed? Were they being selected? Were there actions? ES: Selected, yes, like--  INT: How often were the actions? ES: It was like little things. Killed on a job. Killed. But they weren't like-- they didn't organize big groups to do it until the second action. Individuals were killed. I-- maybe I ought to think a little more. Maybe there were at times that they grabbed people and killed them. But I don't really-- can say that they killed, like, let's say, 500 people at one time. This wasn't the case. 
INT: And who was guarding-- ES: As far as I recall.  INT: Who was guarding the ghetto? ES: Non-Jewish police. And in the ghetto there were some Jewish police.  INT: Were they German, or Polish? ES: Polish predominantly.  INT: We'll stop here and change tape. ES: OK.  INT: Esia Shor, interview tape four. Mrs. Shor, tell me about the second action. When was it? ES: I worked for these Foltanskis for about seven months or so. My work was to wash their laundry, to help cooking-- to help do the cooking, and to clean the house. They didn't have any carpets, so the floors needed to be waxed once a month. And the most difficult work was, for me, to bring in the water for the laundry and for the everyday chores, and cooking, because it was quite a distance to bring in the water. Again, it was some kind of a device that carried two pails of water.  INT: Was it safe for you to leave the house and get the water? ES: I was wear-- yes-- I was wearing the Star of David. And I was working. And this was the-- they allowed at that time.  INT: Did people ever accost you in the street? ES: Well, the neighbors. The neighbors. But the neighbors--  INT: What would they say? ES: --where my-- Foltanskis lived. But they were somehow friendly towards me, because I guess they felt sorry for me that I worked so hard. And the Foltanskis had a very good opinion about me. So I guess they were, in this sense, they felt sorry for me. 
INT: Did you get enough to eat there? ES: Yes. There-- there was plenty of food. And as a matter of fact, she tried to give me some food for my father at times. They were special people. They were very nice people-- educated, worldly. And somehow they thought about me that I was educated. I-- they always said to me, Essie, don't mix in the work there-- in the ghetto. Somehow they get the impression-- they got the impression that I had some foresight, whatever. I don't know. They were--  INT: What kind of work were they talking about, don't mix in the ghetto? ES: In the Judenrate. Don't do anything in the Judenrate. Because there were times they would kill people from the Judenrate, too, any displeasure. If they didn't do what the Germans wanted them to do, they would just get rid of some of them.  INT: So continue about what happened with the Foltanskis. ES: So I worked there. And I was young and healthy. So I was involved predominantly, of course, in my work, to accomplish the day's work. Because this meant, at the time, life or death, more or less. If I lose the job, it wouldn't be good for my survival. And they always assured me that they will help me when something will come about. They will try to help me. As a matter of fact-- we'll call her his wife-- came once to the ghetto to bring me some food, because that particular time they didn't allow already Jewish girls to work in non-Jewish homes-- meaning professional Germans. So everything was done very systematically. They allowed for a certain period of time. And then they stopped it. So nobody could work in any homes. So she felt, I guess, sorry for me. She wanted to see me. So she came to the ghetto. And really at that time her life was also at stakes-- stake. Because there were no-- no people were allowed to come close to the ghetto fence. But she did come, and she asked for me. And, of course, nothing happened to her. She brought me some food. And-- and she said to me, Essie, whenever you feel you're in danger, you come to us. 
INT: Would you have been able to get out? ES: By throwing away my Star of David, I came back to them.  INT: So when did that-- tell me about that. ES: I was working on the-- it was like [NON-ENGLISH] they called it, where the army people were-- the German people. [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] Well, I really didn't mention one--  INT: Go ahead. ES: --incident.  INT: Go ahead. ES: If I may backtrack, that I did work for a German, too, before I worked for-- for the Foltanskis. And that was a German officer.  INT: What kind of work? ES: Manual. Just helping to cook, and that was in the house before I got to the Foltanskis. And one of them was a very human-- well, human. I mean, he had human feelings. So he even tried to write me at that time. But I was only 16. And I talked, you know, whatever. And then they stopped letting, you know, Jewish people to--  INT: Did you fight with him? Did you-- ES: Not really. Not really. But I don't know what took place. I can't recall that, you know, vividly what happened. But I was very scared, you know. I was a very naive girl-- I would say a child, now, as compared to the American children of 11. They know private parts. They know-- you know, they are brought up with the idea to be careful. But I-- I like blacked out at that time. So I really don't recall what it-- took place. I was very scared. And then, of course, I stopped working there. And that was one incident that I had. 
INT: Did your father know what happened? ES: No. I-- after the war. But I didn't-- they don't, you know. It was-- we were brought up that certain things you don't talk about, you know. Even if it happened to you, you know. And I really am not sure how-- I blacked out. I really don't know what took place. He didn't hit me. I didn't have any marks. But I guess fear did it to me. I don't know. Anyways, so this was my experience before the Foltanskis. And then I worked in the [NON-ENGLISH]. And I saw that some of the girls somehow knew, with the other group of people--  INT: What was the [NON-ENGLISH] again? ES: That-- this was like a lot of German soldiers were placed nearby. And I don't--  INT: Was it a camp of some sort? ES: Something like a camp--  INT: I see. ES: --that was in the outskirts of the city. And I saw some of the girls knew that it's going to be a second action the-- the same day. They knew. They had some kind of information. I don't know how they found out. Chances are maybe somebody came from the ghetto and told them. So, instinctively, I ran to the Foltanskis. And I took off my Star of David-- stars, really, because I wore one in front and one in the back. And I snuck into their house. And I was very-- how should I say. I wasn't even thinking straight. I was crying constantly. I said, my father got probably killed already. Because that was the day that it took place-- the second action. And-- 
INT: What time of the year was it? ES: That was--  INT: Or the day? ES: Fall. I would say the end of summer. The end of summer. Because I was in the fields. I ran away to the fields. So it must have been the end of summer. Anyway, when I was crying, and you couldn't stop me, he said, well, if you want me, I can kill you here. And nobody-- nobody will ever punish me for it. And he--  INT: Why would he say that to you? ES: I think he wanted to put me in place. Because I was crying, he couldn't talk to me. I was crying-- can you say profusely? Yes. I couldn't stop, because I felt this is my end. And, you know, my father is killed, and-- I don't know what happened. I was running. And I was afraid that he-- I still did not have the-- the full confidence in him. I figured maybe, who knows? Maybe he wants to point me out to the Germans that I came to his house. Because they could have killed me, too. And, of course, they could have killed him, if he would say, well, I wanted to save her, you know. So if the neighbors would see me, and send Germans, he would have probably said that she worked for me, and she came running here. And I wanted to kill her. That's why she's crying. You know.  INT: So-- ES: So, I mean, that's my thinking. 
INT: So what happened? ES: So he said again, you know, I have a right to kill you, and here is my gun. And if you don't stop, I'm going to kill you. And he said, I was in different situations, too, that my life was at risk. And I survived. And this gave me the confidence. In other words, I knew his intentions are good for me. So she brought out some clothes-- his wife. And they dressed me up in a little blue jacket, and she combed my hair, made me wash my face. And she said, why don't you go in the field that was across the street from where they lived. And I will come there tomorrow. And I'll bring you some food. And they both said, ah, she doesn't look like Jewish. She looks just like a Christian girl. And I smiled at them. And I went across. And I hid in the field. There was a little ditch there. So I hid there. And, of course, all the time my mind was with prayer. And if I didn't say a hundred times [? Shema Israel, ?] I would be lying to you. Because that keep-- kept me sane. And it, like, felt that I'm talking with God at that time. Because I was all alone.  INT: Were you-- had you been religious before that? ES: Oh, everybody was religious. There was no-- well, everybody, meaning the people--  INT: But did you have a very strong faith before that? ES: Yes. 
INT: OK. ES: Even though I didn't know all the prayers, except for [NON-ENGLISH] and, you know, the [? Shema Israel. ?] And being a student in Bais Yaakov, I was explained a lot about the spiritual way of life.  INT: So how long were you in the field? ES: So I was there overnight. Then, in-- during the day came, she, the Mrs. Foltanski. And she was saying in a soft voice, Esia, where are you-- in Polish-- where are you? And of course I answered in a very soft voice, because I was afraid. And she said, I'm leaving some food for you here. And she threw a white sack-- a linen sack-- of food not far from me. And, of course, she left. I was very hungry that day, even though I knew that I might be killed. But I was hungry. So she brought me-- salami was a delicacy at that time. The best food that one could think of. Even cake she brought me. She brought me bread, salami, and some eggs, I think, and a-- a-- a loaf of bread, cut up. So I ate the salami, and I ate the bread. And I was very thirsty. She didn't bring any water. Imagine. Her intentions were good. And after the salami and bread. So my idea was, before I get killed, I am going to that pump to drink some water. I was debating to myself, should I? Shouldn't I?  INT: Where was the pump? ES: Across the street, again, from that place. I figured, I'll have them kill me in the back. But I will drink water. And the decision was made. I went to the pump. Of course, I wasn't wearing the Star of David. And I drank some water. And quickly I was going back to my hiding spot. So on the way, when I crossed the street, there was a neighbor who is-- who has-- had police staying in her house at that time. And she said in Polish, she said-- they knew me by sight. I guess she recognized me. So she said, a Jewish girl just ran away in a blue jacket. So-- and of course I heard it. So they ran out from her house. And these were Byelorussian or Polish police. I'm not sure. And they ran after me. But I heard this, so I threw off my jacket, and I ran in a different direction. Somehow, sometimes ideas come even in danger-- in dangerous times. And in-- I went in the opposite direction where that jacket was thrown. So they picked up this jacket. And I was there, lying in a different part. And they started yelling that they'll find me anyway. And they started shooting, like, on the field. But I was quiet. I didn't come out. I figured, all right. They will shoot me here. Anyway, that was my experience. And the next day I didn't know what to do. So I-- I saw through the-- through the corn that there is someone cutting the corn. And this was on a Sunday. So I was surprised that she's cutting on a Sunday the corn, because they were all Catholics. And sure enough, like we would say it here, as fate would have it, this was a teacher of mine from the third grade of public school. And I said-- I called her name. I said, [NON-ENGLISH]. And she recognized me when I introduced myself, even though probably around eight years passed since she was my teacher. And she said, yes, I-- I remember you. And I told her, I'm very hungry, and I don't know what to do. So she said, why don't you lie here overnight, and I'll bring you food tomorrow. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] I am sorry. I'm making a mistake with the day. It must have been-- she came Sunday, but it must have been Saturday-- 
INT: That she was cutting. ES: --that she was cutting the--  INT: So she brought-- ES: --the corn.  INT: So she bought you food on Sunday? ES: On Sunday. And she still was somewhat working there. So that's why. I got it a little bit mixed up.  INT: And then what happened? ES: She brings me food. And, you know, and I asked her already, what's doing? She said, well, they killed most of the Jews in this action. They just a few remained in this courthouse, the workers. And in [NON-ENGLISH] a small number of people remained. But, of course, she doesn't know if my father survived or not. So I started telling her where I live. And I said this particular person, the neighbor, police used to come to her house, you know. An idea came to my mind, and I'm sharing it with her. I'm hiding, and she's standing and cutting the corn on Sunday. So I said, what do you think? Always police come to her house. Maybe they'll take me to the ghetto. I will tell them that I have money. We didn't have a penny, you know, like a zloty was called at that time. So maybe for this they will take me to the ghetto, and bring me [INAUDIBLE] somehow to a site that they know it's safe. So she said in Polish to me, it seems to be a good idea. But be careful when you walk. She told me which path to take. Because some people go to church on Sunday. And they might recognize you. You look a little bit disheveled, you know. So just be careful, and go to the-- she told me which path to take at that time. And I did do what she told me. And I came to that-- to that neighbor of mine. And I saw there are some bicycles in front of the house. So I was very happy, because they used to come on the bicycles to town, because there was no transportation. So I thought, oh, I'm lucky. Thank God. You know. And again I did once [? Shema-- ?] [? Shema Israel, ?] that everything should go well in that house. I walked in quietly, and I wanted to-- to ask her how she is, how this, how things are going. But the main thing I said to her, can you give me some water to wash up? I figured if she'll give me the water, that means that she will be friendly to me. She said yes, yes, I'll give you the water. She gave me water and soap. I washed up. And then I started talking to the police. I told her first that, you know, my father has some money, and I would like them to take me to the ghetto. So she said-- 
INT: Did she know you were Jewish? ES: Yeah, we were neighbors. My uncle's house.  INT: And the police? ES: And the police did not know me, because they never saw me. But they were their-- her close friends. So I figured she might work out the deal with them. Because I said, my father has--  INT: Some money. ES: --some money-- close to 200 zlotys-- zlotys. And he will surely give it to them as soon as he sees me there. So she told them this. And they said, all right, we'll take you to the ghetto. So they walked me to the ghetto. It wasn't too far from there, that part of town. And I came there. And one of my father's friends met me. They left me with the friend.  INT: They didn't wait for money? ES: Just a minute. They are there in the ghetto with me. And I-- her name was [? Hana. ?] And I said [? Hana, ?] do you have some money? Because I promised them some money, because they can take me out, too. They are the police. You know, they can make up a story and take me out. So she said, yes, I have some money, but I don't have 200 zlotys. And the first question was if my father survived. She said, yes. But my father didn't have a penny-- what we would call a penny-- not even a zloty to his-- to his name, like they say here. So she went. And she-- I think she had about 50 zlotys. And she brought it out to them. And they left me there. So this was my experience coming back to the ghetto. 
INT: And how long did you stay in the ghetto? ES: I did--  INT: And what did you do? ES: I stayed till December-- the early part of December.  INT: Was there any effort at resistance, or-- ES: In the ghetto?  INT: --revolt in the ghetto at that time? ES: This, you know, the-- for survival, you, psychologically speaking-- I'm not that educated in psychology. But still, common sense and psychologically speaking-- especially common sense in those days-- you always feel that you are not going to be killed. The other person will be killed. And you start to push yourself away, because I don't know. You would call it here denial, whatever that might be. But this was the case. Because what they did, if somebody rebelled, they were killed on the spot. So why rebel? Let's live a little bit longer. So this--  INT: Tell me the circumstances that led you to leave. ES: Well, we-- at that time I heard-- I knew from my cousins, because they sent someone to the ghetto. They called it [NON-ENGLISH], which meant Christian who they felt will never betray them. Their idea was to save some people from the ghettos-- meaning Tuvia Bielski, Zusya Bielski, and Asael Bielski. These were the-- the three brothers who were the leaders of the-- of the group-- meaning of the immediate family. And there was another family-- the [NON-ENGLISH] family, who, they merged together at that time.  INT: And just to recap, the Bielskis were your mother's sister's children. ES: Right. 
INT: Is that correct? ES: Right. First cousins of mine. They used to come to our house. We were very close-knit-- we were a very close-knit family. And so when I found out that they are alive, and they probably-- I don't know how they found out. Maybe I somehow was always looking for a way to survive. I knew that they were alive. But I didn't know that they are sending someone to the ghetto. And chances are that they mentioned to that person of myself, and the other members-- of my father at that time. They only-- they knew that my father and I-- I assume-- survived, and other people that weren't relatives of them. Yes, there were some relatives from the-- their father's side. But they weren't as close as with us. So of course, I went out with the second group. Because the first group, they somehow called for people that were in the army. They were very sort of-- how should I say-- they were familiar with the situation. You need a-- a army man, a soldier that already knew a little more about organization, or whatever. I don't know.  INT: How were they getting them out? ES: They were going-- they didn't. They sent that-- this [NON-ENGLISH]. And then this was like 10 people at a time. So they got people that were mostly in the army. And they went. Young people, of course. And they remained with this [NON-ENGLISH] in his home. And at night they picked them up. So that's how it was. 
INT: And how did they get them out of the ghetto? Was it-- ES: Oh, they got out by themselves. So am I. Yeah, I mean, so did I, rather.  INT: Did you-- they sneak out? ES: Sneaked out.  INT: I see. ES: It was cold. It was winter. You broke out one piece of the-- or two pieces quietly of the fence. And they took the risk in the middle of the night. So this was the first group. I went out in the second group. So there was already a few women in that group.  INT: Who went? ES: Myself-- without my father. My father didn't want to go at the time. He said, I cannot go to die in the snow. I will die in the ghetto. He didn't want to go. You know?  INT: And how-- how was it to say goodbye to him? ES: Well, I didn't think at that time. I thought at that time that I'll get him out of the ghetto. I felt for self survival. I felt, here I have a chance to go. I'm running. I'm going. And there was a chance, too. Because I could have gotten killed next to that fence. And my father thought that I'll get killed there on the-- that I might get killed there, and lie in the snow, you know. It was winter. But we did get to the place. And--  INT: And who-- who went with you? ES: It was a family. It was-- let me just think of the name, of the last names. Oh, yeah. It was Gutl Berkowski, and his wife, and his sister-in-law. And he was the leader of this particular group, because he knew the way there. He came from the village, too-- from a different village. I don't recall the name. So I went with them. And I don't remember who else. There was a small group. These are the people that I remember. 
INT: Any children? ES: With-- no.  INT: Were there any children left in the ghetto? ES: Oh, yeah. At that time there were. Some. Not children like five-year-old, a child; but 10-year-old a child you could come across.  INT: So you left the ghetto through the fence-- ES: Right.  INT: --you said. ES: Broke the fence, and went to the Bielskis. That they weren't, you know, like the Bielski brigade. They were a small group. There were--  INT: How many in the group at that time? ES: At that time there were about 20, 25 people, including us. So it was a very small group that time.  INT: We'll stop here and change tape. ES: OK.  INT: Esia Shor interview tape five. Mrs. Shor, you got out of the ghetto with these other people, who you described. And tell me where you went to meet up with the Bielskis. ES: We went with this [NON-ENGLISH] whose name was Kozlowski. And the village was [NON-ENGLISH]. The name of the village was [NON-ENGLISH]. So we came to his house. And at night, my cousins came to take us from there to [NON-ENGLISH].  INT: What was-- what was the reunion with your cousins like? ES: It was a very happy reunion on both sides. And [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] I was explained a little bit, and asked questions about their parents, who also perished the same day-- or got killed, to be exact-- the same day as my mother and my sisters. 
INT: Had they known about it yet? ES: Maybe they did, but they didn't know in detail how it took place, what happened. So I described it to them. And other than that, it was right away the survival idea. For example, when I came, [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] it was snow on the ground, and it was very, very cold. So there was a Russian Partisan. Because they knew some Partisans already, not far from the place where they were hiding in the woods. He put wood on, and he kept me sort of warm, because we weren't, like, [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] how should I say? We didn't have any underground hidings. Meaning that they used to call it [NON-ENGLISH] underground. Later on we had it.  INT: So can you describe, first of all, how far did you have to go with them to get to the hiding place? ES: Not far. A few miles I would say.  INT: Did you walk? ES: In the woods. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] I don't remember. That's a good question. Maybe-- well there was no transportation, except for a horse, and--  INT: Did they have a horse and wagon? ES: --wagon. Yeah, they did have horses and wagon. Horses they had, of course. I don't recall. I would say we walked over at that time.  INT: What was on your feet? ES: Shoes. But not warm shoes, you know.  INT: And did you have a jacket? ES: I probably did, yes. But not warm enough to sleep on the snow, you know, that night. 
INT: And do you remember what month it was? ES: Yes. Just a minute. It must have been December also. Because I was close to a year in the ghetto. So it must have been early-- the early part of December. And in that part of the country, the early part of December you get a lot of snow. So I remember it was snow on the ground.  INT: So it must have been around your birthday. ES: Yeah, who thought about birthdays at that time? [LAUGHS]  INT: Did you think-- and while you were in the ghetto, was there any observance of any holidays? [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] In 1942, did you know when it was Rosh Hashanah or Yom Kippur? ES: We probably knew in the ghetto. Yes. We probably knew. But we did not-- at that time we did not observe-- meaning myself and my father, because it wasn't possible at that time.  INT: So describe-- ES: I ate in the Foltanski house. So, obviously, they were Christians.  INT: Describe the physical layout, or the physical conditions that you saw when you got to the hiding place. What, what did it look like? Was it a camp? What-- ES: Sort of. They made from a-- some kind of material, they had, like the Indians. The Indians make the what's it called. I'm not sure.  INT: A tent? A tipi? ES: A tent. That was really a tent on some wood. And they would tie it around a tent. Tents. They had tents. But it wasn't warm anyway. Just wasn't snow on the bottom. And-- 
INT: Were they able to make a fire? ES: Oh, yeah. This was the first thing that was necessary. Otherwise, you would freeze.  INT: Were they concerned about the smoke being seen? ES: Certainly.  INT: What did they do? ES: That's why we would change places very often. That the, the villagers are, from the countryside, they shouldn't see any smoke. So we would change places very often.  INT: So tell me a little bit about the group. You said there were about 25 people at the time. ES: Yeah, thereabout.  INT: And who was in charge? ES: At the time, there were-- there wasn't like selected one-- yeah. It was Tuvia, always, because he was the oldest, you know. But the three brothers were also, you know-- the other two brothers, to be exact, were also involved. So I would say the three brothers were the leaders. But their-- the decisive-- [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] the person who made a decision was basically the-- was Tuvia. But he used to consult them. They were consulting each other, because they grew up there. So--  INT: What was-- what was the-- ES: They had a good relationship between-- amongst the three of them.  INT: What was the-- what was the purpose of the group? What, what was-- what were you trying to do? What was Tuvia trying to do? ES: Tuvia had foresight. He-- of course, he wanted to survive like all of us. But he expressed himself a number of times that he wouldn't mind if thousands of people were standing around him. In other words, he felt that it can be done. So he always encouraged people by sending the [NON-ENGLISH] to come out from the ghettos. But it wasn't a easy thing to do, for people to leave the ghetto. It was a tremendous risk by leaving the ghetto. Because one could have gotten killed on the way. 
INT: Where did they get the people? From-- was it just from the Nowogrodek ghetto? ES: No.  INT: From where else? ES: He also got some from the Lida. That was a larger city than Nowogrodek. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] That number of people-- as a matter of fact, the sizable number of people survived from the Lida ghetto by him encouraging them to do it. And after a while, they had-- they formed somewhat of an organization. Not only the three brother-- brothers. They included also other people that they felt can be helpful.  INT: Did you know any of their names? ES: Well, yes. There was Pesach [? Friedburg. ?] There was Levine. I forgot his first name right now. There was a cousin of theirs, Iudel Bielski. But predominantly they were the ones that made the final decisions, because there was a period of time that these people weren't so anxious to take out more people. Not because they didn't want to save them, but because they felt that what we are hiding, it couldn't keep to a large group, because we'll all be killed. Because this wasn't like a jungle. These were-- these were woods that were accessible to the villagers. And we ran away a number of times, because we needed to supply food.  INT: How did you do that? ES: Well, it was in a very, again, very courageous way, and somewhat hurtful to some people-- [BACKGROUND NOISE] Oh, here she is. 
INT: OK, continue. ES: Yeah. Hurtful to some people, because they would go and rob the villagers with the idea that if you're not giving us the food, we will kill you. Because nobody wants to give away a cow without, [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] you know, a fight.  INT: Sure. ES: Or a horse. So this was the situation they were at at the time. But of course, they were reasonable-- meaning the Partisans were reasonable to, to a certain extent. They wouldn't go to a villager that had one horse and one cow. They used to go to the ones that had three, four cows, or three, four horses. But at the same time, this was like taking away their house, some of them.  INT: But what was-- what was the attitude of the local population? To the-- to the Partisans? What was their perception of you? ES: They weren't favorable. They did it for fear, because our boys-- meaning the Partisans-- would, would mention [NON-ENGLISH]. That means in Russian that they have the heavy artillery that's behind them. They didn't have it. They only had a gun, and a rifle, on them at a time. But they would make a big, you know, in a loud tone of voice, say, well, are you in the positions? In other words, for fear they would give us. Not willingly.  INT: Did you go on any of these outings-- ES: I went on one of them. Yes. 
INT: You're smiling when you say that. ES: Because I-- from the beginning of the war, I always wanted to help. And the courage was instilled in me. But this was before Shovuos, before our holiday Shovuos. And I went with some of the boys-- Partisan boys-- from Lida. [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] And one of them, as a matter of fact, he's still alive here, that I went with him.  INT: What was his name? ES: It skips my mind. I'm sorry. It might--  INT: It's OK. ES: --come back to me.  INT: It'll come back. ES: But at this point it's-- skips my mind. Anyway, he was from the ghetto of Lida. He came out. And we went. And we got dairy, because its for Shovuos. And we were so happy. We come back, there is no one there. They ran away already. Police was after them. And, you know, so I-- we came at the last minute. And my father should rest in peace, thought that I am-- I was killed.  INT: You, you didn't tell me how your father got, got-- ES: Oh, this is a long story. But if you want me to, I'll certainly will answer this question. So anyway, yeah, that was a very logical question. How come I'm referring to my father? My father was there at the time. And we made it in a nick of time. They were-- everything was left. They were running away. And we joined them, this group. And we ran away with them. So this is the answer to the reason why some of the men that came to us thought that it's impossible to save more people in this-- in this place. That we were it. So that's when the change came about. We moved further. And these were more dense woods. And one of the people within the group said, why don't we move to that jungle-like forest, Naliboki? And he was from that part. So then we moved there. And-- 
INT: Before we get to that, just tell me-- ES: How my father?  INT: --how your father got to you. ES: Well, as I mentioned before, this [NON-ENGLISH] was sent again to the ghetto. And I saved, at that time, an uncle of mine to-- with his wife, and two-- and three of his children. The little girl was, at that time, 5 and 1/2 years old, my cousin.  INT: And they were in-- with you in-- ES: In the ghetto, in the-- in the other ghetto, which was called the [NON-ENGLISH] ghetto, or the [NON-ENGLISH]. They called it a [NON-ENGLISH] in Polish. So I asked my cousin, Tuvia. I said, you must get out. This-- just my cousin. His name was Isziya-- Joshua. Because I have no brothers. I have no one. Just get me out, Isziya. Tell them to get Isziya out. And-- But I have to backtrack. My father came before Isziya. Because I send a letter once before with this [NON-ENGLISH] to my father. And he said at this point he doesn't want to leave the ghetto. He doesn't want to go winter on the snow. And he knows that he's not going to survive. So he doesn't want to leave the ghetto. So I wrote him another letter at a different time. And I said, if you want to be my father, you come out. So he came out-- very strong. Because if I survive, and you survive, I don't want to know you, you know? Because of-- there were no other way. His reasoning was practical. He didn't want to die in the woods. He wanted to die in his bed, he said. So anyway, he came out. And just so happened that when he came out, we had, like we have here in the schools, a fire drill. We had a, a drill, how to survive. But we weren't told that this is just a drill. So he was very angry with me, see? I knew you brought me here to die in the snow. It just so happened that Tuvia did not tell us that this wasn't an [NON-ENGLISH] We called it an [NON-ENGLISH] that we had to run away. 
INT: What does an [NON-ENGLISH] mean? ES: That we are surrounded by Germans. That's in-- in Russian. In the Russian language they call it [NON-ENGLISH]. But it was a, you know, just a training for us. Practice. Of course, that's how my father came, and thus we were together since. And then, of course, my cousin that I insisted, because they didn't wanted any more people.  INT: How many were there-- ES: Especially-- oh, it must have been over a hundred already, thereabout. But especially my cousin had a family. So they said-- some of them-- I shouldn't say not every-- of course, some of the people there said, well, he's going to get his family, and we'll have a camp of, of families here. And we will not survive. And I assured Tuvia, and I cried, really, to him. And I said, well, get me him. He's not going to get his family out. He's young. He was younger than I. He was about, at that time, 14 and 1/2 years old, or thereabout. Get Isziya out. And sure enough, he got him out. And then, of course, he got his family out. So--  INT: With the five-year-old? ES: That's how we had a child there.  INT: So tell me about-- ES: [? Miriaska-- ?] Miriam-- she's now in Israel. She survived, of course.  INT: Tell me about life in this camp. ES: Before, I must backtrack.  INT: Yes. Go ahead. ES: This uncle-- my-- this uncle of mine was one of the very important people for us, because he was a mechanic. His name was Shmuel Oppenheim. And he was fixing the guns and the rifles for the non-Jewish Partisans. So he was very beneficial for our group, because the Partisans somehow perceived us at the beginning that we are not courageous to go and put-- take ammunition, and kill the Germans. 
INT: How did you get the ammunition? ES: Well, we got them-- first of all, at the beginning, some people used to buy them from the ghettos when they came out. There are some people came out with some of the rifles hidden. And then, of course, we killed some Germans. We got it from the Germans.  INT: Did you ever kill anybody? ES: I didn't kill, but I was with a group to, you know, kill or be killed. Because we had to-- that was the regular army-- the German army-- that they were retreating. And we were just a group, one Partisan group next to another lying there. They still had better ammunition than us--  INT: Were you-- ES: --in the-- I'm talking about the jungle, you know, that Naliboki [INAUDIBLE].  INT: Were you allied with other groups? ES: Yes.  INT: And was there an organization? What were the other groups? ES: There were the [NON-ENGLISH]. These were-- and there was [NON-ENGLISH]. [? Viktor. ?] [? Viktor ?] was the leader of another Partisan group. But these were prisoners of war, that they ran away from the Germans as prisoners of war. And they got organized. So they were real soldiers from the Russian army. They used to be called the [NON-ENGLISH]. [? Viktor ?] was the leader. And this was still in the woods. Not in the jungle-like woods. Not in Naliboki. This was still in not far from Stankevich, from all those villages that my cousins knew the location. So he was the one that used to, you know, come to us. And there was a connection with them. That-- 
INT: Did you ever go out on actions, or-- ES: While I was in the small-- in the-- just in the woods there, no.  INT: So tell me about moving to the, the Naliboki. ES: Naliboki. There I was--  INT: Tell me what that was like. ES: --already. I had already, you know, I had a rifle. I had a gun, thanks to my uncle Shmuel Oppenheim. Because he got a cut-off rifle, and he fixed it for me. And also a Belgian gun. They used to call it the Belgian Mauser, a little one.  INT: When they went into the deep woods to this-- ES: Yeah, Naliboki.  INT: --jungle, how many people were there? ES: Oh, there were a lot of people already. I would say they must have been about 900 people, you know. Eventually-- not overnight-- but people came out from all the--  INT: And what kind of a camp did you set up in the Naliboki Forest? ES: Oh, this was very well organized.  INT: Can you describe it? ES: Well, they had an office already built. And we, we had, oh, like I would say vocational-- it's not really a school. One was teaching the other how to fix shoes. How to-- we had a lot of workers working and fixing things. We also had a bakery. We were like a little town. And we had a underground--  INT: Was this above ground or underground? ES: Excuse me? 
INT: Was above ground? ES: Underground.  INT: So were these workshops underground that you're describing? ES: Some of them were run-- one of them was on top. And also they-- where they baked was on top, too. But most of the-- they call it [NON-ENGLISH]. They were underground. And they were built by an engineer-- would you believe it? Amongst our people there was an engineer that helped building. He made a big mistake at one time. A lot of water came in in one side of the-- of those underground houses-- houses. I don't know if you would call it houses. But we cooked there, too, somewhat. But then they got organized, and they got a kitchen.  INT: Where did you get the food? Where-- and where did you get-- ES: They robbed the, the population. Some of the population.  INT: Were they able to rob enough for 900 people? ES: Well, it was done from different villages. It wasn't like from one village that it went to get the food. We didn't have an abundance of food, but if you get-- like we got some cows. So we had milk. My father-- he should rest in peace-- was in charge of it. He would distribute the milk. We had people milking the cows.  INT: So you had cows-- ES: It was a very good organization.  INT: There were-- there were cows in this camp? ES: Yes. We got them.  INT: How did you manage not to be discovered? ES: Well, everything that was done was done at night. And some watched the people-- the non-Jews had fear for us, because for survival, if we found out-- which we did at one point-- that one of the non-Jews-- Christians-- told them where we're hiding, we would catch that person. And we would do what was necessary under the circumstances. You know, Jews usually, usually don't kill. But for survival, you kill. 
INT: Was there ever an attack on this camp? ES: So that's what brought fear in the vicinity to the other people. That he will tell on the Partisans, they will kill you. So, you know, fear is sometimes helpful, that you throw fear on people.  INT: Were you ever attacked? Was the group ever attacked? ES: Oh, by, by police, yes. We ran away. Many a times.  INT: But once you had this camp set up, how long-- ES: Before the camp, we were, as a matter of fact, my uncle was injured-- the one that was fixing the, the ammunition. Because they-- we were-- he was standing watching the group. And, you know, they were smart, too, to come in very quietly. And they shot him in the head. But he lied down. He made believe that he, you know, he is dead. So they shot him only once. And we-- by-- we heard the shots. So we ran. And they were very good in the woods, my cousins. They knew every part, how to, you know. And we also had guns, too. So some of them fought back.  INT: Did you-- did you have doctors? You said your uncle was injured. Did you have doctors there? ES: Yes, we had a doctor later on. We had a few doctors. But it might strike you funny under the circumstances. In [NON-ENGLISH] we had a doctor who did a few abortions, because we couldn't have any children there. So this was done in a very primitive way. I even buried a little fetus. 
INT: Did you? ES: Because she came. There was a Jewish girl that came from a Russian [NON-ENGLISH] or group. And she was pregnant. And, you know, the older women still could not somehow justify this, that a Jewish girl should live with the non-Jewish commander in a different group, and get pregnant. So they shied away. They didn't say anything. And she came to my [NON-ENGLISH]. And again, that was my personality. And it just so happened she had one abortion. But she was carrying twins. So she came a, a few days later to do the abortion. I don't remember her name. But I remember she brought me some wool that-- in, in thanks for it. And that I was so friendly to her. She must have been two years older than I-- about 18, a beautiful woman-- young woman. So she had this abortion. And nobody would touch it. So I took it, and I, I looked curiously. It had little hands. And, you know, it was-- I just-- undescribable, the feeling. And I buried it. So this was my--  INT: So who was-- you said it was a doctor. ES: Well, you mentioned doctors. It was one doctor. And--  INT: Did they have any anesthesia? Did they-- how, how was an abortion performed? Did you witness it? ES: I wouldn't be able to explain how. I don't know. But she survived. It can be done without an anesthetic. It's very painful, but it can be done. 
INT: Was there ever a baby born there? ES: A baby born? Yes. It was one baby born.  INT: And-- ES: But I don't remember. She survived. I don't remember her name. A couple-- a married couple. And a baby was born.  INT: Were there any marriages taking place in the forest? ES: Well, one marriage, my father sort of performed it. They survived. Yes.  INT: Do you remember who they were? ES: Her name I remember, [NON-ENGLISH]. And I don't remember his name.  INT: OK. We'll stop here and change tape. ES: OK.  INT: Esia Shor interview, tape six. Mrs. Shor, you were just saying that there was a baby born in the group who survived. And there was a name that you were trying to remember earlier of someone. Can you come up with that now? ES: Yes, my father married one couple. I mentioned her name before, [? Nechamala ?] and Michel. Michel was his name, but I still don't recall their last name. They survived.  INT: Was this-- was this a big event in the-- ES: No.  INT: --partisan camp? ES: It was done in private. They wanted-- my father was, relatively speaking, he was older, because 41 years old was an older-- elderly person. So he--  INT: Was there any celebration at all? ES: Nah, no, no, just mazel tov, and that was it. And just--  INT: And did they-- ES: --he said, I am the witness, and you know? And there was some other people standing by, saw them. 
INT: What were the living conditions? And was there any privacy in the camp? ES: No, [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] because we were sleeping on-- they call it [NON-ENGLISH], one next to the other, built out of wood. [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] And there was no privacy, no. [PAUSES FOR 6 SECONDS] As a matter of fact, some of my friends that survived, I was sleeping next to them. And, you know, they-- one of them was married from before. So there was her husband by the side, I mean, closer to the wall of that part, and then her, and then her cousin, and then I, a lady cousin. So we were next to each other, [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] maybe separate covers, of course. [LAUGHS]  INT: You said there were some workshops. ES: Yes.  INT: Can you tell me what kind of workshops and what they did? ES: They used to make boots and used to sew. That was in the latter part of our, you know, hiding in the Naliboki Pushta. There, it was like a, you would say, a miniature town. We really were very well-organized. In addition to this, there were a lot of workers, because Jews were always specializing in sewing and fixing shoes. So these were the young people that were fixing and sewing.  INT: Was there anybody in with your group other than Jews? ES: In our group, no.  INT: What was your job? ES: Well, there was no assigned jobs. But the people who had, like myself, I had a rifle, so I would stand guard when my turn came, or just, you know, this was the, the, the job that was really assigned, guard. But predominantly, the men were the ones that were going to fight or on [NON-ENGLISH], meaning that they used to get the supplies. We call it supplies, you know, a cow, a horse, a-- bread or grain. This was supplies that we needed to survive. 
INT: Were there any children? You mentioned-- ES: There was one, one child, I mean, child meaning that she was five years old, thereabout, my cousin, Miriam.  INT: Out of 900 people? ES: Well, I don't remember. Maybe there were a few older children, like 10 or-- there were a few children. There was a small group of children.  INT: Was there any attempt to continue their education while they were with you? ES: Yes, there was a girl named Cesia. She used to play with them. And I don't know [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] what she really-- how she really taught them, because we had no paper, no nothing like to draw. They used to play like you would play here, ring around the roses maybe, or, or teach them how to socialize. And she survived. Her name was Cesia.  INT: And how did the kids behave? ES: They, they feared, like, even maybe more than the adults. Like I said, there weren't too many. The, the youngest was my cousin, and then a baby was born. So I'm not aware of when she was born. It must have been closer to the liberation time, because I don't remember children crying, you know? So this was-- everything took place in the Naliboki Pushta, because we could not possibly have mothers and children there. It was impossible to survive for a child, and for the rest, because a child cries.  INT: You said that there was very-- there was no privacy. What was the attitude towards sexual activity in the group? ES: Well, at one point, there was some privacy when they had the tents. In other words, my husband, let's say if I would be married, my husband would build a tent for me and him. That was before the Naliboki Pushta. And-- 
INT: What about when-- you said that you spent a good deal of the time in the Naliboki Pushta in these-- in these bunkers. ES: Yeah, right-- well, it was accepted, I guess. And people did it with discretion. I don't know. Maybe they did it during the day in the woods. How should I know? These little things weren't on my mind?  INT: Well, was there any courtship? There were 900 people. ES: Yes, there was.  INT: And most of them were young. ES: The courtship was that [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] it was a fast courtship. If you liked the man and he was good enough to bring a little bit more food for you, you, you decided to be his girlfriend. And a girlfriend in those days means living together, because the girls couldn't go out and provide for themselves. It was the men. But as I mentioned before, later on, it was organized. A girl didn't have to do it, because we had a kitchen that food was given to each one of us, and that it was a portion of food.  INT: Did you ever-- ES: It was cooked to--  INT: Did you ever work in the kitchen? ES: No, there were, we had a-- amongst our people was one that was really a cook before the war.  INT: And who was that, do you-- do you remember? ES: Just skips my mind again, his name. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] If course, in conversation, it might come-- it might come back to me. So he was from a larger city, and he was a, a cook by profession. And he was organizing other people that helped him, whatever, to do the cooking. But he was in charge in an-- in charge of it in an organized way. 
INT: Were any of the-- ES: [? Sodik ?] was his name. [LAUGHTER] Now I remember, because it's unusual name. Anyway, he survived.  INT: Were any of the shoes or boots that you made, you said they were making clothing and, and shoes. ES: Very-- not too much was made.  INT: Was it ever used to barter? ES: It was always fixed.  INT: Oh, it was for repair. ES: Repair.  INT: Was there ever anything bartered? ES: No.  INT: No, with the outside, I mean. ES: No, this was just help for the partisan, for the non-Jewish partisan, like if they needed to help them for their needs, I mean, the ammunition and so on.  INT: What was the relationship-- what was the relationship with the other partisan groups? ES: That's a very good question, but it's a little bit involved, especially when we were on the-- not in the Naliboki Pushta, jungle-like woods, because this, like I mentioned, the Viktors, we used to call them, Viktor's group, the non-Jewish partisans, at one time, really reprimanded us that we are going to rob-- we are robbing the population, and we are not doing much [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] in order that we don't do too much damage for the Germans, which they do more, they claimed, at the time. They probably did. So they came a few times to us and sort of strongly reprimanded Tuvia. And he said-- [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] strongly reprimanded to the extent that at one point, they took away the, the, the rifles from some of our boys. And some of them got killed. So when they came back to us, Tuvia invited them to a meeting, especially the leader. And he said to them, remember, a Jewish bullet from a rifle kills just the same as not a Jewish bullet. So-- and he really strongly reprimanded them that we will do what's necessary to survive. And since then, they shied away from us, because they were somewhat jealous in a way. They-- the perception was, hm, the Bielskis, they have women. And they have-- you know, they have it comfortable. They have girlfriends, women. It was perceived by them that we are not the fighting group, which we were. There was a special group assigned especially for fighting, not to go and get the supplies, which was the necessities for survival. So this was the perception until this incident. And after that, they did not bother us. So it was, again, Tuvia with his courage and with his foresight, I would say, to survive, and fearlessness. He never feared anyone. 
INT: When somebody died, did you bury them? ES: Well, they didn't die where we were. They were killed, and who knows who buried them, you know, the non-Jews there. I mean, it wasn't like-- you know, we couldn't run out and get them. We were-- would have gotten killed, so the non-Jews.  INT: To what extent was the Jewish nature of the group maintained? Was there any religion? ES: Not quite. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] we did have a shochet, who was from my hometown. David was his name, [? Dovid. ?] But Kashrut wasn't practiced. It was just survival. Holidays weren't observed. So--  INT: Was there a rabbi among you or someone Orthodox [INAUDIBLE]? ES: This was the only person that I can remember.  INT: Was the shochet? ES: Shochet, of course, my, my, my father was a religious man, but we ate what we-- what was there for survival  INT: What was your relationship with your father while you were with the partisans? ES: Good, but he wanted me to survive, of course, because knowing my nature of courageousness, he always was there, stepped in. You're going to get killed. And I did not really, to be honest with you, listen to him when it came to courage, because I felt I wanted very much to revenge for my family. And I, I wasn't thinking about my survival at that time, because I felt free. I had this rifle. I had a gun, and I felt my father didn't. He hated any ammunition. He wouldn't touch it. And of course, I was trained how to use it in case of need. There was one person by the name of Abramovich who was training us, because a gun was-- and a rifle was priceless. And why would it be in a hand of a girl if she doesn't do anything? 
INT: How many girls had rifles? ES: Very few-- [LAUGHS] I can tell you, we were only two. This girlfriend of mine that I gave you that picture, Itke Az-- no, three-- one more was Genia Pinski. And she, I think she had a rifle. And these were the three girls that had rifles, but some girls had guns.  INT: How were you perceived by the other women? ES: Nothing special. I never put myself that I'm special. And I just went about my own thinking. I made mistakes. I almost got killed.  INT: How? ES: But I'm here.  INT: How did you almost get killed? ES: Because I went once to fix my rifle, 'cause my uncle gave me a rifle that some-- sometimes bandits used to use. In other words, part of it was cut off. And I wanted very much a rifle, a full rifle. So I went to one of the, again, a [NON-ENGLISH] there. I was near the Naliboki Pushta that was, like we would call it our territory. We weren't afraid of those people. They were Christians, but they were for us, with us and with the other partisans, the Christian partisans. They wouldn't kill a, a Jew or another partisan-- was a small village. And he was making this out of wood to make it look like a whole rifle, look better at least. This was partial piece of wood, just to hold it in. So I went there, and I met a group of partisans that were making themselves ready to go and put some dynamite under a train over the Niemen. It was a big river that separated our part from the part that we came originally, that where we got organized. They want to go to that part and put dynamite under a train and stop the transportation. So with my idea of helping and doing something against the Germans, I asked the commander if I can join them. And I, I still was waiting. I didn't have a gun, really. So he said, yeah, you can help us with the, the dynamite. You carry some of it. And this-- their name-- the, the commander was-- they were called-- I don't know the name of the commander of this group, but they were calling themselves the [? Stalinzi. ?] That was an honorable name. So anyway, they said, yeah, you can help us. While going and transporting ourselves over the Niemen, one of the partisans got sick, so they assigned me to stay with this partisan. So my plan was out. I did not partake or participate in this-- they call it a-- I called it a [NON-ENGLISH].
And I'm staying with him there, and they went from that house, a Christian house that they had a confidence in that they wouldn't do anything to them. And I was the only girl amongst them. So they came back. And [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] he got better, this man. And then they decided that they need some supplies. They will stop in the village and get some supplies, meaning food. They also did what the Jews did. There were-- was no other way. They couldn't buy food. And they robbed this Christian people. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] And before we went there-- I mean, before that, I have to backtrack a little bit. They slept over in that house one night. And one of the commanders, or he was the commander, wanted me, as a woman, to go to bed with him. Of course, I resisted that. And it didn't work for him. So we went to rob that village. And they robbed the village. And he was very angry at me for the simple reason, he was promising me, like, the war would end tomorrow. I would probably give in if I would know the war ends tomorrow [LAUGHS] at that time. But I was brought up with, with morals that are-- very high morals and family ethics that are still with me. And I went with them to do the, the, the whatever-- to get the supplies. And he was very angry at me. And I was on the wagon. And he was steering the, the, the horse. And he said, you know, Esia, I'm very thirsty. Just go in-- we were passing out the house-- and get me some water. Yeah, this I have to help somehow. He went on, you know, and they called it a [NON-ENGLISH] to, to do this-- to destruct the, the rails, which they did and were very happy at the time. So I go-- come out with the water. They drove away. And I, here I am, one girl, identifiable. I am in a village that they-- the villagers are very displeased because they were robbed. So this is-- the verdict is there. They would kill me right away if they would see me. And I have a terrible sense of direction, [LAUGHS] to this time, even now. So I forgot how to go back to that house where we were comfortable with this family. In other words, where I was with this sick man, because I couldn't go in any way to pass myself the Niemen, the river. I had to have someone to help me pass the river. So somehow, like I don't know, it came to mind that we passed a field. So I run through that field, and I found the house. And I knock on the window. And I tell the, the man there-- I mean, this was a family with children. I said, please, take me over the Niemen. He said, no, I already took over the Niemen the, the partisans. I cannot take you. So I said, well, now I know. And I hold my hand in my pocket. I said-- I didn't have a gun with me-- I said, well, now I know you did it for the gun. And believe me, they'll come for you, because I got separated from them not intentionally. And I say, if you're afraid of the gun, I have the gun. OK, OK, I'll take you. So he took me, and he transported me over the Niemen. And I came to the same house where I left my rifle to be fixed. And sure enough, they were there, these partisans that [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] went on this [NON-ENGLISH]. And of course, I was very angry. I said, I'm going to tell Platon-- that was a connection with Moscow at that time-- what you did to me. And you did it to me because I was a woman and because I was Jewish, especially Jewish, I am. Because that was the truth. So they said, well, we didn't mean it. We were afraid. We left, you know-- you know, with-- they were sort of giving me excuses. And then again, he came on me, that same man that wanted me. And I said to him, no. You know, I was already so secure there, you know? So he said, let's go outside. So I said, well, you're poisoning the [? grounds ?] here. You want to kill me here? Here are the owners of the house. Do it. You know, that was too much of, of courage. He could have done it. But of course, he was afraid a little bit that wasn't probably justified. Somebody from the owner can say that because she didn't want to go to bed with you, you killed her, you know? So anyway, he said, stubborn Jewess to me in Russian. And that was it. And then they left. And then as luck would have it, there was a, a lady doctor, a gynecologist, Osmaiewicz. She stopped over in that house. And she had a friend who was a doctor. She went to see him. She knew him in a different group. So I said, what are you doing here? 
INT: You knew her? ES: From my hometown-- she was a gynecologist. She was already a grown woman. So she said, well, I'm going to go from here. We'll wait for the boys from our [NON-ENGLISH], from our group. They'll come, and we'll go together.  INT: So she was also a partisan? ES: Yes, she was. So anyway, for a short period of time, because she belonged with her boyfriend in another group, anyway, so she came. And we decided to walk to our group, because they didn't come. And we were very much [INAUDIBLE] there. So I said, would you walk? And we came back.  INT: So we took her in to your group? ES: Well, she came with me to my group. And my father, of course, was overjoyed that I'm alive. He thought I am already killed. And this was a very bad experience for me.  INT: When-- ES: Courageous but not thought out, just on the spur of the moment.  INT: What time of the year was this, and what year? Do, do you know? ES: Well, it was already in 1943, I would say. Yes, that's when we were there, the beginning of-- no, end of '43, beginning of-- no, '43. It was the beginning of '43 because [INAUDIBLE].  INT: Were you getting news of how the war was progressing? ES: Yes, at that time, we did have already a connection with, you know, with--  INT: Through whom? ES: --Moscow. They used to [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] come with-- we called it the aerodrome in the woods, partisans. We used to get some information from them. 
INT: Were any of the members of your group Communists? ES: Probably were some-- who knows? I never took interest in this part, so I really don't know.  INT: How, how was discipline maintained in the group? ES: Well, it was. It had to be.  INT: Were there ever any conflicts among the partisans? ES: Sometimes a mother would run over. And her son is 18 years old, and she has one son to go for supplies or to do-- you know, to go to do damage to the Germans. She cried, but it didn't help. He had to go. And then there was a group specially formed, over 200 people under the leadership of one of the brothers that were specially doing damage on, on the-- on the other side of the Niemen, meaning where they originally got organized, all these single men. So because we couldn't survive otherwise. It had to be that. So he was Zisel Bielski, which was a younger brother of Tuvia. He was the leader of this group. And they did a lot of damage and got us, many times. rifles and guns.  INT: As the war was progressing and coming to an end, what was the feeling among the group? ES: Well, it was pain, a lot of pain, because you-- we lost so much, each one of the members of this group, [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] and happiness that we survived and were liberated at that time in 1944 by the Russians. 
INT: How many people survived in the Bielski brigade? ES: 1,200, [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] and it's documented in the New York Jewish Museum, Heritage Museum, the Holocaust Memorial, or memorial to the Holocaust. I don't exactly remember the title of the museum, but it's New York or Heritage Museum, the new museum, memorial to the Holocaust, something like this. And it's written, too.  INT: Did the Bielskis, did the three brothers survive? ES: No, [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] there were four brothers. One was very young, [? Archik. ?] But he wasn't-- he was helpful. He was riding the horse and doing things, errands and so on, because he was younger than I. He must have been around 13 and 1/2 years old. But the other-- the-- they-- the brother-- [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] there was-- they were four brothers, but I am only talking about the three leaders. And the third one, the youngest out of the three leaders, whose name was Asael, he was a loved person by everybody, was very much loved. And he got killed. He was drafted in the regular army after, after the liberation. The Russians drafted him, and he got killed.  INT: We'll stop here and change tape. ES: OK.  INT: Esia Shor interview, tape seven. Mrs. Shor, what did you know about the politics of your partisan group and the other partisan groups and how this was all related and how they interacted? ES: Oh, they were getting along quite well. But at one time, there was some kind of [? agitation ?] within the group. Not amongst the brothers, but other people, that accused Tuvia of being against communism, one of them especially. 
INT: Who was that? Do you know? ES: Well, I can give you his-- all right, his last name. Liubczanski. They were two brothers. And one of them went and told to the Russians, to the Russian group-- more than the Russian group. We've already-- in connection with-- with Russia, that Tuvia was against communism. And it was a big to-do. He organized a whole-- we called it-- the whole group. And somehow he won. There came people from the Russians, and he gave a speech and his feelings about communism. And they didn't kill him, obviously. It was very crucial.  INT: Who came? Who came? ES: From this organized group that had connections with us. Because at the end, there was already connections with Moscow. Because we had parachutists coming down in Naliboki Pushcha. As a matter of fact, I remember I got the thread, and I made myself a blouse from the parachute. There was some kind of thread that shined, and it was a strong thread. Off-white, it had. The color was off-white. So we were already organized with them. And one was in charge by the name of Platon. I really don't know his rank. But this is how it came about. Because this person, somehow it got to him that Tuvia was against communism.  INT: And he was with the Russian Army, this Platon? ES: Yes. He was the representative from the Russians that we had connections with at the time. This is how much I know about this politic business. But Tuvia was neither a communist and neither a fascist. [LAUGHS] He didn't belong to any organizations. But at that time, in time of war, you say you're against me, then you can be killed, killed very easily. So-- 
INT: What was the day-to-day routine for the hundreds of people who were in this camp? ES: To survive. [LAUGHS] The day-- the day--  INT: How did you pass the day? How did they pass the day? ES: Well, we had to-- you know, clean. You couldn't live in, in an underground without cleaning. Everybody had some assignment.  INT: How were they ventilated? ES: There was like a door coming down, with, with, with steps or a ladder, whatever you want to call it. Primitively done. And that's how it was ventilated. We were most of the time outside. The only time we used to come in was when it was very cold or when it was night, at night, to sleep. But somehow, we were always outside, you know, socializing, thinking, talking. There was always ideas that we were relating to each other whenever anyone had some information. And of course, we were sent to do damage to the Germans.  INT: Was everybody sent? ES: No, only the boys, the young boys were sent. No women were sent.  INT: What were the sanitary conditions? ES: Well, we were-- it was very much involved. That's a good question, because we had, at one time, typhus. And typhus spreads. No matter how, how clean one is, once you get the sickness. So they, they built a, a-- like we call it a quarantine, further away from the people. And that's how we were fighting major sicknesses. And other than that-- 
INT: What about-- ES: --we were--  INT: I'm sorry. Go ahead. ES: We were basically keeping very clean. And I mentioned we had a doctor. So everything was primitive, but we had some medications.  INT: Where'd you get them from? ES: From the town. One of the girls. I don't remember her name now. She went, risked her life to get some penicillin. It was known to us that there is a penicillin. And she went to my hometown and got it. I really cannot explain how she got it, but she did bring penicillin. Because one of our boys had a venereal disease. And that's what happened. But he, he got well.  INT: Were there bathing facilities? Was there soap, for instance? ES: Yes, we had soap. So--  INT: How did you get it? ES: From the villagers. And water, of course. We had plenty of water. So we did the best possible under, under the circumstances. Of course, we had boils, we had-- these are minor things, you know. So it took its course and got healed.  INT: Of your-- the time that you spent in the Naliboki-- ES: Naliboki--  INT: Pushcha-- ES: [? Nalibotskaya ?] Pushcha, yes.  INT: --was is your most vivid [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] memory of that time? ES: When we were-- we had an [NON-ENGLISH], a major [NON-ENGLISH] with the regular army.  INT: What's an [NON-ENGLISH]? ES: [NON-ENGLISH] means that we were surrounded, and we had to leave our place. And for a-- we, we were separated in groups, because we couldn't leave, you know, like, over a thousand people together. So Tuvia assigned on every group a leader, and we separated in small groups. And then we went through water up to here. And all my photos from the family got destroyed. And after that, we didn't have what to eat. So it was a very, very trying time. 
INT: Where did you go? ES: As a matter-- we were going over the Niemen back to the-- to the place where we originally got organized. Because it was a good idea to separate and to be not far from each other, but yet separately, we should survive. And that--  INT: Who decided who went where? ES: Tuvia and his other brothers, Asael. And so they decided that they cannot take all of them. So--  INT: Did you get special treatment, as his cousin? ES: Not really. Not really. But I tried. [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] At one point, when we were separated, that's the only time that I did get this special treatment, in the sense that I wanted to go with them, not with other people who weren't related to me. So with a little fighting. Meaning not fighting with a gun, but with crying and begging and one of-- not them. They wanted to take me. But one of the boys there said, oh, you want again? All the people that cannot fend for themselves, I should be responsible. Because he was also from that part. Where they originated, he was from the first ones. So then Tuvia really stood up. And he said, all right. Give me your gun. You don't want to take her seeing her father, give me your gun. Of course, he gave in. Gun and rifle, of course.  INT: After that incident, did you then go back to, to the camp? ES: Oh, well, yes. After a while, we got back again there, until the liberation. 
INT: Tell me about the liberation. ES: That was a very [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] trying time for us, because we know that we're getting liberated.  INT: How did you know? What was going on? ES: Well, from one side, the Russians were coming, and from the other side, the Germans were running through the pushcha too, through that part. So that was a very, you know. And they were the Germans' regular army people. So they-- and if they saw us, not knowing Jewish, not Jewish, they would kill, you know. Because they were-- wanted to survive. And they were running away. And we were asked to fight against them. In other words, they shouldn't get to our group, the Germans. So the Germans who were retreating, of course, I'm talking about. So since I had a gun, I had a rifle, I said yes, I am going with a group to withstand. I mean, to fight against the Germans that are retreating. And that's when my father threw himself on the floor, and he was crying, what are you doing? You're leaving me alone. You're going to get killed in this moment, when I-- when I feel that we survived already. But he couldn't stop me. I was very rude, very mean and rude at the time. And it was my aunt, his sister, the one that I got from the ghetto. And she was crying there. And I and Itke Az, this girl that I gave you the picture of, she had Tuvia's rifle, and we both went. Only the two girls. And after a while-- she was a very religious girl. A beautiful girl, and she was three years older than I. Very bright girl. And after we went there, we got-- we were very scared. Not scared that we'll get killed, but scared for the Russian partisans. And I gave her the idea, I started saying-- Itke was her name. Itke Az. I said, Itke, you better lie next to me. Because the Russian partisans will be after us. 
INT: What were you afraid of? ES: They'll rape us, and they'll kill us. This was the, the perception of us. So she said, no, no. We have-- we have rifles. They're not going to do it. And we went with the group. And under the leadership of one of the people by the name of Ostashinski. And we really couldn't do a thing, because the regular army was-- you know, they were retreating, and we couldn't fight against the regular army with good ammunition. So we retreated through water, through-- the bridges were already-- you know, they destroyed the bridges. And we made it back to the camp. This was an experience. But again, I never killed anyone. It was just a very-- how should I say? It was a trying experience, but I always had this idea of revenge. I-- it was so instilled in me. And I felt, if I don't do this, I mean, everything-- my mother and sisters and brothers died in vain. I felt this is the time for me to take revenge.  INT: Do you feel that you ever got revenge? ES: No.  INT: So tell me about the actual liberation. When did you know that the war was over for you? ES: The same day. The German army was, you know, retreating, and the Russians came. And they liberated us. A number of our boys got killed then. Because we were fighting against the Germans. We were retreating, they were retreating. It was such a mix up, that you really didn't know who is who. And now, talking about children, one of the children got killed, an 11-year-old boy, 10 or 11. Epstein was his name. And other boys were killed too at that time, because they were fighting. So. And we were retreating, running around. We had a-- one person who knew very well the [? Nalibotskaya ?] Pushcha. He was from [NON-ENGLISH]. And then the Russian army came in on the same day. 
INT: What happened then? What happened? ES: Well, we were elated. We were very happy. And [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] then the next day or two, Tuvia said we're all free now. But I will take you in to Nowogrodek. So in an organized way, we went to the same town where I was born.  INT: How did you get there? ES: It was 10 miles. We were walking and singing and being happy. You know, they had-- they-- we had some cows. We had some-- that leftover. And we had some wagons and, and horses. And they were riding the horses, and we felt so that we are very heroic. And when I came back, I went to the [NON-ENGLISH]. I thought maybe I can help them. But they ran away a day before. They were afraid that they will be killed. Because he worked for the Germans as A engineer. So I was terribly disappointed not to see them. Because my objective was, oh, now is the time that I'll help them for what they did for me.  INT: Did you ever find them? ES: No. And when I went to Poland, I looked in the markets. I-- but I didn't understand maybe to contact the Polish organization. It didn't come to mind. But I, I really miss them a lot. I mean, after the war, I was thinking, what would I have done for them now? I mean, such good things--  INT: So what happened when you came-- ES: --were on my mind. 
INT: When you came into town, who was there? Who was left? ES: The, the non-Jews. And, and they were asking my-- one of the non-Jews says, oh, you're still alive? A Christian. In other words, they did not think that people survived in the woods. They didn't. In Nowogrodek there was a partisan group that some of the people were from Nowogrodek. Not too many, but there were some. So that was the question. In other words, not to say to my father, oh, thank god. I'm glad you survived. The question was, are you still alive?  INT: How long did you stay there? ES: Not too long. About seven, eight months, thereabout. I went to school.  INT: What did you do? ES: I went to the-- a school with this friend of mine, [NON-ENGLISH], to learn how to do bookkeeping.  INT: Did the group, the Bielski Brigade, did the-- over a thousand people-- ES: Oh, we divided ourselves. We separated. Everybody went their own ways.  INT: How was it to leave all of them who you had-- whose survival had depended on each other so closely? ES: There was no special feelings. Everybody went their own way, because they were from different towns. And everybody had to fend for themselves to make a life for themselves, a new life.  INT: What did your father do? ES: Right after the war? He was in some kind of a store that they used to barter at the beginning. In other words, they would bring from the villages eggs, and he would give them some products that the Russians left for him. Or-- and then it was money distributed. And they were selling things. 
INT: You said that you stayed several months. Where did you go after you left Nowogrodek? ES: Well, I was in the house, my uncle's house. That was still there. And again--  INT: How did you claim the house? ES: Well, there was-- there, there were people living there. But when we came in, they were afraid for us. I said, this is my uncle's. This is my-- mine. And, and they left. There were two couples living in-- there were two parts of the house. So I and my cousin, they had a-- the Bielskis had a sister there too, by the name of Taube, Taube. So she took part of the house. But she wasn't an active partisan. That's why I somehow didn't mention her. But I should have anyway. I apologize for it. So she was married. And one half of the house, I was with my father. We got rid of them. Of the non-Jews that lived there. And it was a very, again, a very painful experience for me living there, because Taube and Avram, her husband, lived in one part. And the Russians was already-- they, they took over Nowogrodek. And she had a baby girl left in the snow during the war, but she made up with a Catholic family who were childless to pick her up. She was nine years-- nine. I'm sorry. Nine months old. Her name was Lola. She is here. I wanted her in the worst way to be with me, but she happens to be in Poland now, because she went on this living march. Anyway, it didn't work out. But maybe some other time I will have an additional interview with her. What happened was her mother went to the family and stole her back. Instead of going to them and thanking them that for taking care of her, she felt that they would never give her back, because she was-- they were childless, and she was their baby. So she stole her back. And this child suffered a great deal. Because every Sunday, the bells, the church bells, used to ring. And she would cry for an hour that she cannot go to church. And she would build in a corner a little church. So one day, [NON-ENGLISH] goes over to my cousin Taube and says, Taube, give me Lola. Let me show her the church. I couldn't-- my heart was bleeding for her that she was crying for an hour. And we couldn't somehow explain to her. No, I must go-- in Polish-- I must go to the church. And this is the time we all go, and we always went. So I took her to church. And I was never in a church. And I took this little girl, that she was at the time about three years old. And I said to her-- there were people in the church. Sunday, a lot of people come in, into this lobby, whatever it's called. And there is-- was the [NON-ENGLISH], which means the St. Mary. Mary was a big statue. And I take her little hand, and I touch the-- and I touch this statue. I said, see? This is only a statue. Because she was kneeling and, and saying a prayer. I said, this is only a statue, Lola, and we are Jewish. I sold it to her. And she never bothered with this business of building churches anymore. I said, this is a different religion. We are all Jewish. And it was a war in-- I just said it was a war, and these good people saved you. But you are Jewish. And this-- 
INT: And they never came for her? ES: Oh, they did. They did. You have very logical questions. At one time, I am in the house with my cousin, Taube. And in those days, we didn't lock the house because-- the door, because there were no people who would come rob you or kill you, just like for, for rob-- for doing a robbery. And a lady-- a woman comes in with a big kerchief, like the gypsy kerchiefs, we used to call it. And I never met that person. And a red-haired man in back of her. And comes in and wants to grab Lola. I opened the door for her, not knowing who she is. Of course, Taube somehow caught on, and she grabbed Lola, and she ran out through a window-- we were on the first floor, of course-- with Lola. And then she-- but Lola, at the same time, recognized the father and started to push herself before they ran out. This is my mother! This is my [NON-ENGLISH], in, in a very nice, loving way, she called her. Like we would say dear mother. She said, [NON-ENGLISH], meaning in Polish, that's my mother and the father. And of course, she grabbed her, and she ran away with her. And it affected Lola for a lifetime, in a different way. Because she always felt-- she didn't have-- always feared-- even in the displaced camp-- she feared to come out of the house. She was young at that time. She was about eight, nine years old. She had this fear in her, and maybe one day she will express herself. Because when it was the, the gathering of this-- of the hidden child, we were approached. And I said to her, Lola, let's do it. She said, Esia, I'm sorry. I'm not ready. And this was her answer. And I can understand her pain. And that's the way she felt at the time. 
INT: So let's, let's now go to what happened to you and your father. Where did you go? ES: And after that, Lola went a few years ago to Poland to look for these parents, but they, they changed, or they might have died or changed place. They weren't living there anymore. And one of the people in the village, she really went out of her way. And she went to the church. It's so in her, remained with her, the religion and everything, that in my mind, I was questioning it. But I, I can understand that it was instilled in her as a baby. And that's the reason she wanted to go there. She wanted me to go, but I said I'll never step on that-- in that land anymore.  INT: When did you leave Nowogrodek? ES: Nowogrodek, I left in 1945.  INT: And where did you go? ES: Lodz.  INT: And what did you do in Lodz? ES: I didn't do anything. I got married afterwards. A short period of time, I was in Lodz with my father first.  INT: And did you meet your husband there? ES: Yes. I met him on a train in that coat that I showed you. In the picture that you saw. I got lost with my sense of direction. [LAUGHS] Trains weren't running regularly. So again, I wanted some water. I got thirsty. So I went out of the-- of the train, one of the cars. And he happened to be in that car. He was wearing the Army uniform. He was an officer in the Polish Army at the time. Oh, of course, he was injured. But he was still wearing this uniform, and he was very proud of himself, that he did serve in the Army and helped to liberate some of the concentration camps. So anyway, he said, well, you have come from my car. Where are you going? What are you doing here? I was walking in the station where the, the train stopped. I said, I don't even know what car I'm from. I got lost here, and I am going to, to buy a drink of water, whatever. So of course, he said, I'm from the same car, and I saw you there, and don't worry. And then, [LAUGHS] as fate would have it, we were going to Breslau. That's a major German city. So as fate would have it, we say goodbye on the station. And then we stay in the same building. In the morning, I come out, and he was in the same building. And I was there with another man. My father wouldn't trust me to go after the war by myself. So I went with another man, and he was there with me. An older man, of course. And then he asked me-- he dated me for an hour. And then he asked me where I live. [LAUGHS] And I gave him the address. He didn't even write it down. But he found me. He came to the house where I lived. And I lived with one of my friends. But he came-- 
INT: You didn't live with your father at that time? ES: Yes, my father, my friend [? Perla ?] and her father, and she also lived through the war in the partisan group. She lives now in Israel. And then my husband came into my life, and we got married in a month. Because, because I said, I have time, and I would like to know each other, get to know each other. But he said, he lives-- he's all alone, and I'll get to know him in one month. And this was it.  INT: So, and where were you married? ES: We got married in the same house where I lived.  INT: In Lodz? ES: In Lodz, yes.  INT: We'll stop here. ES: [NON-ENGLISH].  INT: We'll stop here and change tape. ES: Oh, you have--  INT: Esia Shor interview, tape eight. You married in 1945. Your husband's name? ES: At that time, he was called [? Zalman ?] Shor or [? Sigmund ?] Shor, [? Sigmund ?] [? Chorsky, ?] Polish name. Because he had difficulties getting into the Polish Army. With the name of [? Zalman ?] Shor, they would never take him, because he did make an attempt to get in with the name of [? Zalman ?] Shor. But the doctor said that he belongs to category [NON-ENGLISH], which means C, American letter C. A is number one, that you're OK. So what he did was he went to-- in two or three days, he went back to a different doctor, and he said that he lost his documents, and he gave them a name, Polish name, [? Sigmund ?] Shorski. So they took him into the Polish Army. He was an officer in the Polish Army. 
INT: So after you got married, what did you do and where did you go? ES: Well, shortly after I got married, we emigrated from Lodz to Berlin. And from there, the UNRRA, the American-- on the American side-- because that was-- Berlin was divided at that time, if I recall it correctly-- they took us to the displaced camp called Fohrenwald. And my husband was injured during the war, seriously injured. So he was in a-- he worked in helping out first the Org. There was organization to work at the beginning. So he worked by teaching young men to become carpenters. Because he finished a vocational school in Bialystok, and he knew the trade very well. So he helped them out. And then all the, the people that-- the men, rather, to be exact, that survived the war, and they were injured, in Fohrenwald there was a special organization that he belonged from the people that were-- the men that were injured during the war. And they had some kind of a canteen organized, helped by the UNRRA, of course. So they were selling things there. They were called [? invalids, ?] means injured people in Polish, or maybe it was a Russian word. I don't remember. Anyway, [? invalidin ?] group, and he belonged there. So that's where he worked in that camp. And then I gave birth to a little girl.  INT: Well, before we get to that, I'd like to hear a little bit more about the living conditions in the DP camp. ES: We had-- we were in one room. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] My father remarried after the war. And he was with my stepmother in this same room, but my husband made some kind of partition between the two of us and him. And also there was-- with them. 
INT: And your stepmother's name? ES: Kunie [NON-ENGLISH]. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] And they lived part of the-- in part of this room, and we lived in part of this room. And then we got a stove, one stove for both of us. It was dreadful to live with a stepmother. And even though she didn't kill my mother, but still, she took my mother's place. And [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] to live in the same room, with a small partition. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] And at the same time, shortly, rather, she got pregnant. And that's why I have-- I have brother. He's a very nice fellow. But at the time, it was even difficult to accept it for me.  INT: And what, what was his name? What's his name? ES: Hy Levine. Hymie, we called him. Hyman.  INT: What were the-- ES: And then we-- we had, like, other people living in the same. And you went into the centers, there was the upstairs. There, other people were living. And downstairs was [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] let's say like a bedroom. But there were sinks and the bathroom. And that was the living place where we lived.  INT: What about the conditions in the camp for you? Were you free to come and go as you pleased? ES: Displaced camp? I didn't go any particular place. Sometimes we went to Munchen, Munich. [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] Just I recall one time, because we were newly married and young. So there was some kind of an acrobat that he would walk on a wire from the same-- I forget the family. That's still here. Comes with the circus. And he was going-- walking on a wire. And he wanted to see it in the worst way. So we went to Munich, and we saw it. And my father even criticized that. He said, why are we going? What are you going to see there? But it was very interesting. It was-- this wire was attached to two buildings, you know, very tall buildings. And he came from a larger city than I. So his outlook of life was, at the time, entirely different than mine. 
INT: In, in the DP camp, was there a curfew? ES: No. No curfews. Nothing. And we had friends. We had very close friends there from the [? invalids. ?] As a matter of fact, we had a friend that he didn't have anyone. He used to come to my house and eat with us many times. And [NON-ENGLISH] was his name. From Lwow, Limberg he came. And--  INT: Were there other-- ES: Other friends too. They-- we were very close with friends. Of course, my father and my stepmother and then the baby, my brother, my half brother. And my baby was older, my daughter.  INT: Your daughter was born before you brother. ES: Yes. Before my brother. My brother-- my brother was-- I think they were 18 months apart.  INT: So tell me about the birth of your daughter. ES: Yes, I went to the hospital, and it was a normal birth. I was very happy. And she was like-- to me she was the restitution to everything that I dreamed of. She was a very pretty child, and this was mine. And I didn't have family. And, like, this was-- like I said, the restitution for the war, that I lost everyone. I gave birth to a normal, beautiful child. And I was very happy at the time.  INT: And what did you name her? ES: After my mother. My mother's name was Ciral, but we called her Celia [NON-ENGLISH]. And this was the name. 
INT: And-- ES: Well, unfortunately, she's not here. She passed away at 26 years of age. College graduated. And it's very difficult for me to talk about. But she's not here.  INT: Was your second child born in Germany, in the DP camp as well? ES: No, she was born in the United States.  INT: OK. How long did you stay in Fohrenwald? ES: About-- we were there in '46. So three years before-- I came in 1949 to the United States.  INT: The three years-- the three years that you were there, was it a normal life? ES: Well, normal in a way that we used to get, like, certain rations from-- the UNRRA helped a lot, and the United Jewish Organizations were sending in clothes at that time. And [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] this was the normalcy, as far as normalcy goes. Normal-- I mean, a normal life.  INT: Were there ever-- ES: My father was a little involved in selling, buying things, just to survive.  INT: Was there ever any time that the people who were living in these camps felt that they weren't being treated well? ES: Well, as I said, there were rations given. So more or less, everyone had the same, unless some people were involved in a little sort of business, whatever, to sell things.  INT: Was there black market activity? ES: I really don't know if you would call it black market, because the-- for example, we've got some-- my father would get some herring in big barrels from the Germans. He would buy it, though. So I don't think that this was black market. 
INT: Was there any cultural activity? ES: Yes. The Org was very big there at the time, because there were a lot of people, young people, that they wanted to teach them how to sew, how to do carpentry. That's where my husband volunteered to teach them carpentry.  INT: Did you ever want to go to Palestine or Israel? ES: Yes, at one time, I wanted to go very much. But then when I found out about the war, and one of my cousins, the one that survived with me, the younger child of my uncle Oppenheim, got killed there in Jerusalem. I said to my husband, I am not going anymore to be-- if possible, of course-- in war. And we waited and waited until our next. Because we could have gone earlier to Palestine. But this was my decision, and my husband agreed with me at the time. For fear of being killed. Not because I wasn't-- I was very nationalistic, exceptionally nationalistic. But when it came to this, after finding out that my cousin got killed, this would help me made my decision. And I had relatives in the United States. I had no one in Israel. I just-- because of my ideas of being nationalistic at the time.  INT: At what point after the war did you resume religious observance? ES: Even in Fohrenwald it came back to me. I, I-- they started to buy kosher meat. And my husband took a while. He became more religious. Not religious. He was a very, very much with the tradition and very much against intermarriage. Because I-- maybe I shouldn't say it. My daughter is here, so it pertains to her. Lora, after I lost my daughter, I decided shortly that-- [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] shortly meaning she finished Harper University, and then she decided she likes to go to California, to Los Angeles, and study for her master's degree in social work at the University of Southern California. We were sitting here in the basement, and my husband felt very strongly against intermarrying. He felt that we're losing the person who intermarries. So he said to her, Lora, remember, you're going away over 3,000 miles from here. And we agreed on it that you will study there. But if you intermarry, this young man will never be my son-in-law. You will always be my daughter. I don't know how much it registered with her at the time, but that's what he said. And I felt differently at the time. I just ran up the steps. And I remember like today, I was crying. I said, why did you give her an ultimatum? She's our only child now. He felt very strongly about it. And till the day he died, he, he wasn't too religious. We always belonged to a community center. We are conservative Jews. But this was due to his experience in the army and due to the war. He formed this belief that this is the strongest. Our tradition, our forefathers, and the coming generations shouldn't intermarry, if possible. 
INT: And did your daughter marry a Jewish man? ES: Yes, she did. Thank god.  INT: So tell me about coming to the United States and then about the birth of Lora. ES: So I have to go back.  INT: [LAUGHS] ES: Lora was born in 1955, September 7, 1955.  INT: Well, wait. You came here, you said-- ES: '49.  INT: '49. Where did you live? Who helped you when you arrived? ES: My uncle and aunt. I had an uncle living here. My mother's brother. And they got us an apartment, which was very difficult on me at the time. Because the owners were German, Germans. And I lived right on top of them. And many a times I really reprimanded very strongly my daughter Celia, she shouldn't walk too fast. She shouldn't, you know, make noise. Because they used to knock. If the child just ran through the house. A child sometimes runs over, Ma, I have to tell you something, whatever. They would knock on their ceiling, because they lived downstairs.  INT: They were non-Jewish? ES: They were German Germans. And I always had this terrible fear for them. Because I didn't trust any German. But of course, my cousin that got me the apartment, my uncle's daughter, worked in this office and for this particular man. And she didn't feel the way I felt about this man. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] Well, with me, it was he really didn't do anything to me except for knocking the ceiling, but my interpretation was because I am Jewish, my child can't even pass the, the apartment that I'm paying for. This was my perception, of course. They were very clean, very rigid people. Very rigid people. So I came from one German to another in the sense of the-- of my feelings of fear of-- for him. 
INT: And where-- where did you live? Where was this? ES: Two years at the [? 10th ?] Avenue.  INT: And-- ES: In the Bronx.  INT: In the Bronx. ES: Yes.  INT: OK. And then where did you move from there? ES: From there, we moved to, to the Bronx. Again, in the Bronx, on [? Weiss ?] Avenue, in three rooms. So there I felt comfortable, because it was a mixed neighborhood, and the, the house belonged to a Jewish landlord, and it was a big house. I felt good. I felt secure. Let's put it this way. I couldn't wait to move from there.  INT: How did you learn English? ES: Well, at first I went to-- there was some kind of-- in public schools at that time, they had some courses, so my husband and myself went to learn somewhat of the language. You know, which I did learn some of it. [LAUGHS] Because this was helpful.  INT: Did you work when you first came here? ES: No. I had a baby of-- she was-- wasn't even three years old. She was, was three years old. It's two, two years and seven months when I came here.  INT: And what did your husband do to support your family? ES: Carpenter. He found a job. He worked very hard as a carpenter.  INT: When you came here, did your uncle or other people that you were in contact with or became close with ask you about your experiences? ES: Yes, they did. We stayed in their house for a whole month. They were very nice people. 
INT: Did you tell them? Did you want to talk about what happened to you? ES: Well, they-- we stayed one month, and then their daughter, my cousin, found for us this apartment in the German house, German-owned house. And they helped us out. My uncle was in a furniture refinishing business, so he got us a, a bedroom-- a bedroom set, which was very helpful. He also signed for us. We bought a refrigerator. At that time, they had these ice boxes. So he signed for us, our credit, and this was very helpful to me. My uncle's name was Mendelevich. And his son, [? Sammy ?] Mendelevich, they were-- took up this apartment. So-- in the apartment, rather, the furniture, so. And got the apartment, his daughter. I'm a little bit already mixed up with the-- [LAUGHS] with the time. Anyway, so I was very thankful to them for it. They were very nice people.  INT: When your daughters were growing up, did you tell them about your experiences in the war? ES: No.  INT: Why? ES: I-- when I look back, I think I made a mistake. For the reason-- the reason was I was-- I felt I wanted them to grow up the way American children, American-born children grow up. And at that time, I felt, let the German and the Polish mother tell their children what they did to the Jewish little children. But of course, the reasoning wasn't, you know, right. Because they didn't say it. They probably said it was war, and the Jewish children got, got killed. I'm sure the Poles didn't say that in concentration camps, they were gassed, and the German mother didn't tell this to, to her children. So I felt, why should I say this to my children and make them, you know, feel that their mother suffered so much? And maybe they wouldn't have the confidence. Who knows. I, I don't know. This was my thinking at that time. Because when I left Germany and Poland, I gave myself a word that I'll never return there. So it was very-- the idea was very strong with me, like I would just close that book for my children. And my older daughter, Celia, used to ask me many questions. And my answer would be, well, they were killed in war. So this was my answer. And at one time, when she was a little bit older already, I said, later on, I'll tell you, or you will be able to read some books. It was somehow put away so far in my mind that-- this is a two-family house, as you can see. And I had a tenant, a lady-- I mean, a family, rather, a Jewish family, who would sit outside, and she would ask me. And I would say, I'm sorry, I cannot talk about this part. And again, I would say, well, if you'd like to find out, I'm sure there are books already written about it. Never shared with anyone. This is my first experience, really. I shouldn't say the first, because like a month ago, one of-- a young lady called me, and she wanted to do a paper. So I talked to her over the phone. She got an A for it. She wrote me a thank you note, that I have it here, which was very nice. This goes back about six weeks ago or so. So-- 
INT: [INAUDIBLE]-- go ahead. ES: In an-- not in an organized way, whatever came to mind at that time, mind, I told her the important parts. Of course, for a young girl in school, in high school, I emphasized that these were the Nazi Germans, which is true. Because now there is a new generation that may be more favorable and will be more favorable to other religions or other race, for that matter.  INT: Do you think your experiences affected the way you raised your children or your relationship with your daughters? ES: Yes. The way I raised? Definitely. Even though I didn't talk about it. I did mention a few times, you know, here I-- they, they were very poor eaters, especially the older one. They would say, oh, we didn't have what to eat, and what we wouldn't do for this. You know. Which-- and people still don't have what to eat because of their experience. And well, as far as affecting their feelings, their, their thinking, my daughter will have to express herself on this. And I'm sure that she will cover a lot of grounds, like they say here.  INT: Do you ever get together with other members of the Bielski Brigade? ES: Yes.  INT: What's that like? ES: Well, you know, we're older now. We reminisce. We, we say well, this one was a hero, in his time, and, and then it bumps back to present. You know. But they do talk a lot about it. I don't take that much of a part to talk about it. 
INT: What kind of emotions are evoked when you think of your time spent in the Naliboki [? Pushka. ?] ES: Pushcha. [LAUGHS]  INT: Pushcha, right? ES: Yeah.  INT: [? Pushka's ?] something else. ES: Well, [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] there is-- in-- again, I'll go through these feelings of courage. A lot of courage was instilled that Jews can also defend themselves. Jews aren't always shying away. Jews aren't only businessmen. You know, in my mind, I feel that one should stand up for one's rights, regardless of race, creed, and religion. And of course, I'm talking about myself in this sense.  INT: Who or what had the greatest impact on your life? ES: What do you mean, during the war, or before the war?  INT: Before or after. Who had the greatest impact on you? ES: I would say my mother, because of her courage, always. And, and seeing how hard she worked and how-- well, the family it was, the family ethics. And very much devoted, not only to her own family, but when the Bielski brothers used to come to us, and even if we, we didn't have enough food, she would divide it between them. I mean, the guests. They were very often in our house.  INT: Anything you'd like to add? ES: About what?  INT: About your experience, how it affected you, what you'd want to leave as a message? ES: To me, it's very important. Family ethics are very important to me. And also, since I mentioned already about intermarriage, I hope my grandchildren will not intermarry. And [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] other than that, [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] as I mentioned before, Tuvia had a very big impact on me when he expressed himself that a Jewish bullet-- a bullet coming from a, a rifle held in Jewish hands can do the same as from non-Jewish people. This is sort of engraved in me, that we can do it. We did it. 
INT: Thank you. ES: You're welcome.  INT: Esia Shor interview, tape nine. Mrs. Shor, you were talking about Tuvia's impact on your life and how he inspired you. Tell me what you did with the rest of, of your career here. Did you resume your education? ES: Yes.  INT: Tell me. ES: After I went to public school, they used to give courses in the evening for myself. I mean, I went with my husband. And my, my daughter was very young at the time. So I started with the Roosevelt High School. And I received the general diploma. It took me four years in the-- four or five years in the evening. But I did get the diploma. In other words, I always went with the name of accomplishment-- not to say, well, I went to college. Well, I went to high school. But a piece of paper was important to me. That means I accomplished something. So I did get my general diploma from Roosevelt High School. As a matter of fact, my daughter Celia was there and her friend, [? Hank ?] [? Blank, ?] from the neighborhood. They were going to high school too at the time. But I received my diploma. And other friends of hers came with her. She was very proud of me at the time. And then after-- my children were already of age that I could leave them home. Laura was in her sixth grade of a public school-- PS 97. I decided to look for a job. So I went on the train with my daughter Celia. She was working at the time. And I-- she looked in And she said, Ma, this is a good job for you. You'll do some filing. We were only talking about it. It was just an idea. But I was set to look for a job, because my husband made a living, but we hardly could make-- meet ends at the time, and I figured I can help. So the diploma made me feel very good. Here I'm coming in, a high school diploma. And she said-- I mean, Celia said, Ma, this is a job for you-- as a filing clerk. You need to learn just alphabet to know it well. A kindergarten child knows the alphabet. But you know, it's in your language and everything, so of course, I studied the [LAUGHS] alphabet. And I knew it very well. And I learned how to fill out-- she showed me-- the form-- an application. And as luck would have it, I was interviewed with one of the people who lives in my neighborhood. And the place that I went to was called The Book Press.
It was advertised, as I said, in And this person, Mr. [? Hikin, ?] interviewed me. And at the time, of course, I told him that I live in this neighborhood. It was from this house that I went for the interview. And he asked me, where do I belong? What organizations? I said well, I belong to the Community Center of Israel, and I also belong to a-- the American Jewish Congress, which I did. Because I, I always wanted to learn more and to be sort of exposed somewhat to friends-- to, to make friends. So I was active in the American Jewish Congress, helping them. I wasn't the leader or the president of the-- of the group, but I was always helpful. Oh! He said, yes, I know where the center is. I know. And you are hired. So I was hired. And the head of the department was a, a man-- a young-- a young man. At that time, I-- when I went to, to look for the job, I was 42-years-old. And the man who interviewed me was 40-years-old-- Mr. [? Newman. ?] I still call him Mr. [? Newman. ?] Mr. [? Hikin-- ?] Mr. [? Newman ?] was the head of the department. This was an estimating department, and this was a major book manufacturing company. So in this estimating department, we would figure out how much it cost to print a book and bind the book. And they had salespeople that went to the major book manufacture-- major publishing companies-- get the work. And after the head of the department, Mr. [? Newman, ?] interviewed me again, he said, Essie, you're not gonna be a filing clerk. You're gonna learn the, the scales, and you-- we will teach you how to be an estimator. And I learned it on the job. And after a while, the company paid for a course. So I learned in-- it was given me in-- at NYU. And predominantly I learned it on the job. And they would send me to the plant, which was located in Brattleboro, Vermont, to learn, to see the machinery, to see how a, a book is being manufactured, bound-- printed and bound. So I worked there for 14 years. And then my job got phased out in 1980, due to computer system. They put the estimating computer system-- I mean, into computer system. Them-- the whole group of people-- oh, we must have been about-- the whole office-- about 14, 15 people that got out of-- you know, didn't have a job. We got some severance pay. And then I'm-- I decided to-- rather, I did not decide. I have [LAUGHS] to backtrack. My daughter, Lora, was in, in California at the time. And she finished as a social worker with her master's degree. And I turned to her. I told her, you help other people. Why don't you help me? I'm in-- at such a loss now. I am not working, and I'm not doing anything. So she said, Ma, why don't you go to study social work? I said, I don't even have the background for it. So she says, oh, your logic will take you in there. You have a diploma. You finished American high school. And that's how I wound up in Lehman College. And this was in 1981. 
INT: When did you graduate? ES: I think '86 or '85. I have the diploma there. But I'm not sure. I forgot already. So I did graduate with a bachelor degree-- bachelor degree in social [LAUGHS] work. But there was nothing to do with it, because I made-- I, I, I wanted to get my master's degree. I was already too old to undertake a full-time job for too long, because I must have been-- when I finished college, I, I, I must have been 59-years-old, thereabout. So I-- my plans were to go get the master's degree in social work and maybe open a office with my experience of being a, a Holocaust survivor and a social work degree, you know, a master's degree in social work. This was my objective. But life had different plans for me. My husband got ill with, with-- he has a heart condition, and he couldn't work. And I did make an attempt. I made Hunter School of Social Work, and I went for one semester. I needed-- at the time, I needed to work three, three days a week, I think, in the field, as a field worker-- or two days. I'm not sure-- two days to college and two days probably in the field, which they assigned me. The college assigned me to do group work. I always wanted to help more people, not only one individual-- group work. This is part that they really train you and teach you how to go about counseling groups of people. So I, I wound up working in the Jewish Home and Hospital for the Aged on Kingsbridge Road. And I worked there for a half a year doing field work, just like a doctor does, does internship. And I had a group of people who were-- all-- they had all-- the Alzheimer's disease. So it was very discouraging. And I had to do a lot of papers. And my husband was sick. So I would come down here and be busy till 2 o'clock in the morning with the papers. So he really-- I insisted that I should stop-- in other words, not continue, because he needed me home. He was six years older than I, and here he was sick. And I would disappear for evenings here, you know. There was no, no life between us, so to speak. And I felt that he's right. I gave priority to the marriage-- 
INT: And what did-- ES: --and his health. And then I felt a half a year away there, I somehow felt, here I required a-- the-- an, an education. I'm doing nothing with it. So I went. I was just passing the block. And knowing that one of the-- [LAUGHS] of the people here that own a house is a teacher. And her husband was a assistant principal. So I walked over to her. Her name is [? Gail ?] [? Zavlick. ?] She still lives here. And I say, look, [? Gail. ?] I have a diploma, and I heard that some people can do substitute teaching in public school. Maybe I can make an attempt. And she sort of gave me the direction. She said, go to District 11, and somebody will direct you. And of course, somebody directed me. I, I was-- I had an examination. Everybody gets through an examination. Of course, I had to show my college diploma first-- and then an oral examination. I passed right away. But for the written examination, I went twice for the essay, because I didn't pass the [LAUGHS] first time. But I passed it. You're allowed to four times. So I passed it the second time, which I felt good about it. And the Board of Education in Brooklyn, they told me that I have two years to get my education courses, but I have to start right away registering college. So I went to Lehman College, got my Ed courses. And I was allowed to start working, though. So I worked and got my courses. And I'm still working. 
INT: And how many years have you been teaching? ES: A, a substitute teaching with the little children, with kindergarten, first grade, and second inclusive. So unless they are very, you know, short of teachers, I sometimes take an upper grade. But I like the lower grades. I feel much more comfortable, because-- not because of my education, but because of behavioral problems that children have. And as you can hear, I'm very recognizable. I'm old. [LAUGHS] And I speak with an accent. So, you know, whatever I do, I must be perfect, more or less-- because nobody's perfect. Because many times, the principal will stop over and take a glance how I am doing my work, you know. And so far, it's already the ninth year that I'm working. And I intend to retire this coming June, the end of-- by the end of the school year. But I don't have any plans as of now what I'm gonna do with myself. Although, after taking a class now that [LAUGHS] was required for me-- because I worked more days that I-- than I am allowed to with my credentials, I needed to take a class, a Ed class again, dealing with early childhood education. And while in the classroom, the professor gave an assignment to this whole class to do something with clay, because they feel the kindergarten children should be creative, and that they feel hands-on. In other words, they should do things out of clay or build out of blocks. It's very important for the children to be creative. And this helps them to be creative-- the kindergarten children. So she gave an assignment to the class to create something out of clay that, that remained in one's mind. And in my mind remained a partisan group. So I put a few trees from both sides, and I put a chimney there. She walked over to my desk, and she said, Essie, a chimney comes out from the ground? I said, yes. At that time, it came out from the ground. And she said, how so? So I explained to her that we were underground hiding. She asked me if I like to share it with the class. At the time, I said no. And then she called me. She told me to meet her after class. And she said, Essie, I am an art major, and we will do a book for little children. So this is the project that I feel I might get involved with. She said she's gonna do the art, and it's gonna be titled And we will do it for little children, age group five, seven. 
INT: And what will you-- what will your message be to those children? ES: It has to be just descriptive of the time. You can-- I feel you cannot tell-- it was a war, of course, where I have to make sure that-- where, where it took place. And some people hid. I, I was one of them. And then I didn't really focus on it yet. But the first sentence was-- it will be-- it was a very brutal war-- and put the, the time, meaning World War II, and maybe the, the year when it took place. Because you cannot overload children with, with things that is not up to their level. So I feel this sentence will give me a lot to go by for a child to understand. And then I'll put it in their-- I mean, they should be-- but it'll come to it, of course. [LAUGHS] I don't know if it will ever come to it, but it might. The professor's name is Professor Zakin.  INT: OK. ES: I-- I'm not sure if she's a professor now or just an instructor. But she majored in art. And she said the art will be beautiful, and she would like me to do this book. And it should have 32 pages. That's all. So it has to be very limited.  INT: OK. ES: But I, I hope and I'm looking forward to it-- to do this.  INT: It's-- ES: And I even made an attempt. I went to the Jewish Museum and looked what people wrote. But I didn't see one book for little children. So if you ever hear of me, you'll know that you interviewed me. [LAUGHS] 
INT: OK. Thank you. We'll go to your pictures now and to your-- ES: OK.  INT: --family. ES: This is my husband, Jerry Shor. This picture was taken in 1946, in the displaced camp of Fohrenwald. This is me, Esia Shor. This picture was taken in Nowogródek, in 1944--  INT: What country? ES: --right after the liberation. In Poland. Starting on the left, this is me, Esia Shor. And on the right is my girlfriend, Itke Az. We lived through-- in the partisan group-- lived through, meaning the war, in the Bielski Otriad. And this was taken in 1944.  INT: Where? ES: In Nowogródek.  INT: What country? ES: Poland. With a baby. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] This picture was taken in Fohrenwald, in 1946. I am the second in. I sit in the second row to the lady with the baby. And, and these are--  INT: And state your name. ES: --my name is Esia Shor. And this was taken in Germany.  INT: Where in Germany? ES: Fohrenwald.  INT: And what is the occasion? ES: Oh, it was the [INAUDIBLE] day when, when the people got killed from my hometown. So we, we had a date-- a special date.  INT: And the name of the town? ES: Nowogródek. This is a group of little children-- 2 and 1/2 year old-- there about-- their-- the age group of the children. And my little daughter Celia is in the middle row. And one of the men gave them a ride in a wagon. This was like a treat to children, in Fohrenwald, Germany. 
INT: What year was this? ES: 1947 or-- 1948 probably. On the left is me, Esia Shor. And next to me is my husband, Jerry Shor, my daughter, Celia Shor. And next to my husband is my stepmother, Kunia [NON-ENGLISH], and my half-brother, Hy, and my father, Shmuel [NON-ENGLISH] Levine.  INT: When was this picture taken? ES: It was taken in '48.  INT: Where? ES: In Fohrenwald.  INT: In what country? ES: Germany. On the left is my husband Jerry. And next to him is my daughter Lora. And next to my husband is me, Esia Shor. Next to me is Celia Shor-- my daughter, Celia Shor. Next to her is my half-brother or brother. He's a very fine young man now-- Hy Levine. Then is my stepmother Kunia, and then my father, Samuel-- Shmuel.  INT: When was this picture taken? ES: In 1961.  INT: Where? ES: In New York.  INT: What was the occasion? ES: That was my brother's bar mitzvah. To the left is Tuvia Bielski, the leader of the Bielski Brigade. And next to him is his wife, [? Lily ?] Bielski, and then myself, Esia Shor, and my husband, Jerry Shor. And this was taken in New York. It was a celebration of our-- of a 25th wedding anniversary.  INT: What year? ES: I don't remember.  INT: You were-- what year were you married? ES: I was married in '46.  INT: So this was 1971 then? ES: 1971 or earlier? No? 50-- well, wait a second. I was married in 1950-- just a minute. I'm confused. 
INT: I think you said 1945 in the interview. ES: Yes, '45. Yes. Thank you.  INT: So this was 1970. ES: OK, yeah. This is-- I-- To the left is my nephew, Seth Levine. Next to him is his mother Susan. Next to her is my daughter Lora. Next to Lora is Michael-- my nephew Michael. And next to Michael is their father, Hy. And next to Hy is me, Esia Shor. And the first row is my grandson, Chad Friedman. Next to him is his sister Carly. And next to Carly is Alix Friedman.  INT: When was this picture taken? ES: January the 10th, 1997, in Philadelphia, to my grandson's bar mitzvah-- Chad's bar mitzvah. And I'm very proud of him. [LAUGHS] ES: Next to me is my darling granddaughter, Carly, that I love very dearly. In back of me is my oldest grandson, Chad, that I enjoy very much his company. And also, his bar mitzvah, we were very proud of him. Next to Chad is his mother, Lora, [LAUGHTER] Of course-- LORA FRIEDMAN: Stop that. ALIX FRIEDMAN: I can't help it. ES: I-- I love her very much, and I'm very proud of her, the way she teaches her children to be good to each other. And she emphasizes the family values to them, to be helpful whenever necessary. And to my, [LAUGHTER] I guess left or right, left, is Alix that is always giggling. So he's giggling now, too. But basically, he's a very bright fellow. LORA FRIEDMAN: I told you to stop it ALIX FRIEDMAN: Sorry. ES: And it just something about equipment, I guess, that struck them funny. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] And I'm very proud of-- of this-- of the family that I have. And I hope that they will continue to be the way they are, devoted to each other and caring for each other, [LAUGHTER], and also giving consideration to their mother-- LORA FRIEDMAN: Will you stop now? CHAD FRIEDMAN: OK. ES: --whenever necessary. They are very helpful to her in everyday's life. [LAUGHTER] OK, they're still giggling. Anyway, [LAUGHTER] it seems that maybe you should take a drink of water. LORA FRIEDMAN: Will you stop, please? ALIX FRIEDMAN: I can't help it. LORA FRIEDMAN: Go in the family room. UNIDENTIFIED SPEAKER: You all right? ES: Very unusual, because they're usually very serious children. 
INT: Tell me what you would like to say to your mother about her Holocaust experience and how it's affected all of you and what your reflections are. It's a special time for your family. LORA FRIEDMAN: Well, I'd like to just say I'm-- I'm really proud and honored to be here with my mom. She's a survivor in-- in all ways. And she's really taught me a lot. She's very heroic woman and has a lot of exterior beauty and interior beauty, which I think comes through, her warmth, her compassion, her gentleness, her knowledge, her ability to-- to just transcend any horrible situation and turn it into something that is positive. I've learned a lot from her. She's showed me something in life about dealing with what you have. It's one of her favorite expressions. And I think that she truly lives that. And that's been her perseverance in the face of adversity and her ability to-- to basically just transform something that's very negative into something positive. She's taught me a lot. And I'm-- I'm real proud of her. And I'd like to call up my son, Chad, to speak a little bit about his-- his grandma and his experience of having-- being part of the family. CHAD FRIEDMAN: I'd like to say that I adore my grandma very much, because she's a survivor of the Holocaust. And I think surviving the Holocaust was a big struggle, and it was hard for her to go through that every day of her life, knowing that they were coming after her as a Jew. And I just adore her very much for being able to survive the Holocaust. ES: Thank you, Chad. I love you, too. 
INT: Did your grandma tell you about her experiences? Has she ever told you any stories? CHAD FRIEDMAN: Yeah, she's told me some stories, like how she was hiding in, like, fields to avoid the Nazis coming after her with, like, they had, like, sickles or something. And it was a struggle, like, every day of her life. ES: Thank you, Chad.  INT: Carly, what do you love about your grandma? ES: You just love me as a grandma, right? OK, sweetie, and they think maybe they remember their grandfather, Jerry. Do you remember anything about your grandfather, Chad? CHAD FRIEDMAN: I think that Jerry was, like, really strong. And he fought the war to save the Jewish people. And he tried, like, every day of his life at risk, just trying to save the Jewish people. And I think that was very brave of him.  INT: And he was a good grandfather, right? CHAD FRIEDMAN: Yeah. ES: Very good grandfather. CHAD FRIEDMAN: Yeah. ES: Teaching that children and the family, family ethics and family values.  INT: Thank you. ES: You're welcome.  INT: Thank you for appearing. ES: We are done.