INT: Today is June 19, 1998. The survivor's name is Dr. Saya Feinman-- S-A-Y-A F-E-I-N-M-A-N. My name is Paula Draper-- P-A-U-L-A D-R-A-P-E-R. The interview is taking place in Toronto, Ontario, Canada, and will be conducted in English. Today is June 19, 1998. The survivor's name is Dr. Saya Victor Feinman. My name is Paula Draper-- D-R-A-P-E-R. The interview is taking place in Toronto, Ontario, Canada, and will be conducted in English. What is your name? SF: Saya Victor Feinman.  INT: How do you spell that? SF: S-A-Y-A V-I-C-T-O-R F-E-I-N-M-A-N.  INT: When were you born? SF: On March the 10th, 1923.  INT: Where? SF: In Heidelberg, in Germany.  INT: Where did you grow up? SF: I grew up in eastern Poland, in the city of Rowno-- R-O-W-N-O.  INT: How old were you when you moved to Rowne? SF: Oh, only one or two years [INAUDIBLE].  INT: Did you have any other names that you were known by? SF: The spelling of the name Feinman depends on the country where one lives. So in Poland, some relatives had a spelling of F-A-J-M-A-N, F-A-J-N-M-A-N, and the spelling I'm using now, F-E-I-N-M-A-N with one N. Sometimes some people spell it with double N. The American cousins spell it F-I-N-E-M-A-N.  INT: And how did your father spell it? SF: The same as we spell it now. It may be that his father spelled it F-A-J-M-A-N for some time [INAUDIBLE].  INT: Did you go by any other names or nicknames? SF: Yeah, they called me Sunik-- S-U-N-I-K, at-- in-- in Rowne, and, later on, Dziunek-- D-Z-I-U-N-E-K. These are Polish names. 
INT: Did you have a Jewish name? SF: No. My second name, for a short while, was added-- Victor-- and Itzhak too, after-- after an illness. They used to believe that you had another name [? you ?] help you. And that was an old superstition, so they added a name--  INT: What kind-- SF: --at the-- my age of 4.  INT: What kind of illness? SF: I had an acute appendicitis, which was ruptured-- a ruptured appendix. And it was quite an emergency. They had to bring me to another city to operate, et cetera.  INT: How old are you today? SF: 75.  INT: What was your father's name? SF: Moses.  INT: Do you know anything about his parents? SF: Yeah. His parents lived around the city of Rowne. And his father's name was Ben Zion. And he was-- they were all rabbinical trained, but they did not use that as a profession. He was a businessman, in-- in-- in jewelry, watches, and real estate. That was the grandfather. And many of my uncles and aunts lived in that area of Poland. That was in eastern Poland, around Rowne, in many small, little cities. And they had their businesses of their own.  INT: Did your grandfather have a large family? SF: He had a large family. And some of his relatives moved to the United States before the war, and they lived in Boston. One of his cousins was Harry Feinman. And he changed the name to F-I-N-E-M-A-N. I met him after I came to North America. His children live in the area of Boston. 
INT: Did you know anything about your grandmother? SF: My grandmother from my father's side, no.  INT: Did you know her name? SF: My grandmother's name was Minucha, but the grandmother's I do not recall.  INT: And did she pass away before you were born? SF: My grandmother, yes, and grandfather. [INAUDIBLE] That was my first funeral I went to, actual, was my grandmother's funeral. Her name was Minucha. 'Minucha' means 'peace.'  INT: This is your father's mother. SF: My father's mother.  INT: You said your grandfather was in the jewelry business? SF: Yeah, too. They all were.  INT: What does that mean, exactly? SF: At that time, and that was in a smaller place, he was wholesaling watches to other-- to other watchmakers, jewelers, around that area. This area of Poland is called Wolhynia-- W-O-L-H-Y-N-I-A. And it was under the Russians until the end of the First World War. And after the First World War, in 1919 I think, or '18, '19, it became the eastern part of Poland. So it was about 60 kilometers west of the border to Soviet Union.  INT: How many children were in your father's family? SF: Oh, I think about six or seven. I-- I do not recall all of them, but I remember-- yeah.  INT: Where was your father-- SF: I remember three brothers-- wait, I remember-- three brothers and three sisters. So I think there's some died in early childhood. One of the brothers was called David, and he was a very learned person. He knew-- [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] he specialized in the old-- in Hebrew language. And he was a specialist in old literature and Aramaic. And that-- that was his hobby. And the others were all in jewelry business and in watchmaking business-- the other brothers. 
INT: Where did your father fit into that group? SF: What did my--  INT: What-- was your father the oldest, the youngest? SF: My father was the oldest. But I think some of these children died before-- in childbirth or something-- early.  INT: What was your father's education? SF: He was a-- he finished a rabbinical school, but he did not practice yet as a rabbi until he came to Canada, by the way. Here, he did it. But he used to say that you should know as a rabbi but never be a rabbi. You should be a-- a board of directors, not a rabbi.  INT: [LAUGHS] And what kind of business was he in? SF: He was also in the jewelry business, a large jewelry business.  INT: Did it have a name? SF: Yeah, it called Belgia-- B-E-L-J-- G-- G, like George-- I-A. It is a translation, like Belgium, because they did business with Belgium. And that why they called it Belgia.  INT: Was it also just watches? SF: No, there was watches and gold and jewelry. And my mother worked in that business very well, because my father was very occupied with political work. He was a-- a right Zionist in the religious part.  INT: How did he engage in that work? What did he do? SF: Oh, he used to go to many meetings. He used to do collections for them-- used to vote for them and so on. 
INT: Did the organization have a specific name? SF: Yeah, Mizrachi-- M-I-Z-R-A-C-H-I.  INT: Do you remember any of the people that he associated with in Rowne? SF: In Poland, you mean, in Rowne? No, he had a very good friend but he was not-- he-- the other was a-- a general Zionist, , and he was a very freethinking man. His name was Rappaport. And the story about this Mr. Rappaport, he came from Russia, and he was a big landowner. He also had lots of-- the place where they make-- wood-- cut wood. How do you call that? In forestry. But he also prepared, like, planks, et cetera. The reason why I remember that-- he was a very well-to-do man until the Bolsheviks took away from him. But he supported Bialik, who was the most important poet of the Zionist movement. And he gave him a job as a bookkeeper. But he only kept him there. He asked him to write poetry, but he paid him from the company [LAUGHS] as a bookkeeper. So when Bialik visited our city, in '35 or '36, he was his-- he was his most closest friend. That's how I could talk to him.  INT: You met Bialik? SF: Yeah.  INT: What do you remember about that? SF: Oh, I don't remember. We went all to the-- to meet him at the railway station. You know, they used to travel by railways all the time. So it was a special committee, and Mr. Rappaport was his old protege. That was his young protege. Then he visited our school. And he talked to the-- I remember [? that, ?] because he spoke fluently Hebrew, and that was the Hebrew actual we learned from him. So he had to read his own poetry. Some of my friends knew it all by heart. I was not so much into poetry, so-- 
INT: Do you remember how he appeared to you at the time? SF: Oh, he was a very friendly man and was-- was-- he was already advanced in years. He was about 60, I suppose. And he was-- he lived in Israel, at that time. And my personal contact was-- happened only, like, shaking hands and saying 'how do you do' and 'I like your [NON-ENGLISH].' I say, [NON-ENGLISH] means-- so we used to tell him especially-- he had one called 'HaMatmid.' This is a schoolboy, somebody who was learning all the time. That was a famous thing. Then he had another, about a mother who was working, and she had only one son, and the mother was sending him to school. And she had [INAUDIBLE] a very-- a very hard life. And on Friday night, she was baking bread, and her tears went into the-- together into the bread. This is a famous piece of poetry of Bialik.  INT: What other activities was your father involved in with the Mizrachi? SF: [INAUDIBLE] beside it, he was also a landowner and real-estate owner. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] He had a part of land outside of the city, which he used to sublet for summer vacations  INT: Was there a building on the property? SF: Oh, yeah, he'd build everything. He'd build everything. He-- he was very creative, my father. He-- he built it-- first, he built a theatre. He thought it would go there. But it didn't work, so he cut it into-- into small, little apartments. 
INT: Do you know what year your father was born? SF: I think in 1896 or-- I'm not sure-- or '97. Because he was 70 when he died in 1967.  INT: What was your mother's name? SF: Riva.  INT: And her maiden name? SF: Welichko. 'Welichko' is W-E-I-L-C-H-K-O, but the American part changed it to 'Welch.' My uncle, who lived in New York-- I showed you the picture-- W-E-L-C-H. But they still have family there. They was-- they were near Zhytomyr, which is east between Kiev and Rowne. And her father-- I-- I do not remember them. I know that from stories only. They used to have a transportation business, where they used to transport people-- not with autocars but with horses and this. He had a company of that type. And so he was quite successful. And he had a large family. And [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] immediately after the war, his first daughter, the oldest daughter, immigrated to Canada. That's how we came to Canada. She married Mr. Weinstein, who [? wasn't ?] out of the Russian army. He came here and started to work. And first he was peddling apples, and then he had apple orchards. And then they opened Canadian Fruit Company. This is their company. They are the largest importers of melons.  INT: What was your aunt's name? SF: [INAUDIBLE] what was her name? [INAUDIBLE] remember the name. Molly-- Molly.  INT: And when was your mother born? SF: When or where? 
INT: When. SF: She was born in 1899 or 1900-- something like that.  INT: Do you know anything about her mother? SF: Oh, yeah. Her mother stayed in Russia. Because my mother was engaged in an organization which was smuggling people out of Soviet Russia, to the West. And this was a very dangerous business, because that border, there, was not like the Canadian-United States border. That was a very supervised border. So they had an [INAUDIBLE]. She was quite young, when she left. She was a nurse in training, at that time. So that was when she was about 20 or 21. And all the family, except one brother, he had left first, to Warsaw and then to the United States. Then she left, and she [? worked with-- ?] that how she met my father. And-- because we were very close to the border. And that was the reason why they had to leave to Germany for a year or two, [? after that. ?]  INT: What year-- about what year was this, that-- SF: That was '21, '22-- all the time-- it was five years after the revolution. And they were-- the borders were still-- you could still move people, so people moved to the United States. Actual, HIAS, I think, supported that.  INT: Were they only Jews that she was helping? SF: I don't know. What I know [INAUDIBLE] I didn't know the people. [INAUDIBLE] I know that from stories, because of her. 
INT: And what happened to her mother? SF: Her mother stayed in Russia. But it was one of the unusual cases, that her brother-- her-- my uncle, who lived in New York, he was able to get his mother out from Soviet Russia in the '30s. And on the way through Riga-- that's in Latvia-- my mother went to see her mother, on the way to the United States. That, I remember, because she went there and-- and my-- my grandmother, she stayed in the States for several years, until she died. She died just before the war, either in '38 or '39. We actual visited her grave, in Poughkeepsie. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] Her name was Ethel-- E-T-H-E-L. Oh, yeah, she had another daughter. I forgot-- another daughter, in New York, who died in New York. Shaw was her name.  INT: Was your mother the only one who stayed in Europe? SF: No, there there's a large family stayed in Russia. They couldn't get out. And one of the sisters is still alive, and we are supporting her. She lives in Kiev. It's an old lady. She is nearly 90. And two of her daughters were with her, but one was killed by an accident.  INT: So this is your aunt that still lives in Kiev. SF: My aunt lives in Kiev, and-- with a daughter and a grandson. And that why she-- when we had suggested to her that she should move to the West, she said, I'm an old lady. My daughter is here buried. How can I move? [INAUDIBLE] But she's very astute, very clever. And we and our cousins are supporting her there and-- 
INT: Do you know what your aunt's name is? SF: Yeah, of course. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] Her name is Fania. And her husband's name was Sendler. Fania Sendler. That was her second husband. Her first husband was killed in Stalingrad, on the-- in the war. And some of my uncles were killed during the war. They were all in the Russian army.  INT: Do you know what your mother's education was? SF: She was a nurse, later. She did [INAUDIBLE] a part of high school [INAUDIBLE] nursing, immediately at the end of the war, in 1918, 1919. She was 18, 19 years old.  INT: Did she ever practice as a nurse? SF: Yeah, she worked in a-- in an army hospital, in a Russian army hospital. Actually, it was her influence to me to go to-- to study medicine. It was my mother's influence.  INT: Was that unusual for a Jewish woman in that period? SF: It was not so straightforward. But-- [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] but she went to nursing. It was just-- there were the fights, there, between White Russians and Red Russians, and there were lots of casualties. So they-- they didn't select very much, whoever-- but that was not very usual.  INT: Was your mother's family religious? SF: They were not as religious as my father's were. And, later on, when the Bolsheviks came, I don't think they were very much--  INT: Do you know-- SF: My father's family was very religious. 
INT: Do you know the circumstances in how your parents met? You mentioned earlier-- SF: Yeah, they met, actual-- they met at a place. The name was-- I used to remember the name of it-- [NON-ENGLISH]. And they-- yeah, the old people. And I used to-- because, when I used to go, they'd say, oh, your parents met at my place. There was a place where they had, like, a hotel. And when my mother came over, she lived there. And they happened to know my father just started his own business. So they introduced them. They lived near the-- near the river. That, I remember, because I used to go [? to them ?] from time to time. And one of their daughters, I think, is alive, around Detroit, somewhere, in Michigan.  INT: You mentioned that your parents had to go to Germany. Can you explain what happened there? SF: Yeah. They had-- exactly specific, I don't know, but it was, I think, politically, that they had to leave quick that area. So-- and my father was going to Germany because he had a [? ghastly ?] condition. So he used to believe in that-- he used to go after that, too, as-- once a month, to a spa. But at that time he was too young, yet, for that, so they just moved there, and they lived for a short while there.  INT: Where was your brother born? SF: In Rowne.  INT: When was he born? SF: Four years after me. 
INT: What's his name? SF: Was in '27. David.  INT: Were there any other children? SF: No. We were always two boys, [? only. ?]  INT: What are your favorite or fondest memories of your parents from before the war? SF: The [? ones-- ?] actual, we had a very good family. And so we have-- all the memories were good. There were not one better than the other. But some I remember better. When we used to have this estate [INAUDIBLE] my father used to rent places, there-- so we-- we had a very large estate, there. So we used to spend weekends there, and et cetera. That is the picture I cannot find. But I'll find it [INAUDIBLE].  INT: What was the name of the place, that it was-- SF: Nowostaw. That means 'a new lake.'  INT: Were there other Jewish families that had places there? SF: Yeah, there were-- [INAUDIBLE] used to go out there for summer [INAUDIBLE] places. It's like here to go to Jacksons Point.  INT: Where did you live in Rowne? SF: In two places. First I remember is a small street, not far from the store. But later, my father built three houses-- so one house for us, and several for rent. The name was Zamkova. That was the-- 16, 18, and 18 1/2, or 16 A-- no, not and 1/2-- 18 A. I have the papers of that, somewhere.  INT: And those were the three houses-- SF: Yeah, three houses [? beside it. ?] 
INT: How-- how old were you when you moved there? SF: Pardon-- how old? Maybe five years, maybe six. I-- that, I don't remember-- six or seven year. No, no, I-- I was already [INAUDIBLE] at seven or eight, because I was [? supervised-- ?] while they were building, I was already there. I remember that. It was a big--  INT: How many rooms were in the house you lived in? SF: We had [PAUSES FOR 5 SECONDS] five. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] And we have a very unusual library. My father collected lots of books. And I remember they had, like, the old time, they used to heat-- it was not central heating. So they used to heat it with-- there used to be very nice ovens, so that was specially made, I remember. And my father's room was a very--  INT: What was unusual about his library? SF: First, he had lots of books. That's number one. He collected lots of book-- in all languages-- Polish, Russian-- and Yiddish too, and Hebrew. Because we spoke Hebrew, very early. But then, the outlay, it was an unusual, very elegant room-- special furniture, et cetera.  INT: Were these all secular or religious and secular books? SF: Both. [INAUDIBLE]  INT: Now, you said your father was a rabbi, as well? SF: Yeah, he used to study a lot and used to write a lot, et cetera.  INT: Did you observe Jewish holidays in the home? Did you observe Jewish holidays at home? SF: Oh, of course, very much. 
INT: What was Pesach like? SF: It was a very big holiday, by Passover. You had-- the preparation for Passover took a week, at that time, because you couldn't go in and order [INAUDIBLE]. No, you had to do everything-- except matzohs, what you bought-- everything. So [INAUDIBLE] came two people to help to do that. They used to call a server in-- like, somebody who's serving. So used to be a cook and a server. That was a big production. Once-- once I got lost [INAUDIBLE], because they put all that-- the furnitures away. In my father's room were nice chairs. So I just lay down and fell asleep, there, and they didn't know where I am. It made a big commotion at that time.  INT: Did you have servants in the house normally? Servants? SF: Yeah, yeah. One or two, always. Yeah.  INT: What would they do? SF: One was in charge of cooking. Because my-- my mother helped a lot in the store, too. And then we had-- it was unusual to have a-- like, a [NON-ENGLISH], a-- what's the word? She taught me poetry, et cetera.  INT: And the-- this was a governess? SF: Yeah, a governess, yeah-- [NON-ENGLISH].  INT: In what language did she teach you? SF: Polish.  INT: Was she Jewish? SF: One was Jewish, yes. [BACKGROUND NOISE] Gesundheit. Yeah, she had a boyfriend who played soccer, I remember. Her name was Zania.  INT: Did you and your brother get along? SF: Usual. But sometimes we had fights, too, [INAUDIBLE]-- a normal family. Sometimes, he-- he hit me, once, with a-- with a small violin. Something was-- I don't know. Maybe I was wrong. 
INT: Did you take music lessons? SF: Pardon?  INT: Did you take music lessons? Music. SF: I took for a short while. I gave it up. Yeah.  INT: And-- SF: I had a very ugly teacher. [LAUGHS]  INT: You mentioned your school. What kind of school was it? SF: OK, I went-- it's a very unusual school where I went. This school-- that-- that's why Bialik visited that school. There were about five or six schools like that in all of Poland. And remember, in Poland were more than three and a half million Jews. This school was teaching Hebrew in Hebrew. There was no translation. You learned mathematics in Hebrew, like in Israel. Except for Polish, Polish history, and geography. That was in-- in Polish. The rest was all Hebrew. And Latin was extra. And German was extra. Yeah, that was-- the-- the-- the foreign language was German.  INT: Where was this school located? SF: That was on one of the main streets. I forgot the name [INAUDIBLE]. I visited that school, now, actual. But I forgot the name of the street. But it was a new school, built. [PAUSES FOR 5 SECONDS] And [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] there was a time when they found some literature, leftist literature, in one of the upper classes than ours. And, because of that, this school was suddenly disqualified that, when you finish this school, you cannot go to university. See, in Poland, you didn't have to go to a college and then university. You went-- you finished school, and then you went straight to university. If you take away the rights, that was a horrible thing, because you couldn't go to university. So we had to appeal that. So they forced us to write a special exam. And this exam, it was in the-- let's say you have 10 years, here, in high school. It was in, like, the ninth year. So this exam covered all the nine years. And they were specially done at another place. And it was at that time when I started to learn, because that was like an ambition to get that. Before, I was not very much interested. I played all type of sports. I had quite a secure home. So I did not-- I looked after girls, the others, but I didn't study very much. But at that time, that was the time where we had to show that we are doing something good. So that was like a national type of thing. 
INT: What year was that? SF: That was just before [INAUDIBLE] '36, probably, or '35-- something like that-- just before the war-- two or two years before.  INT: What was the name of your school? SF: Tarbut. There were a school like that in-- in Vilna, in Lwow, in Warsaw-- I don't know, maybe other cities, I-- but-- that they had, like, a-- and they know people in Israel know these schools, because many of the people were at very high positions later.  INT: Why do you think your father sent you to that school? SF: He sent me to that school because I did-- I revolted from going to a very straight religious school. So what he did, he supplement-- he had both-- the good of both world. He supplemented the religious learning by special teachers at home.  INT: And we're going to take a break now. SF: He wanted you a break five minutes ago.  INT: --98. This is an interview with Dr. Saya Victor Feinman. And this is tape 2. This was a Zionist school? SF: Yeah.  INT: The Tarbut? Did your father talk about possibly ever moving to Palestine? SF: Yeah, that what I want to tell you. They moved a lot. And he actual did. In '36 he left to Israel, to-- with the idea that he will-- we will come later. And actual, what he did, he was in Israel for several months and established some way of business there. And-- but, when the Abyssinian war started-- and I don't remember-- is it '37 or something? At that time was a big panic. And that why he returned. That was '37, 1937. And so he returned back to Poland. We supposed to move-- we had already half of our business liquidated, to move to-- to Israel. 
INT: After that, did he attempt to go? SF: After came back, because of the Abyssinian business, and he always was sorry that he did. And that how the war caught us there.  INT: Was your mother a Zionist? SF: Less than my father.  INT: And did your mother become more observant? SF: Oh, yeah, she was regularly observant-- what-- what you would call here as 'observant.' We kept a all kosher house, et cetera-- foods. It would be like an orthodox type of house but not super-orthodox.  INT: Did she wear a wig? SF: No.  INT: Did she cover her hair? SF: She did cover the hair, when you had to cover the hair. But she was a business lady. She was working in the public all the time. She was--  INT: What were your ambitions, as a child? SF: To play soccer, to tell you the truth, first. And then my ambitions were to be a lawyer, actual. But my mama, my mother, induced in me to-- to do something in medicine. Especially when I started to read that de Kruif book about the et cetera. That gave me the idea.  INT: Who is it by? SF: De Kruif, I think-- D-E K-R-U-I-F. It's a Dutch man. He wrote a book-- it's a very famous book. You probably read it and you forgot. It's called  INT: Did you have non-Jewish friends, growing up? SF: Yeah. Yeah, not many, but I had some very close friends. Actual, I used to go, with a guy, fishing. He was the son from-- not from our city but where my grandfather lived. Because, when my father was in Israel-- at that time, in Palestine-- we moved to my grandfather's place, because we already have-- we were ready to go. So we was going fishing. And then we started to discuss moral attitude-- what is good and what is bad. So he said-- it's a funny thing. He said, you know what my mother says? It's a Catholic house. You say it's a Jewish house. You have-- we have the same thing-- different names. That, I remember till today. That was quite profound, at a young age. 
INT: Were you aware of antisemitism in Poland? SF: Oh, yeah, in Poland was very active antisemitism. But our city was-- the majority were Jewish people, so they didn't. But I was beaten up several times.  INT: Why? SF: Just because you passed by the street. There is no reason. And it used to be beaten up when you were alone and there were seven guys on the other side. Just for fun. It was-- from '35 on was a big movement of antisemitism-- all over Europe, but especially in these areas.  INT: Were you aware of what was happening in Germany to the Jews? SF: Yeah, of course. We started to aware. We had a radio. We had that.  INT: Did any German Jewish refugees come? SF: Yeah, came, but, on the contrary, the German Jews said, you know, we have more freedom in Germany now than you-- than you-- when we were persecuted than you have now.  INT: What did they mean? SF: They mean that-- the-- before, before Hitler, they had complete freedom, like in a democratic country. Poland was never had freedom. But Poland was something like a colonel type of government, of South America. It was governed by the army. And Pilsudski was an army person. He actual was a quite a good person. But the army was first. And second was the big rightist movement of the landowners--  INT: Did-- SF: --which were not-- they were only anti-Soviet, anti-Jewish, anti-women, anti-Protestant everything anti, but they kept the country going. They did very well. And all this country, you could buy anybody for money. It's the same like South America was. 
INT: Did you want to move to Palestine yourself? SF: Not myself, but with the family. I didn't think that we-- that was our idea. On the contrary, my father bought land in Israel-- which we sold after the war-- to move there. He was prepared, that.  INT: But did you consider yourself a Zionist? SF: Yeah. For a while, yes, yeah. I did.  INT: When did you begin medical school? SF: I started-- I got inscribed right away, when I finished school, in, in '41. But--  INT: So this was-- all right, so let's go back a minute. So, in '39-- SF: '39, our part of Poland came under the Russians. Poland was divided half to the Germans, half to Russia. We were very close to Russia. And we were brought up-- our older generation spoke Russian. I understood Russian, even, at that time. So the Russians came in. And, right away, they took over all the businesses, et cetera. So we had-- and, because my father was prominent also politically, so we were in danger that they will take us out to Siberia. The-- The-- they-- they segregated the people of-- as following. One was called [NON-ENGLISH]-- means 'an enemy of the people.' Enemy of the people was-- go right away to Siberia. And that was one. The second grade was-- the second degree, or the grade, was a passport number 11. What does it mean? That you are not allowed to live in main town. Where there's a large town, you cannot live there. You have to leave the place where you-- where you had-- where you own something. And, of course, you can never leave the country. So we got that number 11, which was by pool, too. We were lucky to get that, by the way. So my parents left the city, and I was by myself in the house. And what we had to do-- we have to show as being of good social standing-- that you couldn't have more than one and a half rooms. So I took some relatives in, to live in the areas there. And that how we lost everything, at that time. I got the order that the houses were-- became the property of the nation. That's called 'nationalization.' So I remember-- the parents were not there already. So then we settled, in order to be able to go to schooling and to live normal, at the closest place where it was livable but large, large city. The largest city was Lemberg, was Lwów. So we lived west of Lwów about 20 kilometers. And, in that little city, there were never Jewish population. It was one family there. And he was a barber, I remember. And then there were maybe 300 families moved in, because it was a-- a logical thing, to move in these people who had bad passports. And they were usually previous businessmen or lawyers or something, who'd lost their jobs. So they lived there, because they could commute, during the day, to Lwów. So they practically lived in Lwów but slept in the-- it's like being here and having a-- a house in Whitby-- or on the other side, in Mississauga. 
INT: What was the name of the town? SF: Zimna Woda. It means 'cold water.' [LAUGHS]  INT: Were-- SF: It was not a town. It was a hamlet, but is very small. And it was on the main roadway from Przemysl to Lwów. Przemysl is now at the border of the present Poland and Ukraine. So it was a very important artery. And-- and that why it is important, too. We had trains four or five times a day. And it took them 20 minutes where you were, 30 minutes you were.  INT: Were these 300 families all Jewish? SF: Yeah, most of them were Jewish. Some were also Polish who escaped to be moved to Siberia, as well. So--  INT: During this period, were there Jews from Western Poland who came in? SF: Yeah, but not with us. They were more in the big cities. They didn't have 11. And what happened is that the Russians took them away to Russia because they registered like they were going to-- to west Poland. And they used it-- it kind of [INAUDIBLE]-- it-- it-- there is no logic in it. They escaped from the West to the East, but they wrote down that they are from the West. So the Russians, when they had their agreement with Germany-- so whoever West will go-- will go west, so they could consider them a semi German. It was kind of a stupid thing. But they took him all-- But that was lucky for them. They took him all, by force, to east Russia, along to Siberia. And that saved these people lives. 
INT: Did you know any of them? SF: Not on this way. On the way back, I knew. Yeah.  INT: In Zimna Woda, did they create a synagogue and a Jewish-- Jewish institutions? SF: Yeah, they had a-- they create a synagogue, and they create a kitchen for-- for poor people. But there were not many poor people there, because they were all these number-11 passports. So they-- But they waited until the end of the war. And they didn't realize they-- they were not-- they-- they were-- they lived in limbo. There was no way to escape from there. That's number one. You couldn't go to another country. That what everybody want, but you couldn't. So what did they wait until the war will finish, till the war will end. And then we'll go to Israel-- to Palestine, or to America, or to-- back. Some of them were so naive. One of my, my father's friends said, you know, as soon as the Germans will liberate us-- he considered the Germans as liberator, because he was a real capitalist-- and they will give me back my apartments, I will give you an apartment, until they will liberate Równe, until you will go home. Now, he thought in the ideas like in the-- the Austrian, first World War, he thought it takes 300 kilometers-- at that time, took half a year, or one year. He didn't-- they-- they were detached from the real modern warfare, that to take 300 kilometers was a business in three days. Anyway, what I'm just giving you an example of a very important businessman, a very influential person. So that-- that was his way of thinking. And my father hated the Bolsheviks so much. I had a possibility of taking a car, a-- a railway car, and go all to Russia. And he didn't want to use it. We stayed under the German. So being clever and so made a mistake by misjudging the political situation of Germany, because they did not believe the Germans, as a cultured nation, will annihilate people. Oh, they say, maybe there will be ghettos, there will not be complete freedom, but this is a civilized country. Says, it's a culture-- they used to always call it-- oh, this is a nation of Goethe and Schiller and Beethoven, that they wouldn't do things like that. That what-- this type of philosophy killed millions of people. 
INT: How did your father preserve his property that wasn't taken from him? SF: He didn't.  INT: He-- did he-- SF: He lost everything [INAUDIBLE].  INT: Did he have his jewelry, still? SF: He had something. That's how we were-- we took everything with us. And that how we lived. We lived, thank to that. But all the properties are all gone-- until today, actual.  INT: Did you rent a house, in Zimna Woda? SF: Yeah, we used to rent-- not a house. We used to rent an apartment.  INT: How large was that apartment? SF: About two and a half rooms. It's not a luxury apartment.  INT: Was your mother also concerned about the Soviets, because of her past? SF: Yeah. But my mother had a heart condition. And-- but she believed the same as the father believed. She didn't have her own ideas. And she was hating the Russians too, because some of her family suffered there, from the Russians, too.  INT: Were you able to go to school there? SF: Yeah. That I did. I went to the best school, because I spoke Russian. And there, they didn't ask very much who your father is. You went to school by myself. Who are your father? I said, a-- a-- a [RUSSIAN]. [RUSSIAN] means 'a worker.' They-- they write down. They were not-- it was not FBI or something. So they-- So I was, with all Russian. That how I had a car to go. I was only two-- two of us-- two kids, from people who lived in Poland, with that Russian school. That was a school for children for the-- only for the high army officials. So we had an unusual school-- that, later, they let me sleep there, even, in, in, in, at school, without having that bad passport. Nobody looked at that. 
INT: Where was this school? SF: In Lwów, in Lemberg.  INT: So you took the train-- SF: So I finished the school. When I finished the high school and I was accepted to medicine, this was one of the best schools where all the children of the big generals, all of them there. And I had-- I could do anything I wanted. So I could escape to Russia, but my father didn't want.  INT: Did you want to? SF: I wanted, yeah. But-- yeah, I felt that we should escape, it's true. But that was my father's mistake. On the other hand, thank to him, we survived the war. But that was the, the danger of political indoctrination, that we-- you are so anti-Soviet that you even accept-- accept a modified Hitler. But that was after the war, all America did. Whoever was anti-Soviet, it could be a killer, was a friend of the United States. So everybody did the same thing.  INT: In this period between '39 and '41, how were Jews treated by the local population? SF: At that time, the Soviets had, like-- when under the Soviet thing, you could not have ethnic-- ethnic problems. So they did not exist. That, they had a very quiet order. Nobody thought about it. If-- if Tito would be in Yugoslavia now, it would be quiet in Yugoslavia, too. So in some-- some populations, too much liberty is not good. So that did not exist.  INT: When did you start medical school? SF: I started right away, in, in '41. 
INT: When? SF: Oh, that was-- the summer of '41 was automatically. I mean, and I didn't do very much, that. Right away, the war came out.  INT: What happened? SF: When the war came out, that was in June, I think, June or July of '41. At that time, we could not even move from that place where we were, by train. Right away started the-- They gave to the Ukrainian, the local police, tremendous power to control the Jewish population. So because that was not an organized population, these 300 families, they lived dispersed, they let them live like that. But they had to go to work, to do special work. So the first job I did, my, my brother and I, was working at a railway. And we worked there for several months-- it was like maybe eight to 10 months.  INT: Were you paid? SF: We paid with some products or food-- not real pay. That was--  INT: Were the Germans in Zimna Woda? SF: No. I mean, they passed by. The German army passed by. It was an excellent army. It was the real thing. But everything was run by the Ukrainian police. Small stuff, they didn't bother with them.  INT: How did they treat the Jews? SF: Not good-- they extorted from them anything. The Germans came, and they said, we need all the furs-- because in Russia, the army is freezing. Took away all the furs. Took away all jewelery. Took away all the-- whatever you had. And who did not have a job could, could, could be taken to a camp. That was the beginning of the-- of ghetto formation in cities. So we were a little bit luckier. But, luckier or not luckier, it was de facto a ghetto, but it was not called a ghetto. 
INT: Was there-- SF: Until the first aktion. It's called 'aktion' what I don't know in the English.  INT: But in this first part, when you were working in the railroad-- SF: Yeah.  INT: --what kind of work did you do? SF: We-- we learned to do anything on a railroad. Now, the-- the first job was, the width of the rails in Western Europe is smaller than the Russian. It's about 1 and 1/2 inch. The first thing they change it when they came in there, they changed it to the width. It was in Poland was the same as in Western Europe. So the Russians changed it. Now the Germans came, so we had to change that. That how I learned to do-- that was quite difficult work, but we learned to do that well.  INT: Were other Jewish boys working with you? SF: Yeah, there was a group of us working together.  INT: About how many? SF: About 20, 25 people worked there.  INT: And the Ukrainians were overseeing you? Is that correct? SF: At that time was one of the-- or the Polish or Ukrainian-- whoever worked for the railway.  INT: Was there any brutality? SF: Yeah, there were. There was. The was. If you didn't work, you can get beaten up. Actually, you could do anything with you. Nobody-- you-- you didn't have an ombudsman or something. You could not complain. Once they beat me up, but that-- I took a piece of coal to heat the house. And the coal was as large as this little equipment. And I didn't consider that an important thing; I just took it. It was lots of-- and it was not even in our yard. It-- it fell off a railway train. It was on the side. And one of the police caught me with that. So he nearly killed me with-- for that. But-- and he wanted to, to kill me, but he did not dare. So what did he do? That-- he took me to the railway station. That happened in the railway station. And he telephoned, and I-- we could hear, on the telephone, that was about two meters from here, he phoned the German supervisor to Lwów. And he says, I, I, I got some-- I got a Jewish boy who was stealing coal. That how he presented. He said, how much? He says, he carried it in his hands. That's all. What should I do with him? Should I shoot him? So he says, no. [SPEAKING GERMAN]. That I heard on the phone. So he hit me very hard. My back business is from that time, probably. But about 15 or 20 lashes-- real, not just hit you once. But, at that time, a group of locomotives came of-- and they stopped-- stopped there. They were all from Germany, going up to Kiev, to the front. And they were all German mechanics. And they walked in, and they didn't like what the guy does. They stopped that, in a way-- without telling him anything. When he noticed German-speaking people looking at that, he got ashamed. He had an order just to hit and let him go. But he-- for his doing that here. So that was a bad accident, at that time. I had to recuperate for about two, three weeks. And, from that time, I have a weak in my left leg. 
INT: What was his name? SF: That, I don't remember. I don't remember the name. My brother actual looked him up, later, when the Russians came. But then he escaped.  INT: What was his background? SF: He was a part of the police, of railway police. It was a low-grade police. He didn't have to do much. All the Ukrainians were slaves of the Germans. We used to call them that they have red hats because they are in the ass of the German. They-- they were, they were the real-- the pariahs of the Germans. They used the Germans, before, because the Germans promised them to give them a free country, away from Poland and away from Russia. But they broke their promise. When they came in, they didn't keep their promise.  INT: What did he hit you with? SF: With his belt, with the-- with the metal of the belt. It was a heavy belt, it was.  INT: Who took care of you, when you recovered? SF: My brother. I walked, with my brother, home. I walked, I, I, I limped. But you were young, so you could do it and--  INT: You said they were picking up people and taking them away. How were your parents protected? SF: They-- they were, but they did not do it in an organized manner. As long as you didn't do anything, so they were-- they were left alone. But, later-- You see, the German system was like that. They used to call it a 'aktion.' They used to go into a little city and grab anybody for-- and it took a day or two. Whoever was hidden, whoever was not there, you left you alone for a while. And that what happened, at that time, in, in August of '42. When they took us-- actual, one of the neighbors warned us that they will come. So my parents hid in a garden of roses of our neighbor. They let us in there, to lie in between roses, bushes. Now, we had numbers that we worked at the railway. So we thought that we are safe. And, that way, I walked out of that hidden place, and I walked into the house. And then, when the SD captain-- SD is 'Sonderdienst,' a special-- they were Polish German who are part of the SS. 
INT: Were they Volksdeutsch? Were they Volksdeutsch? Were they ethnic Germans? SF: Volks-- probably, many of them were Volksdeutsch. Many were, were-- yeah. That was the SD. In every country, they used people who lived there, from there. And so they, he took me-- he told me, take some bread, because you're going for a long way.  INT: Were you with your brother, at that time? SF: Yeah, with my brother. Then he went in home, and he looked around. There was my father's watch, near the bed, he just pulled out. Whatever he saw, he put in his pocket.  INT: OK, I want to come back to that, but, before we do, in this period between June '41 and August '42, were there other aktions which you avoided? SF: At our place, there were not aktions. There were sporadic type of thing. They caught somebody only when they took away the furs, when they took away jewelry. That's all what we had to do. We had to work in a special kitchen, to help others. That's all what they did.  INT: Were you aware of what was happening in other places? SF: In, yeah. We heard. 20, 30 kilometers in Lwów, they killed lots of people. First thing, the first day when they came in, they took the intelligentsia. And they annihilated them. 200, 300 people got shot. Or I don't remember how many Lwów, many, many. It was such a small city at that time when my wife's brother-- father-- was shot. That was also a part of that thing. They gave them-- the German army gave the Ukrainian a free hand, for two, three days, to do whatever they want. So they used to call it anti-Bolshevik, they used to call it, but really, that was planned. They took away the brains. 
INT: Did you witness anything like that? SF: Not when I was there, no, but--  INT: You heard about it, later. SF: We heard, oh, yeah, it was close. But we tried to be in a very low-- not-- not-- not to-- to witness very much.  INT: Did you hear what happened in Równe? SF: No. We did not have a communication with home. That was a big deal. Later on, when I was in a camp, somebody said that we didn't hear.  INT: What did they say? SF: That-- that was the big massacre, massacre, in November. But there was no lines of communication. Actual, I was so already away from Równe that I did not consider myself from Równe anymore. We were-- we left, and I didn't want to hear from that. That's another thing.  INT: We're going to take a break, here. SF: OK.  INT: --eight. I'm interviewing Dr. Saya Victor Feinman, and this is tape three. SF: Our place was considered a relative safe haven. So many people who escaped camps came to hide in our place. They have to hide for six, eight weeks until the hair grew out, always, because they had shaved hair. Later, that applied to myself. But from them we knew what's going on somewhere else, where already the ghetto, in-- in Lwów started to be formed. And that was the information. Some people escaped. Some people ran away. Some people assumed different names. Some people started to get non-Jewish papers. And there was a big deal when not everybody could do it. Not everybody could afford it. But not everybody can do it because of the looks too. They used to have a compliment, oh, she is good. She doesn't look Jewish. That is good. That was the good thing about it, that-- or the other way around. And so this was-- that's how we knew information from other places. 
INT: What camps would people come from? SF: They came from-- from already-- Lwów started to have the ghetto. And then they-- some of them came from other camps, from other cities, even as far from Cracow, from Plaszow sometimes. That happens very rare, but you had a-- but that's all. There were very reduced communications.  INT: Did the-- the ones from Cracow tell you-- SF: No, no. We did not hear back. It was one or two. We knew only that something like that is forming. That's all.  INT: Had you heard the name Auschwitz, ever? SF: Not yet, no.  INT: Belzec? SF: No, no. At that time, we didn't hear those. What we heard is Treblinka. Later on-- that was the first. That was the closest to us. And we didn't hear much. And [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] that was-- we are now in '42. The first big aktion was in August. And at that time, cars came in. So as I started to tell you, we were warned. The neighbor came back from the railway. He was going to work, and he saw soldiers. It wasn't soldiers, but SS came and SD came and Gestapo came.  INT: Was the neighbor Jewish? SF: No. No, no. It was a Polish gentleman. He came. It was in his garden where my parents hid. And he warned us that there's something. So we decided, the parents have no papers. They are going to there. And we have papers, nothing is going to happen to us. That's how we did it. So when we were grabbed right away by that, two or three people came in, and he told us, bring something warm, some food, because he will not come back for a long time. So we told him we'd work as his-- I don't give a damn if you work or you don't work. We-- we're going. And they took us to a central place, where the big lorries were-- cars were standing. They packed us in, into this lot. I remember it was a Mercedes five-ton truck. And-- and on top was sitting two or three people supervising you. But-- and there was like a tarpaulin. If you went to grab the-- the rail, you got hit. You could break your hand with a rifle. You couldn't hold it like that. We were stopped. That was the first, taking us to Lwów. That took about an hour driving, until we first time saw a camp of this type. 
INT: How old were you at this time? SF: At that time, that was '42. I was 19.  INT: And your brother? SF: He was four years younger. But my brother is taller than I. And we knew the regulation, that below 16 they annihilate. So I told him right away, you are 17 or 18, and nobody asked very much. It was straightforward. Nobody had time to examine you. So they only examined you that you could walk, that you had muscles, that you could work. That's all. And so the first time what we saw an accumulation of people, the segregation first of male and female. That was the first thing. That was the big thing, they separated parents from daughters or sisters or mothers from children, et cetera. So that was one. Then I saw the first time death. That they took children on a leg, hit it at a post, and threw it down. And I thought that's a spontaneous thing. No. It was regular. They did it maybe with 20 little children. Everybody. That was the first time we noticed somebody killed in a way like that.  INT: How did that affect you? SF: We were stunned. We didn't know what's happening. But we knew something bad is happening. And then they started to separate, after they took away the females, young from old. And-- and at that time, my brother David, what I say, [NON-ENGLISH], we called him. [NON-ENGLISH], you are 17 or 18. I forgot already what we'd [INAUDIBLE]. And we were a complete night like that. And that was-- and then we heard Majdanek or the other one, the Treblinka. Because they took away many people to this campsite, away from there. And we knew that the train station was not far. And we knew that that's going to be something bad. And then somebody who moved around was beaten up. The first time we saw these type of things. And then they took us into a-- everybody got in his name. Then you got shaved your hair. And they give you a garb, a-- a-- camp garb, with a line in the back and a yellow thing on the front. That was the-- the uniform. We did not have numbers. And we were assigned to a brigade. And because we had experience in the railway, we told him that. So he assigned us to the brigade working in the railway. But later on, I don't know how, but maybe my father helped us, that we were transferred from that railway. That's called the aristocratic brigade. And that was the garbage brigade. That was the best brigade. Because you left the camp, and you worked in the city of Lwów, and you collected garbage.
So you were relatively free. So you could get some food. You could change shoes. You could have-- that's how the parents kept contact with us. That was one way. The second way was in that camp, there was also a brigade of criminals, non-Jewish, who had a sentence, six months, nine months, 10 months. This-- that was the underworld brigade. This underworld brigade dealt with everything. They brought us packages too. The price was one for five or one for four. But it was a bargain, because otherwise we got nothing. So that was the the-- the-- the-- the-- then we saw that they're taking out older people and getting shot. The people that-- their system of killing was by shooting people. And that was not far from the camp. There were sands there, areas with sand. And we used to call it in Polish piaski-- the Sands, S-A-N-D-S. That was the area of shooting. They had people who made their own graves and shoot them and put them up. And then they had a brigade used to cover them up. And then we noticed a regularation of the camp, 5 o'clock or 6 o'clock was the appell. You have to have appell. You stand in brigade. You walk in fives, so it's easy to count. You've got a supervisor who was Jewish. And on top of that were the Askars. The Askars were either Ukrainian or White Russians, who were captured by the German Army. And they-- Vlasov, General Vlasov had an army. They called them Vlasovs. And they were there the-- the helpers of the Germans. Because in the camp, there were only 10 Germans. There were 5,000 or 6,000 inmates. All the rest were the-- the lower echelon was Ukrainian and White Russians and Belarus, from Belarus, not White Russian. White Russians is a different denomination. So that was the first thing. You grabbed your food, you came back. So we were lucky to work there. But we slept-- we-- our brigade was also lucky. We slept on bags of-- that what they used for buildings, for inside. Now it's not allowed to use, actually. It has asbestos in it. So and-- and this-- but it was good to sleep on that, otherwise you slept on the floor or in a-- in a bunk. So that was soft, relative. So that was the place where we were. I remember, there was an older gentleman. And I remember the-- there was the mayor of a city of Bialystok. His name was Zhimilsky. He was a-- a lawyer. And he was a writer. He wrote several pieces which were shown in the theater. He used to tell me. I used to know him.
He used to be with-- he knew my father. He used to have a nice survival. I described that, what happens. Because once they grabbed a boy who ran away, and they took-- that was an example. They took him-- they-- they didn't hang him right away. They put him on-- on-- they called it like a-- like a hump, to hang, with your hands and feet and hanging down. And they used to beat him all the time, as an example to see what happens in escape. When they hang him later, that was already a-- a good thing. But that was the first time we saw how blood flows around and all that. And he-- he told me that. Zhimilsky told me that. When I survive, I will describe it. That is unheard of. Of course, he had a heart attack two or three weeks later. He never survived that. But that was the first. And I remember, at that time, Willhaus came out, and he says, [NON-ENGLISH], nobody will go out of here. You are completely finished. This interview is because of that. [PAUSES FOR 5 SECONDS] And see, that I remember, until today. [PAUSES FOR 7 SECONDS] Yom Kippur was several weeks after-- after the-- after they caught us, four weeks. Now, you were not allowed in the camp to have a group of people. Because if you're five or six means a group. You can get shot for that. So but people wanted to pray. So I remember our prayer was in the latrine. And somebody had to watch outside. And we said Kol Nidre in a place where people used to pee. [PAUSES FOR 8 SECONDS] That was the first holiday in there. Now, in that camp, and we saw lots of people beaten up to death, lots of people-- and but most of that, when you walked out in the morning, was an inspection if you could walk. And who could not walk was taken out. And I went on the way, when we went to work, we heard rat-a-tat-tat-tat-tat-tat the automatic. We knew. There are about 200,000 to 250,000 people were shot in this piaski, in the sands. I remember, in Polish you say and in Russian you say son of a bitch. Oh yeah. Go-- that you say it in English too. And that is-- you don't mean anything. I remember an old gentleman saying-- he wanted-- the guy was maybe 65. He wanted to beat up a guy from 20. How can you dare to call a mother a bitch? He took it verbally. So there were these type of-- of anecdotes, which you-- which you heard. Another anecdote, what I heard, a very, very rich man. He was, dare I say, aristocratic brigade. That was a very important thing to get into that brigade. And until now, I don't know how we got in there. Because there were many more important people among-- among that group. But he liked us, my brother and myself. And he said, you know, I knew that it will be a bore. He was the biggest real estate man in-- in on that city. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] It's sort of like Thompson here. 
INT: In Lwów? SF: Or [? West-- ?] in Lwów-- or [? Reichman, ?] something of this group. He says, you know, I have money in London. The first time I heard the-- what did he say? The Barclay Bank-- That time, the first time I heard the word the Barclay Bank-- in the First City of New York Bank and in Switzerland. The only thing what I don't have, he says, I am here with you. So. [LAUGHS]  INT: What happened to him? SF: He got shot there too. I don't remember. He didn't make that camp. He was an older man already at that time. And what he said, remember, don't always-- don't-- where you keep your money, you'll see that you are free. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] Mr. Schlechter or something like that was his name, or Schechter. I forgot. I can look it up, because that's known, that-- the family.  INT: You haven't mentioned the name of the camp. SF: Pardon?  INT: You haven't mentioned the name of the camp. SF: Janowska Lager. That was the Janowska Lager, because it was on Jonowska Street. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] And we had contact with my parents, in a way. My father, who was a very religious man, came on Saturday, special, because I had no shoes. And he knew that if you didn't have shoes, you were half dead. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] So he brought me a pair of shoes who had new soles, and my brother too. And he gave it to somebody who bring it to him. We used to go every Saturday or every second Saturday to a public bus, where they used to clamor in 200 people to a room where only 40 can go in. They had showers. And after you pack your stuff, you gave it in, and on the way out, you picked it up. That was disinfected in order to de-louse you. So we were walked in there. It was a big thing. And that Rokita, the untersturmfuhrer, he walked around with a gun in his hand. And his eyes were completely blind. And he used to like to shoot people and to look at the blood flowing on the floor to the-- to that-- he loved that. And we knew already you had to avoid him to go in. When we finished with that work. I go in. And I get my package. But the Polish, or whoever was the guy who was supervising the disinfection, noticed that the shoes were nearly new. This was a great investment, to have a pair of shoes with leather. So I noticed that I have no shoes. My father specially came to bring them. And I became in a big panic. Everybody was dressed very quick. You have to be-- get out and stand in five. And here I am alone, alone in a room and half-dressed and looking for bloody shoes. And Rokita walks in with that gun here. So I said, that's it. I remember what he liked. He liked when you stand up like an army and salute, and that's what I did. What are you-- [NON-ENGLISH], I have no shoe. So she took this gun, put it in back, and said, grab another pair of shoes. I grabbed two right or two left. I don't know what I grabbed. I know only that the guy who was in charge of my command, he says, I thought that you are completely dead. His name was Tannenbaum, I think. But he was a nice guy. He says I-- I was sure you were dead. So that's how I walked out. The boys kept me-- it was in five. I was getting dressed and walking. 
INT: What else do you remember about this Rokita? SF: Rokita had a group of musicians, which you asked me. He was a musician himself. He was a piano player. And he used to play at night, at-- at-- at-- in his place, where we had nothing to do with him. But he-- he had good days too. He used to smile sometimes. He had a bad day, he used to shoot somebody on-- on the spot. Then we had a guy called Kolanko that was under him. K-O-L-A-N-K-O. And then we had a guy, I forgot his name, Fritz. And we called him the Redhead. He was a redhead, a short guy too. He used to like to beat up people with a-- he had a very nice leather with a lead end. But he used to love it. But-- And Willhaus was the elegant person. He had a Blutorden. That was a very high order of the SS. He used to sit, sometimes from his-- he lived on the third floor of a building. He used just to shoot people like-- like that, like nothing, from his room, like-- like practicing.  INT: Did you witness that? SF: Pardon? Yeah. Yeah, of course. People were falling on the ground. That's why it was dangerous to group. You could not group, especially when you grouped. You have to watch not to be three together. But we had to, thank God, not to be in the camp. That was our lucky thing, because we used to come there. Only then we got typhus, typhus fever. We had an epidemic. And we were taken to the hospital in the ghetto. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] But not because we had typhus fever. If you said you had typhus fever, you could burn the camp. We said it's pneumonia. And there was a doctor who says that. He could-- they could shoot him for that. His name was Dr. Kurzwerk. He was a-- the doctor of the camp. So when we went in-- in the ghetto, there was a-- was the Jewish hospital. So we were in the hospital. At that time, it became known that there will be an aktion again. That was November or December. My parents knew about it. They got a warning there will be an aktion. And in every aktion, the hospital was got out first and shot. My parents knew that we are-- we are in the hospital. It was at that time, in the beds, I remember, when the Allies landed in Africa. Or they had already going on in that-- I remember that we had news about that. So my parents, at night-- they went into the ghetto, by the way, which they didn't have to.
But my father knew somebody in a factory of silver. He knew the-- the-- the guy who was superintendent. So he kept him there. And this was very close to the Jewish hospital. They came at night to take us out of the hospital. Now, you couldn't walk after 7 o'clock. There was a curfew. They risked their lives. And they took us out of that hospital. We tipped everybody off, of course, to disappear from the hospital later on. But we said in half an hour, when we go, you start moving. And we were taken to this jewelry factory. In that jewelry factory worked a brigade from our camp. They used to come to work. That was the connection. So my parents could sleep with that guy, the supervisor's, under their bed somewhere. We were on a-- on a-- on-- below a roof, on-- on-- on-- on top. I noticed a place where people were hiding, so I took my mother. They brought in two women to hide. And I-- we hid out there too. And we stayed until the brigade came to work. When the brigade came to work, we went down and started to work in the brigade. Nobody asked, are you-- already I'm making something from silver. I started hooking silver. I ask a guy, what do you do? He says, oh, you're not from here. I says, how do you know I'm not from here? I slept at my aunties. We didn't want to tell him that. I slept at my aunties, now I want to go back to camp. That's how we went out of the ghetto. Thousands of people were taken from the ghetto. But because we were in camp-- He took us in. He didn't want to know. The-- the-- the charge of the brigade could get shot for that. But he didn't dare. I mean, there were other guys who were in the ghetto who came in. And we walked out with them. We walked out with them, and then we got vitamins at that night. What is vitamins? When you came from work, they gave you extra work. We were not far from a railway station. So we used to carry-- start for building. They used to build around. So they had vitamin A, B, that means-- that is in Polish. Either bricks is B. No, it's C. [NON-ENGLISH], bricks. In English, it's B. And A, I forgot what was A. And B is [NON-ENGLISH], so that was B. [NON-ENGLISH] means two by fours or two by sixes to carry. So we worked about four hours after that and got beaten up at that time too. But at that time, we noticed a train already which was going to Majdanek and to Treblinka from the ghetto, from-- from Lwów. We knew that, and we were the lucky ones, that we could work and not being on that train. 
INT: How did your father escape? SF: My father was still in [NON-ENGLISH] at that time. He was not in Lwów. So the aktion was in Lwów, but not in [NON-ENGLISH]. And they knew that. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] At that time, that was the end of November, December. And so we stayed in camp until another two, three months. It was February or March when Stalingrad was-- it was '43.  INT: Before-- before we get to that, I want to go back and talk a little more in detail about the camp. Did you-- were you in a specific barracks in Janowska? SF: Yeah, yeah Special the-- but our barracks were the best barracks. That's why we slept on fiberglass. Fiberglass, we slept. They were building all around that camp. It was always turning around building. So we slept on bags of fiberglass, put in plywood on top, and that's how we slept, which was not too bad. But before I was on a barrack on plain wood.  INT: Do-- did it have a name, the barracks? Or was it on a specific street? SF: I don't remember that. It had-- it had a number. It had to have a name and a number. Because you had-- you had your thing, where you had the soup. We used to call-- there was a song that-- we create a song, there, the prisoners themselves. [NON-ENGLISH]. That a glass of water, four grains, a soup like that is for-- for that is. It's a very arrogant thing. But that was the song. 
INT: Can you repeat it in Polish? SF: Yeah. [POLISH].  INT: Were there any other songs like that that people created? SF: There were others, but I didn't know that. I couldn't participate in all the songs because we were strangers in the camp too. Most of the camp were people from Lwów, so they grew up together. We were taken from completely-- they looked at the-- we were strangers among strangers.  INT: They were from-- people from different towns and different-- SF: Yeah, but mostly from Lwów, and that town we were--  INT: About how many people were in this special-- SF: About 80 people or 90 people in the special brigade.  INT: And what age-- what age range was that? SF: That-- no difference. It was ranging from-- officially from 18, but my brother was much younger, up to 55 or something like that. But there were people of 60.  INT: We'll have to stop here.  INT: Today is June 19, 1998. The survivor's name is Dr. Saya Victor Feinman. And this is tape four. You mentioned you had typhus, and that's why you were sent to the hospital. How did you recover? SF: Not because of that. Because I was sick, not because of that. But the disease was called 'pneumonia.' Because, if-- if the Germans would know that somebody-- anybody had typhus, the complete camp would be annihilated because-- because of infection-- the fear of infection spreading to the population and to the army. So the Dr. Kurzwerk called this 'pneumonia'-- 
INT: What were your symptoms? SF: They were, we had fever. We had a rash and malaise, body aches, and very tired. That were the symptoms of disease.  INT: How did you recover from it? SF: We just recovered spontaneously. We had to leave the hospital anyway, because it was a danger of-- of an aktion. So we did not leave completely recovered, probably. But, when you're young and you're, you're in danger of death, you recover quick.  INT: Were you in touch with any women in Janowska? SF: No. There was a section for women, but I think that was before we came or after we came. I think it was before we came. It was given up. And we didn't have anything to do with women.  INT: You mentioned, earlier, a Yom Kippur service. SF: Yeah.  INT: Do you recall any other religious observances? SF: We tried to keep it very-- the very Orthodox had prayer, sometimes, in-- again, in the, in the latrine-- but not officially. That was all subdued.  INT: Did you participate in any? SF: Not as I can remember. But this Yom Kippur, I can. That was very early, when we came to-- to the camp. And-- and Yom Kippur is the most important holiday. That why I remember.  INT: What did they feed you? SF: The food, as I said, was a glass of water and four beans, a piece of bread. Oh, I forgot to tell you an important aspect. I used to get-- they used to get one cigarette a day, everybody. I used to change the cigarette for bread. But I took the end of the bread, was the largest piece of bread, so I gave them my middle bread-- I, I-- and as my cigarette, I got the end of the bread. So I had more bread. But that how we have to divide. On the other hand, we were helped that our parents send us in packages of food. And then, when I was outside, hunger was not so important because we ate outside. We used to get-- exchange something. We could buy something, you know, for-- on credit. Because my parents used to pay, or somebody else. 
INT: Were you finding food amongst the garbage that you collected? SF: There were people-- I-- I, myself, not. But I saw people eating peels of potatoes from the garbage. Yeah. Thank god, my brother and I never had that.  INT: Who supervised you, outside-- when you were on the-- this detail? SF: Oh, there was a supervisor one-- I forgot-- his name was Tannenbaum, I think.  INT: Was he a kapo? Was that his-- SF: Yeah, a kapo, of course. But he was a benign kapo. He was-- actual, he helped us later when we planned the escape, in a way, which was very important. When we planned the escape-- my brother was younger. He was ready to escape anytime, because we had a place where to escape to. And the place was only 20 kilometers or 30 kilometers. But you couldn't move around. You can get shot by anybody. And especially when you looked from a camp, you-- you had the gear of camp, you had no hair-- On the other hand, they used to shoot-- not always. We always go out in the same five. If you didn't come back, you could shoot the other four for you. So we were afraid not to do that. The only way is, if you died, if you got killed. We get that arranged, that he wrote us all that we got killed. Nobody asked how. There was no investigation. It's not important. A dog would be more investigated than a camp. So, when we escaped, we-- when he told us, you're already dead, that means we cannot come back to the camp. It's also not strict, because nobody counted it anyway. You could come back and in. But in the book it was written already you're dead. We-- another brigade from-- in the meantime, a ghetto was formed where my parents were. And a brigade from them was washing dishes and-- from some German officers. They used to come to do cleaning work. So we had a connection from the camp to the people to our camp. This was the way of escape. One day, we were left in a place. 
INT: Did German guards bring you out to-- SF: Yeah. Yeah, the-- but on the way back we could come by ourselves, was under the Jewish brigade. So that was on a day like that, where we just didn't return to the camp. And we had a place. A guy was waiting for us, a non-Jewish guy, and took us in in the car, which brought the people for cleaning jobs in the German officers' place. And that's how he took us to to Zimna Woda back. But we went into Zimna Woda. We had to do that so that the people, the landlords where the parents lived, should not see us. Because we were afraid we could be-- So we were six weeks in hiding, in a part that, you know, when the-- the roofs going up like that. So you have a room, and you have a-- a cupboard, which is along the room but no height there. In something like that, we were six weeks, my brother and myself-- until our hair grew up a little bit. Then my mother got very sick. And she had an acute-- she had a heart condition. She had a mitral stenosis-- rheumatic heart disease. She developed severe abdominal pains. And she got acute appendicitis. And she had to be operated. A Polish doctor came, who was friends of these people-- at that time, that we had to tell them that we are back. Maybe they knew, and they didn't want to know it officially, but they were good people. So a Polish doctor came, and he told my mother, listen, if you're not going to be operated, you may die here any day. I'm going to take you in to a Catholic hospital in Lwów, in Lemberg. And there nobody will ask. I will give them a name and-- My mother was so afraid, she says, if I have to die, I am going to die here. I don't want to go to hospital. And she survived that attack. She was so afraid of going into a Catholic hospital. She looks at, you know, the pictures. She looks very Semitic. And here she was, in fever, and was going and to leave the family. So we stayed with her. We learned to cook, at that time too. 
INT: When you were hiding, whose house was that? SF: That was-- belonged to a Polish family. We sublet it. We sublet the apartment upstairs.  INT: Were your parents in the apartment, and you were behind the cupboard? SF: Yeah, yeah, yeah. Yeah.  INT: So you saw them every day. SF: Oh, yeah, we were-- always-- the parents-- together. This was, like, cupboards from the same apartment. And then we were forced to go to an organized ghetto. So that was already several months later. And we grew up our hair. And nobody asked us where we came from, et cetera. Nobody asked us. We went to work, to work in a forest. This was the forest work. So we learned to fell large trees.  INT: Where was this ghetto? SF: That was in Zimna Woda.  INT: Was it in the same part of town? SF: Yeah. That was-- that was a very small ghetto. It was about 10 houses included. That's all.  INT: But you had to move from one house to another? SF: Yeah from-- moves from that apartment there, with everything to in one area.  INT: How many young people were still able to-- to do this? SF: There were many young people, because they-- they were not in camps. So there were many. There was about 80 people, 90 people. I don't remember.  INT: Were the women working, as well? SF: Yeah. That, we had to work, the women, but we had-- the women couldn't work for-- for-- to fell trees. It's a-- but they didn't want to know that. They gave us per capita. So-- so we learned to do extra work. And so, when we started there, the professional workers used to laugh at us. He was like, sort of like college boys coming to work. But after three weeks, they notice that we do the same work as they're doing plus 50% more in order to cover for the sick, so they respected us. When they started to respect us, they started to help us. There was a switch when they saw this attitude of work. And also, another help that, in that forest there was a reserve-- a place where you couldn't cut trees. How do you call that? A special area of very high firs, that especially under protection. The Germans ordered the men to cut this tree. He loved these trees-- the super, the forest master. His name was Eidukevich. And he loved these trees. And when they needed it for masts, for, for-- they gave an order, I want these trees, and that's it. And there was no-- He started to help us, because of-- he hated them because of the trees, not because we were slaves or workers. But they helped us too. 
INT: Were they Ukrainian or Polish? SF: Polish. Polish, and some workers were Ukrainian too. But most of them were Poles. Eidukevich was Polish.  INT: How long-- how long were you working there? SF: Several months, uh-huh.  INT: About what time was-- SF: It was the spring.  INT: Of what year? SF: That was in '43, before we went to hiding.  INT: Were you paid? SF: No, I don't remember we were paid. Maybe there was some-- something in the books, that we were given something to eat. But we were not paid as-- as real people are paid.  INT: Who supervised the work? SF: These people, the Polish people, whom they-- they were the supervisors. But we were lucky too. The forests of that area were under the supervision of a forest master who was appointed by the German. He was a German officer-- was a major. This major was-- his name was Barth-- B-A-R-T-H. And he had some-- members of his family suffered from the Nazis. That why he was not sent to the active army. That why he was there. Being in charge of all forests, he was also in charge of hunting parties. And his most important hunter was the chief of the SS of Eastern Galicia, of the-- of this area. His name was Katzmann. He was General Katzmann. And Katzmann gave him-- he says, I leave you your Jews as long as I can. It was our place and another place. I forgot where. He told the supervisor of the camp-- his name was Scheinbaum-- who spoke German fluently. And he told him to remember that the ghetto is becoming already liquidated in Lwów and Lemberg. It will be, soon, a time where everything will be Judenfrei-- or Judenrein. They are two things. And he gave us a warning when to escape. But, before that, my father knew already, and some other people, that a day will come that that will be liquidated. So he prepared, with a Polish family, a place where we can hide. And, in that place, 12 people were hiding. We had to pay for that, of course, but that how we arranged it. So when-- 
INT: So was this Colonel Barth who warned you? SF: Oh, yeah-- Major Barth. He came, I remember, in a Mercedes convertible. The German-- some of Mercedes have four doors. It's an unusual convertible-- not two doors, like here every car. And he came-- and, as a, boy you're fascinated by cars, even if in camp too. And he called Mr. Scheinbaum out. He came out. And he said, listen, Katzmann told me that within two, three days this place will become Judenrein. I want you to disappear, and may God help us to meet after the war. That was the signal when we had to run away.  INT: Did everyone run away? SF: Most people ran away. Some went to the forest. Some went here. Some had prepared ways. So that was the place.  INT: Do you know anything about Barth and what happened to him, after? SF: No. No. But I may look it up actual now, and do that. But that was one of the important things.  INT: So you went into hiding. How did your parents pay for this? SF: We had to pay, I remember, with golden eagle. That's $25 American-- one eagle. That was the currency to be paid it was more expensive than the Ritz. But it's also more [LAUGHS] valuable than the Ritz. [LAUGHS]  INT: Where was this house? SF: That was in the outskirts of the Zimna Woda. It was an isolated house, where you can see people going to the-- it was a fence around. And when you see the-- the entrance to the fence, it was locked. You had always time to do something. You could-- there was a distance from the fence to the house of about maybe five minutes' walking. So that way it was a strategic house, very well located. 
INT: What was the name of the people who owned the house? SF: Ulanowski. They don't own it. They rented it. That belonged to an officer, who was either in England or in Russia. He was not there anymore.  INT: Were the-- SF: Ulanowski was a secretary of the court, of the-- he was in love with a lady, the wife of a very prominent lawyer who was killed during the first days of the German occupation. He-- he lost his wife in tuberculosis. And, because he was in love with this lady, he was infatuated-- not in love, as such. She didn't even talk to him before. He took her in to his house as a wife, after she changed the name to her own name. She happened to be Jewish, but she looked very Polish. And she gave him the idea of maybe taking some Jews that will have some money. He had no money. So that was the work. Among the Jews there was her sister as well. And when we came there--  INT: What was her name? SF: I don't know Well, Mrs-- we called her Mrs. Ulanowski. I think her name was Paula, her first name.  INT: Were they actually married? SF: Probably. Probably married what like-- she brought up the children like a mother, and she was very good to them. She stayed with the man after that. She died later, maybe 10, 15 years later, after the war, of cancer. But she stayed with them. She was a-- and she was an excellent mother to them. Well, she was a good person. 
INT: And what was he like? SF: He was a good guy. The only thing, he drank from time to time. And we used to give him always money-- currencies-- like dollars, to go and exchange. He-- the exchange was not on the New York or the Toronto exchange, so whatever he told us, that was accepted. One of our people was a little bit nervous. His name was Moishe Fischel. He was a very simple man. And he looked after a man, another man, who was in the camp-- in-- in the lager with us, who was from Belgium. And he used to say, it's impossible that-- this exchange. I have to tell him. My father gave him-- told him, Moishe Fischel, [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]. Don't be stupid Because you are not dealing here in Zurich or in New York. You have a way out of checking. Thank God that you are here, that he doesn't call the Gestapo and get 5,000 marks for your head. Because he's a gentleman. He can get 5,000 for each of us! So you are going to talk about that? So that's how we kept it. Another anecdote, that Moishe Fischel snored a lot. And we slept under a veranda. My father created this place of hiding. We had to excavate. Under the walls about 20 meters, a place to have-- a place which is 3 meters by 1 and 1/2 meter by 1 and 1/2 meter, a place which had a plank, and we could-- 10 people or 11 people could sleep, and one was always on guard. He was-- and-- and we put a pipe out, in order to-- the air, to circulate outside. And the other thing was a special entrance what my father created. It had a base of boards and a wall of boards. It could be lifted and moved to one side, so you could jump into a hole, which was fortified by-- by-- by wood. We built it all with my brother. And so you can lock that, and then manure fell down on it. We were-- we lived with rabbits. We had about 120 rabbits, that made such a smell that you couldn't smell people. So he bred rabbits especially for that purpose. 
INT: Now, did you sleep under this? SF: We slept outside of the house, under a veranda. So, in order to get in there, you had to go through a tunnel, which was under the wall of the house. In order the house not to fell down, we had to put special supports every 2, 3 meters, to hold that, that it doesn't fall down. The only thing, the support made the tunnel narrow. So you had to walk this way, to get in there. And-- But always one person was always watching that. So the circulation went from that hole through the bunker into a pipe which went out. And that how air was coming in. This Moishe Fischel was snoring a lot. His name was Blondinger. So I woke him up at night. I say, listen, Mr. Blondinger, you cannot-- turn! You're snoring. He was half-asleep. So he says, you know, if you don't stop bothering me, I'll call the police. [LAUGHS]  INT: Now, this place under the manure, was that where you slept? Or was that an extra hiding area? SF: That was an extra hiding. The manure was covering only the area where you jumped in into the tunnel. That was built in a very clever way.  INT: Did the tunnel go to where you were sleeping? SF: Yeah, of course. That was the purpose of the tunnel, to go to the place where we're sleeping.  INT: How many hours a day did you spend in there? SF: In the tunnel? Half a night-- the night. And, if you didn't feel good, you could lie down there too. 
INT: The rest of the day, what did you do? SF: We were sitting there with the rabbits. I was learning history. That what I'd-- I started to learn history and learned English. And I was teaching English to the children. I knew three lessons, always, ahead of them.  INT: Where-- SF: The system I-- I used is Langenscheidt, not Berlitz. But Langenscheidt, that's an old German system where you still translate sentence after translate. It's not the modern way of teaching. But I remember that the was my first part of learning.  INT: Where did you get the books? SF: He brought them. Some books were there, and then he brought me books. And there were-- we had our connections for the BBC radio. He heard that. He-- the-- the Polish underground had some connections with England, and that's how we got news. And, from the radio, from the German radio, I could plan the war. Because they-- let's say, our division 42 from Kursk moved southwards 40 kilometers in best order. So we knew they are-- that they are running away. That how we-- we-- we knew what was going on. And, at that time, when we were-- in the first months we were was already the big tank battle under Orel-- Orel. This is one of the largest tank battles in the history of warfare-- Kursk and Orel.  INT: You mentioned, earlier, that you decided to leave Janowska at the time-- around the time of the Stalingrad-- SF: Stalingrad. That was-- yeah. 
INT: How did you know that was going? SF: That, we knew also backwards from the movements of-- of army going back in here, and also from types of news like that, that a part of Von Paulus army was withdrawn, for instance. When you hear something like that. Then we got rumors, already. We-- people, even in the camp had rumors. And then we were outside. We could speak to people who-- to normal Polish people, we could hear. Sometimes, one of the-- with whom did we deal? With the superintendents of buildings. So that where all the garbage was in their charge. So, sometimes, they started to be better to us too. Because when Stalingrad's changed a little bit. That changed the atmosphere, a little bit, that there will be-- that this Reich will not last forever. That gave you a ray of hope. When you're-- When you are young, I did not doubt that they will survive the war. It was crazy, but that how it was. Older people were different. When you are about 40, you do not just dream like that.  INT: Did you develop friendships or close friendships with people outside your brother, when you were in Janowska? SF: No. No. In Janowska, we did not develop many-- I mean, we knew people. We knew some people from there, like this Mr. Zhimilsky, Dr. Zhimilsky, he died. We knew about that. We-- we used to-- from one brigade to the other, we used to know what's happening to something. That's all. 
INT: Did you have any idea of what happened to the people in Janowska after you left? SF: We knew that it couldn't happen anything good. Because when we were the best times yet. And then we heard from our Polish people, the, the supervisor-- One night he didn't show up. He went to trade everything, and he just-- Mr. Ulanowski didn't show up. And here we were in a dilemma, what to do? So he was dealing on the black market. It could be caught. He could be caught. He had a friend who was in the Polish underground. He could be caught too. Then, he could be drunk, and he could talk. If you're drunk, you can-- so we didn't know. We wanted to go out, maybe to a-- to go out-- where-- where to go out? To start going to the forest, maybe. So we had, I think, one or two nights that we were like that. And then the daughter-- the daughter was 16 years old, only. She went, herself, to look after her father. Where did she go to? Her father's friends. And he was sleeping there. It was [INAUDIBLE]. She brought him home. We decided not to talk. And so my father had to-- how could you do that? You know, you-- shut up, don't talk. So that is human frailness, and-- was quiet.  INT: You mentioned there were the four of you, and this Moishe Fischel. SF: Yeah, and more people. And there was the sister of, of the lady, Marisha. And then was Mr. Perlsberg, who was the boss of that Moishe Fischel. He was his adjunct. He was a very elegant man who was in, in business before the war. He was alone. And then was one guy called Strickler. And this Strickler was a very rich man. And he suggested to the Polish guy that I cannot eat what they eat. I have to have special breakfast. So we arranged it like that. He should have special breakfast. But, you know, it was quiet. There were two people. I also had special breakfast, because I taught the kids English. So I took my breakfast to my mother, downstairs, a little bit. And my father didn't touch anything which was not kosher. He didn't touch a piece of meat, all over that time-- nothing. We had meat twice a week. 
INT: The children you were teaching were the Ulanowski children? SF: Yeah. I was teaching them.  INT: Were there any children with you in hiding? SF: Pardon?  INT: Were there any children-- SF: No--  INT: --with you in hiding? SF: --no, no, no, no, just what-- the children were taken out of school, by the way. And she was teaching them other things, and I was teaching them-- the schools were not supervised very well when they were closed, but it's a danger to have a child at school about not talking. So that was the arrangement my father made with them. But the children were very instrumental. They took out the buckets of-- from 11 people, the buckets, every day. She is-- We are in touch with the children. Actual, I'm going to call him tomorrow. He needs a pacemaker, and we are going to send him a pacemaker. And she's a physician, Litka, the girl, whom I used to-- she's an old woman now. She used to be 16 years old. And she's already retired.  INT: Were there just two children? SF: Two children, yeah.  INT: How did the men and women get along together, in such close quarters? SF: It was-- oh, yeah, there was another couple-- was a-- a pharmacist his name was Meth-- Mr. And Mrs. Meth-- M-E-T-H. They lived in New York. I don't know what happened to them. Benjamin Meth. Was a nice guy. So it was quiet, that's all. It wasn't-- there were no fights. There were very-- except that men who wanted special treatment because he was a rich man. So we gave it to him. 
INT: Were you able to walk around the house, during the day? SF: No, not in the house. We did not-- we had a very strict-- I was in charge of security. And you have to keep a-- a steel hand. Otherwise, some people get-- oh, I wanted to go out, maybe-- that guy, one of them, said, maybe I'll go out. I'll get much better money from the American dollars than he will get. Kind of idiotic thing. People got shot, because of that. Now, in order to-- you see, in order to feed so many people, you need stuff. So we created a thing that he was dealing on the black market with food. So, once in two weeks, he used to bring a-- a car with lots of food. Used to sell to the neighbors at half price. And that how we kept everything. The food consisted of rice, potatoes, and once or twice a meat. That's all. It was not bad food. We-- we never had hunger. That's-- that's important. And then we had rabbits. Oh, he ate the rabbits. He liked rabbits. We didn't eat rabbits, because they were special for us.  INT: Are rabbits kosher? SF: I don't know. I don't think so.  INT: Did you father eat them? SF: No, he didn't eat no meat at all from this. But rabbit is very good meat, by the way.  INT: We're going to stop here. SF: Did you ever eat rabbit? 
INT: [LAUGHS] SF: You should eat that. It's very good-- venison.  INT: --19, 1998. I'm interviewing Dr. Saya Victor Feinman. And this is tape 5. We were discussing the period you were in hiding. When did that-- how long was that period? From when until when? SF: That was from March till July-- so, it about 14 months.  INT: So March of what year? SF: Of '43, till July of '44. March, or April. That, I'm not so sure about that. I'll ask my brother. Maybe he remembers better. But I don't think so.  INT: How did you stay warm in the winter? SF: It-- it was very warm, there. And in the winter, because, downstairs-- and we had lots of animals, there. It was very warm. We had to keep, actual, to ventilate it. And then we had some sweaters and that. So-- and we didn't move very much, and you had lots of people around. So--  INT: Did you go outside at all? SF: No outside. That was an order which we-- a voluntary order. Nobody will go outside. First thing, the neighbors could see you. And the neighbors were more dangerous, like Gestapo. That, that, that would be a horrible thing.  INT: How did-- SF: But I started to tell you about the lighting. My father connected an oil with a, a little-- like you keep a piece of cotton, but--  INT: A wick? SF: Yeah, a wick. And that how we, we, we could read and that. First thing, we should not have light where you see in a basement's windows. The windows were below it-- were not huge windows, anyway. But we could look out. We could see people walking. We could see-- in spite of that it was a distance, we could see. Especially in-- in the summer, when you see young people singing, going out, and you're sitting here from the far and looking. And, and, and you look at the rabbit. But this Blondinger had a gift. He could tell stories. He was a very simple man. He was a leather man. He was working in leather, making saddles. So he couldn't write. And his family was in Russia, where he was actual-- wait a minute. He was a part of the people who came from west Poland, from a city called Jaroslaw. And his family was taken to Russia. But for some unknown reason, he escaped-- I think because he couldn't do anything. So he was like a helper to that Mr. Perlsberg, who was a big businessman, a very-- a man of about 55, a very elegant man. So he was his valet, that's all. 
INT: How-- how old a man was he? SF: About 55 or something. I don't know.  INT: Both of them were about the same age? SF: He was younger, Moishe Fischel. I don't know. Moishe Fischel died when he was 70. After the war, I saw him [INAUDIBLE]. But he had a gift of telling stories in a simple way. If that man would be able to write, he would be Mark Twain. That, how he could do. He could confabulate a story which could never-- you could not prove anything, but it was entertaining. And people like-- well, Mr. Meth was a trained pharmacist. The wife was a pharmacist. They were people with high education. They listened to that. That was, they are going out to the theatre. And that was a gift of God, having that guy around-- with-- with his snoring, with all the bad things. That-- that was a kind of entertainment. Now, I learned a lot. I learned English, really serious, but also history seriously. I covered lots of history, like the taking up the-- and how to do strategy of warfare. So it was practical, and it was also a-- an entertaining thing. Between that, and between hearing BBC, and between having a clandestine type of a newspaper to come in, your days were full. But the most important thing was to, to pray to God to be-- to be liberated-- to see that. So I was very impressed when the German army walked into Russia, to-- to Poland, to our city. That was an exemplary army. You couldn't-- an army like that-- the Polish army was nothing. And the Russian army, which we saw later in '39, was a riffraff army in comparison to the order of the German army. Everybody was-- they had no hats even. They didn't have to have that. Helmets they wore only when they had it. And it was clean and orderly. In '44, the months before the liberation, we started to see Germans on the way back. And when we looked sometimes from outside of them, several times they slept there, and we had to be quiet because they slept upstairs. We couldn't say no. But we saw a army of full of louse-- lice-- dirty, not washed, not orderly. It was a pleasure, to see this herrenvolk, that folk which think it was the super nation of the world, walking around like slaves and escape. But what I forgot to tell you, that we had two episodes where the police came to look for us. And it came Ukrainian police. And we were in hiding, well. They came, and they-- they had-- somebody-- they looked for the wife of that lawyer who married them. And they looked for a Jewish woman who lives there, but they didn't know who it is. So they interrogated the daughter. They didn't even dare to question the identity of Mrs. Ulanowski, but they thought his daughter, who was-- had dark hair, by the way-- they thought that she is Jewish. The only thing is, her age did not match the description. But they were there. We were ready. We had to decide what to do with them. If a German, not a Ukrainian, come, we had to kill him. He provided us with a gun. We had that and said if something like that came, he had to be dead. He cannot go out, because he would-- all-- everybody would be dead. Twice, we had the police there. 
INT: Was Mr. Ulanowski there? SF: Yeah. He was there. They knew him. That what-- they-- they looked for a woman. They didn't look for us.  INT: Did anyone know how to use the gun? SF: We'd learned-- he taught us, a little bit, how to use, yes. We would use the gun, yeah.  INT: Who is 'we'? SF: I would use it, and my brother. We were-- that, I knew how to use a gun from before. In Poland, I used a gun. I, I, I was trained at that, a little bit. That, I could do.  INT: When were you trained? SF: Was when my father was in Israel, when-- in Palestine at that time. We had a Polish officer living in a part of our buildings. And he was a very big hunter. So he taught me all that stuff of hunting-- didn't take me hunting, but he taught me all his-- this. So that, I learned.  INT: Did you ever think of trying to join the partisans? SF: Yeah, very much. That was all the time. And my father kept us together. It's only because of our parents we didn't go to partisans. Otherwise, most of the people went, and most of the people got killed. That was-- it's only because we were together, we were-- didn't-- couldn't do that. And luckily, we didn't, because in our area the partisans were not very active. And they didn't take Jewish partisans very much. But we had contacts with partisans, indirectly, when I worked at the railway. We had to report how many-- see, it was a main railway on the way to Kiev, from Przemysl. That was from Cracow, Przemysl, Lwów, Kiev. So we had to report. And I-- I for sure that was going to partisans, how many cars are going, how many tanks are going on the cars. That we did. 
INT: What partisans were they? SF: That was Soviet partisan. But we didn't see the partisans. We saw one person coming, and we're just writing down. That's all. We knew that, but we didn't want to know. We-- officially, we didn't know.  INT: At this time, while you were in hiding, were you aware of the death camps? SF: Yeah. Then, at that time already, we knew that Majdanek and Treblinka-- we were in the camp, when I was in Janowska, we knew that they are already killing people. That, we knew. We knew-- these two camps, I knew.  INT: Did you hear about Belzec? SF: Belzec, we also heard, yeah. These are the three camps. But Majdanek and Treblinka mostly, because they were the closest to us.  INT: Did you have any Jewish observances while you were in hiding? SF: My father prayed every day. That's all. But nothing unusual.  INT: Any holidays? SF: He kept-- we had the prayers on the holiday, that's all, but we didn't have anything unusual. My mother sometimes-- you see, to put in candles, a candle was an important thing. You just cannot use a candle, because you need a candle to live in the evening. But for formal, she used to make a blessing on the candle-- but not to keep long candles or something like that. And the candles, that what I used for the-- for reading. That were like candles too.  INT: Did it-- did the experiences affect your faith? SF: To me, not much. But other people, it did. My father believed that we are-- due to God, he saved us. But, on the other hand, there was no question why other people were killed. So this-- we were a little bit ambivalent to the power of God. And I didn't go into this. 
INT: You didn't discuss it? SF: We discussed it maybe by sitting, but not much. But they didn't, because, for my father, they didn't want to. And they were older people. They were more-- people, older, that were nobody rebelled. And the rebelling-- what can he do-- you kill a rabbit when you rebel. We, we couldn't do anything by rebelling or not. But you could not approve of God, who let children to be killed by, by hitting on a-- on a-- [INAUDIBLE]. But you shouldn't question the ways of God. That's the answer. So-- but, later on, when I had people who left Judaism, I did not object to that. I understood them, too. We-- we had to have an open mind. [LAUGHS] Like I had a friend, he used to say, you know, our god is now on vacation. That was the word-- God is on vacation. He is not around. So I have to respect that, too.  INT: What did you talk about, in hiding? SF: About anything. Everybody-- hiding, many people tell stories about their past. This is a history of immigrants and [INAUDIBLE] hiding. Some of it were true, some of it were all exaggerated, but that they lived with the past. And that was the actual-- but the most important thing was the daily. Every day was a problem. Will we survive the day? How will he cover that? How do we do this? How do we--  INT: Did you think you were going to survive-- SF: Yeah, I was thinking all the time that I will survive. Yeah. That was true. That what I believed. 
INT: How did your brother cope? SF: The same-- same thing.  INT: You were mentioning that, in the spring, June, July, sometime like that, in '44, is when you were liberated? SF: Yeah. That-- when I told you how we knew already that the German army is in retreat, then we knew already that Lwów is in an-- encircled. And Mr. Ulanowski came down. He says, you know, you will be free very soon, but I don't think you should go out. We should keep you here another several days, to make sure that the front is stable. Because a front can go up and down. And once in the morning, around-- it was very early morning-- the Russian army moved in. And that was a different army than the Germans, but young. And we had the first voice. He was sitting on the veranda, where we were under the veranda. And you hear the first words from the Russian soldier, told to Mr. Ulanowski-- [SPEAKING RUSSIAN]. [RUSSIAN] means-- what do you call the bird which brings-- when you can send letters with the bird? Raven-- not raven--  INT: Pigeon. SF: Pigeon! In Russian, if you say 'a small, little pigeon,' this is a, an endearing word. 'My little pigeon.' That is a Russian expression. So he told him, hi my little pigeon. That was the word of liberation. So we stayed, after that pigeon, another 24 hours. Then they baked white bread, to take out with us. And-- and we said goodbye, and we started to go out. And when we walked to the early morning, we saw the Russian tanks, and soldiers sleeping under them-- or behind them. And then we, we walked as a group. Where did we go? To the ghetto, to where we were-- where we left. And the first-- until we reached them-- many people did not speak Russian, but we speak Russian. So they ask him, oh, you survived the war. You-- you were in hiding? And a one guy gave me [NON-ENGLISH]. That is one tin of American meat. That was [NON-ENGLISH]. It was pork meat, but was excellent. He gave me that. That was a big gift. And we came and met other people who survived. And the first thing we did, we went to say Kaddish. There were several people killed and shot, during an escape, during that, about 50 people or something. So we-- we had a place where they were buried. And that was the first thing we-- everybody did. 
INT: This happened after you had left? SF: After we--  INT: The escape happened after you left Zimna Woda? SF: Yeah, yeah.  INT: But you knew about it? SF: In Zimna Woda, we know that, before we left, people were shot. Once was a small aktion and some people were shot. And there were relatives of people we knew. So we knew where people were buried. So we went there for prayers. And after one day, we started-- we didn't want to move-- stay in a small city. We didn't know what's happening. So we said, we are going to Lwów-- to Lemberg. And we walked by foot there.  INT: Who were you with? Who were you with? SF: All my family, and another family-- that's all. We just walked.  INT: So you separated from the other people who were hiding. SF: Yeah, yeah. We said goodbye. Everybody went to Lwów. But everybody had different plans-- this plan, the other plan-- nobody knew. Some people were going to look for relatives, some-- But the center was Lwów. That was a huge city. So we said, we'll go to Lwów. We went to Lwów, and we came in there. And we found out-- Some people say, you know, on-- in this and this place, in center of town, German officers used to live. Let's go there. So we just go there and took a, took a-- an apartment. It was an empty apartment. But then the Russian brass moved in. They were assigned to, to Russian important officials. One was an important official of the party. And he says-- he was a very good person. He says, I'm going to take this apartment, and you take this apartment. And when he says, we knew that we will be protected from the Russians as well. He was a very straightforward, real, good person. He could say, you can go out of here, because my general has to take it. 
INT: What did liberation mean to you? SF: Liberation means, like, a new birth. I consider myself being born at that day-- like a new gift of life. That means liberation. It's-- it's-- there is a prayer like that, from death to life. That what it is. It doesn't mean anything else. It doesn't mean anything political. It doesn't mean anything else. That what it-- it's an individual thing.  INT: What happened after you moved to Lwów? SF: We moved to Lwów and, right away-- again, Lwów also had memorial services for there. Then we had committees started to look who is around, who is not around. And my-- my father opened up a business right away. He went in, and-- there was a, a free store or something. So he opened. We start working the first week. And I went back to medical school right away. And first we want to go to the army-- or, wait a minute. That's the first thing. That was the first reaction, three days after we came in. So we looked like this color, from them being a-- more than a year in that. So the [NON-ENGLISH]-- that's the political officer-- there were many people sitting there, going to-- want to go to an army. He says, you're going to an army? You know, you boys, you should go to a hospital, not to an army. [LAUGHS] So my father thanked God for that. So-- he thought we are crazy. And so we stayed there. We-- we-- but you recuperate very quick when you are young. My mother was quite sick. But being there, she couldn't walk too much. That saved her heart. So-- but we served as a center, because we have our family. So we kept everybody who passed by there from our-- from Równe. Then we found out everything about Równe-- came to us. I met in Israel now a lawyer. He says, you know, I remember what your mother gave me to eat when I passed by. I didn't even remember him. He's an old man, now. He's a very influential lawyer. He says, I remember the things-- that-- that what we served as a center for everybody who came. And-- and after being at school for two months, I joined that paramilitary outfit, because I was too nervous to be at school. So I took the anatomy books with me, to write the exams, and I went to that army. I wouldn't get into that regular army, but I went and I had somebody I knew, who was an officer there. And they needed people. So he-- he grabbed me. I went. 
INT: What kind of work did you do? SF: I-- that, that, that was an outfit which was building airfields. And the general who was building airfields was going from Moscow, west, and he had tremendous experience of building quick airfields. That is for light airplanes. And the system was an American system really. So he-- I-- he put me in charge of bringing labor. And I spoke all the languages. So I excelled in that. I got more people to work than he ever got. So after that, he calls me and says, you know, they call you in Russian Saya Victor [RUSSIAN]-- the Son of-- of [INAUDIBLE]. He invited me for, for breakfast-- 5:30 breakfast. So Mr. Bernstein, the guy who took me in there, he says, you know, you're going to-- that's a great thing, if the general goes you to breakfast. So I walked over. [INAUDIBLE] what happened? He says, sit down. He says, you know, I'm going from Moscow. I build maybe hundreds of airfield. I never had as many people working as you bring me. So I really went up there. And then I had to learn to drink vodka there. That's the first thing. He gave me a 100-gram vodka. 100 gram is more than three ounces, and my experience in drinking wine was just to kiddush a little bit. So-- but a friend was there, and he taught me how to do it and to eat a lot.  INT: Where was this located? SF: We were located about 60 to 70 kilometers east of the Vistula River. Warsaw was still under German occupation. [? Praga ?] is a part of Warsaw that was already under Russian occupation. We were about 60 or 50 kilometers-- we could be-- we were-- when we would travel there, we were shot that from the other side yet. When we finished one or two airfields, I remember, Zhukov, Marshal Zhukov, visited the place. And, at that time, he walked in with Russian jeeps. And his young officers inspected the place, very quick, and then they moved. My general said, within two weeks, Warsaw will be taken. Because he knew, when he finishes an airfield, light aeroplanes-- these were support for infantry and tanks-- that was not bombers. You couldn't build an airfield like that for bombers. So we, we used to straighten it out, used to put gravel, and on that, steel plates. The steel plates were made in US-- USA. But, after a month or two, I noticed the same steel plates coming from the-- coming from the Urals. They copied them right away. And that was the, the work. 
INT: How long did you stay in the Soviet army? SF: Several months. I forgot exactly. Until they took-- until they were Frankfurt an der Oder. At that time, I had to-- I had to write exams at school. I did it halfway, so that I had to go back to school.  INT: Was that a problem? SF: No. My officer did everything. If I wanted to do-- to give away half of Russia, he would give me. He loved me, because of that. And I loved that, too, because I did anything I could. I-- I went into [INAUDIBLE] city, and I figured out-- a city or a village. I knew how many houses are there. I figured out there are four people in a house; two of them can work. So I always-- I, I know I go in. There are 60 houses. 60 time 4 is 240. 120 work. If he gives me 60, I'm taking. That how I dealt with him. I come in and say, listen, I need from you 100 people. Says, 100 people? How will I get it? They don't work! Says, OK, if you don't get it, you-- I tell my general. He'll raze your village. Tomorrow, you have no village. I'll give you 30 people. Say, give me 100. So he gave me 60-- women and male. They were working right away. One city after-- after the other, and that how we did.  INT: Was this the University of Lwów that you were-- SF: Yeah, yeah, yeah. 
INT: Who were the other students there, in the medical school? SF: Mostly girls. There were not males anymore. Mostly girl-- there were very few males, because either they were killed or they were in the army.  INT: Were there any Jewish-- other Jewish-- students? SF: Girls were the one-- two of them, yeah. And many of them, I didn't know. But then we moved, soon. After one year, we moved to Cracow and, from Cracow to Vienna.  INT: Where were you when the war ended? SF: I was still there. I was in Lwów. I was in a car, and traveling to a city called Lódz, because we were building airfields already on the west side of the Vistula-- Vistula.  INT: What was that like? SF: Oh, it was beautiful. I-- I-- all-- I enjoyed all these years, because, when I hear the, the, Russian anthem-- after each big battle, the anthem played. So, when we heard that, it was another trip, another thing to end the war. So, when they went into Berlin, that was the big thing. We were following that in detail.  INT: When did you go to Vienna? SF: Vienna, we went in '45, the middle-- the summer of '40-- one year after.  INT: What did you do there? SF: We went-- we moved out [INAUDIBLE]. It wasn't so difficult to go to Vienna. I used Russian officers' connections from my old general, how to get to Vienna. So we were-- And then, the man who took us to Vienna still lives in Vienna. He worked also for a Russian outfit. He's from Lwów. He survived the war in Kiev, under false papers. He worked for Todt's organization. Did you ever hear about Todt's organization? He worked there. So he had a connection with a Russian outfit to have cars going from Cracow to-- to Vienna. So with him, we went over. In six hours, we were there-- six or eight hours. 
INT: What were you able to take with you? SF: Only what we could carry. You could-- two suitcases, three suitcases, and that's all. So with him actually was a luxury. He had a big truck. And we could do many thing. But I-- we went into Vienna, and we were two nights in the so-called Rothschild Hospital. There was a place where people stayed. And-- but we happened to know some of it from Vienna my parents knew, so we moved out right away to a hotel. And--  INT: Did you still have money? SF: At that time, yeah, we had more money, because my father worked already, at that time, in the [INAUDIBLE]. At that time already, he was already in business. And-- But we went to a hotel for a while, until we rented a flat. And we decided to stay in Vienna until we finished schooling.  INT: What was your brother doing? SF: He was going to a technical school.  INT: And where did you go to school? SF: Pardon?  INT: Where did you go to school? SF: In Vienna.  INT: What university? SF: At University of Vienna.  INT: Was it difficult to get in? SF: No. No. They did special-- they-- they didn't question very much. And I had good marks from the beginning. And so they let us in. And then I had right away exams there. They had exams every three months. And I was a pretty good student in that. 
INT: Were there other Holocaust survivors in your class? SF: Not in my-- yeah-- in-- the class was different, there. But there were two or three. There was one what I have on the paper, Dr. Neufeld.  INT: Where were they from? SF: From-- he was from Lwów, too.  INT: And the other two or three? SF: [SIGHS] From other cities, from city of Lódz. Actually, one died two days ago. I sent them today a fax to his--  INT: What was his name? SF: But he was in a younger school, a much younger than--  INT: What was his name? SF: I send him today a thing, and I-- his name is Bugayer, Richard Bugayer.  INT: Where did he live? SF: In Vienna. They lived in Vienna.  INT: They stayed there now-- till now? SF: He died on a, on a tour, near Corfu.  INT: We'll take a break, here.  INT: Today is June 19, 1998. The interview is with Dr. Saya Victor Feinman, and this is tape six. I wanted to focus a little on your father now. When you were in Lwów, you said that all of the survivors from Równe would come by. This is before the war ended. What other things do you remember from that time? SF: We were preoccupied a lot with surviving children. In-- in other situations where parents left children in order to pick them up, and they couldn't pick them up, or they didn't come, or relatives of the children came and there was no legal way of getting children from parents' who-- from families who-- who kept them and who wanted to keep them. So we had a little conflict with that. We had an organization of taking our children to relatives-- to close relatives there. When I was in the paramilitary organization, I used to do that a lot in other cities. It was a kind of a divided morality here because some of the parents were good-- some of the families were very good parents of the children. But on the other hand, here were close relatives, like a sister, or a auntie of-- of a-- a child, and she felt it's her child, and we had to make the decision who that is. So we used to help in this aspect. And second, we used to help other people with getting jobs, for instance. We got, for instance, that Mr. Ulanowski. We were so annoying, the man who-- who let us live in the apartment, he had lots of influence in the party, we got him to run a-- a bakery, to-- to be a manager of a big store. So we got this type of things to do people some good deeds if one could. 
INT: The children-- the group that was helping the children. Who organized that group? SF: I don't really remember. Some of them were organized, some were spontaneous.  INT: How did you know what to do? SF: I was just going by conscience. I did not do it legally. I didn't do it studied law. And I didn't ask anybody. And I didn't know who was right. But it was-- when a mother came for a child, that was easy. The difficulty was when a sister of a mother came for a child. So that was a borderline type of-- of-- of action.  INT: Who was organizing this action? SF: That-- in Lwów there was organizing a little bit by the committee. But where I was, there was no organization. That was all spontaneous.  INT: Somebody would come to you? SF: That's it. I was going into a group, and-- in a place, for instance, I-- I needed a contact to know somebody. And I walked into a Polish city where it was raining like hell, and it was dark, and I ask, where is Mr. Rappaport living? So she told me, Rappaport, I don't know Rappaport, but I know some other Jewish people, they live here. That's how I got the place. When I walked in there was a uniform, and my assistant was a guy who was 6 and 1/2 tall, and a man from Odessa. So they looked at us with suspicion. They didn't know who they are. So I asked him, I would like to speak to you. And he says, how know-- how do I know that you are Jewish? He says that's his minhah time now, they are going to pray. And they have to do a prayer for those who are-- who are-- did not survive, for the dead. So I told him, you know what, let me pray. When I was the chazzan, they warmed up to me. So they went, you know how to pray well. So they became friends, and I gave them some food, and I arranged for them many things. But one of them was that they had-- they couldn't pick up a sister's child, et cetera, that we helped it. 
INT: So and this is a case where this-- the aunt had gone, and the family had refused to let the child go? And how did you interfere? You went because you had a uniform? SF: Mm-hm. I just went in, and we spoke to the people, and they-- they had relented. They did it. They didn't want to, but they gave the child up. So in another type of part-- time in a civilized other country, it wouldn't be so easy because there are specific laws applying to that. We worked actual with a different law at that time. And by doing so, we returned many children to Jewish families. That was done, I know. But the most important thing is your reminding me is about the Passover, the first Passover in that time. I was traveling from Lublin to Lwów. That is about 400 kilometers from west to east. We traveled to an area called Rava-Ruska that was a very dangerous area. There were lots of old [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] soldiers which-- White Russian soldiers and Ukrainian nationalist-- Banderovs as they're called. They used to kill people, and kill even officers at night. So you had to be armed to pass by there. So when we passed by there, that was about 7 o'clock, and it was starting to be dark. A captain jumps up, and he says, you're going to Lwów. Take me too. And I had three friends from my camp going up, and I told him, listen, I have a big holiday today. That's our holiday of liberation. You're all invited to come to me. This captain listens, and he says, holiday? What holiday do you have now? He says it is called Passover. He says, you know what? I know my parents used to keep that. But now I am in the army. I didn't even know where it is existed. I say, you're invited too. So I brought-- until we came to Lwów, was 10:00 in the evening. It was late, and my mother didn't know really where I am. And I came in here, and I brought five guests. In the meantime, there were other 10 or 15 people who were alone. So we had made a real holiday-- a real liberation holiday. That was the first, the most important Passover I ever had. And we had to thank God, especially because we had a family close together. And all this Russian guests, and then we taught them how to say the [NON-ENGLISH]. And we had-- between our songs and the Russian songs, we had the best evening we ever had. It was a-- a religious, and a national, and a humane experience. 
INT: This was in 1945? SF: That was in '45, yeah. '45, that was two months before the end of the war. In May that war ended already at that time.  INT: Let us get back to Vienna. How does your father participate more in his Mizrachi activities? SF: Oh, he always was a Mizrachi person, but when we came to Vienna he joined again the Mizrachi movement. And so he became one of the leaders of the movement there. And in Vienna-- all the people in Vienna came from all parts of the-- of Eastern Europe. There were people from Poland, from Czechoslovakia, and from Hungary. These were the main groups coming into Vienna. There were very few real Viennese people who were born in Vienna. And those who were born kept a little bit different-- a little far from the newcomers too. But we were a very close-knit people, and they right away created two temples right away-- one Orthodox, one also Orthodox. But both of them were Orthodox still. And that how became a society. People started to meet. We had our club-- society of students, of Jewish students, the Viennese. I'm actually a member of that today too, which I-- I do not participate, but I'm still a member of it. So that was the first group how we met-- young people met, and in medicine we were about four or five people who knew each other and some younger people. And [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] I worked in medicine summers and winters. I had to cover many years. So there was a continuous course, and everything in the summer-- I worked in the hospital already-- started from laboratory, to internship, to all that. And so we went-- when I graduated, I had to make up my mind what I'm doing at that time. And I decided-- at that time I decided to stay in Vienna. It was '48. We still stayed in Vienna. But we dreamed about going to North America, or to Israel, that we had to make up our mind. And because of my mother's illness, we decided not to go to Israel. My father wanted to go to Israel very much. And we had relatives here. Relatives, I told you before, that was our connection with North America. And it took quite doing until we came. It took until 1951. In the meantime, I met my wife in '49, and we got married in '51. A month later we moved to-- to Canada. 
INT: What was your wife's background? SF: My wife, again, she lived a-- a-- a non-- on Christian papers. She and her mother survived the war near Vienna working in a quarry-- in the stone quarry.  INT: Where was she from? SF: But she was from southern Poland, from city of Boryslav, which was known because all the-- the oil industry of Poland was there. And her father was a very known mining engineer.  INT: Did your father go to Israel in this period? SF: He went to after that. And-- and he went to Israel twice, once before and once he was accompanying [? Erzel-- ?] they took out [? Erzel ?] in '49. It's too bad I didn't find-- I have a picture of giving-- laying flowers at [? Erzel's ?] grave in Vienna. Every commemoration of anything started, actually, there at the cemetery in Vienna. And so my father was chosen to be one of the accompany-- there were five-- six people only in the aeroplane which brought the remains of [? Erzel. ?] I happened to be with my wife. At that time she was not my wife. Our group of students worked in Israel over the summer. I was already not a student, I was already graduated, but I belonged still. So we went there to work in Afula-- near Afula in a-- in a kibbutz for three months. And that was at the same time as my father came. So we were at that time when [? Erzel ?] was laid-- to [? Erzel, ?] which is a big cemetery now. That was the beginning of that. And we had a division in our family. My father wanted to go to Israel right away, and due to my mother's sickness, we decided to go to Canada. 
INT: When did you arrive in Canada? SF: In '51, in the summer of '51.  INT: Did you continue schooling here? SF: Right away I-- I got an internship here. I was already trained three years in internal medicine. But after a year of internship I got my license here. I practiced for a year and a half, and then I went back to school to do physiology. And I finished my specialty. So I did-- I was a resident at St. Michael's. And then I started my practice, and I got my exam in some specialty and then the fellowship exam. Then I went to other places still to train more in liver disease, and among them I went back to Germany in '61. And I took a special course in liver disease, but most importantly in doing laparoscopies. All laparoscopic procedures I introduced to Canada in 1961. And it was so new that the hospital didn't want to buy the equipment so I bought it myself. So we did all liver-- the diagnosis of liver disease by laparoscopy. At that time there were no ultrasounds, so we-- we created the most-- the-- the most effective liver unit in this city.  INT: At what hospital? SF: At Mount Sinai. I-- I was an intern at the Mount Sinai, and a resident at Mount Sinai, and then a staff person at the Mount Sinai, in the new Mount Sinai on University. I still was in York from one year. 
INT: And what has-- what has been your major accomplishments since then? SF: I-- I created the clinics for hepatitis. And that is my main subspecialty in hepatology. So we are looking-- from the '70s on, we follow all patients with viral hepatitis. Anybody diagnosed by the Red Cross was referred to our clinic, so it's one of the most famous clinics in North America. And we have the largest number of patients of hepatitis B and C. And then I did all the studies on transfusion hepatitis. All the rules now between 1986, this is all based on our work. And now we are specializing in treating of hepatitis C with all newest antiviral drugs.  INT: You're still working? SF: Oh yeah, I did a lot of that. We have a very large group of-- a research group.  INT: Are you planning to retire? SF: Not knowingly, but if I retire I'm going to study history or political sciences.  INT: When you first came here, were you involved in helping survivors get restitution? SF: I was not involved as an organized way, but I-- I-- I had lots of survivors as patients. Patients go to doctors first because of language. This is the most important thing is to be able to communicate. So-- and because I know all the languages, so I had patients from all-- all European patients. I had a full house. When I was an intern I already practiced. I could practice when I was a resident at St. Mike's. The professor let me practice, so I worked like that at 8:00 in the evening to 12:00 at night. 
INT: What kind of damage from the war did you see amongst the survivors that came to you? SF: You mean-- whatever they needed. Many of them have mental disturbances-- very many. So that is a new science, by the way. Now it is-- has a lingo. The psychiatrists have a special-- at that time they didn't even have it. But we had to help them out with that.  INT: What did you do? SF: We have to examine them to find out how much disability they have. So we-- we did that a lot. And because I know the German law, so I used to be able to communicate with them. So a letter from me was respected in the consulate too.  INT: Did you get restitution yourself? SF: I didn't get medical restitution at all. I just got the restitution for a camp. Everybody's supposed to have it, so I did it. Then I refused to do all that. I have a back illness until today from that time, but I didn't want to take restitution. We're doing very well and I didn't want to do it.  INT: How else would you say the Holocaust has affected you? SF: The Holocaust affected me-- it is difficult to say, but I remember, as I told you, in the camp that thing that to say [NON-ENGLISH]. The student who is [NON-ENGLISH], I always looked as a payback. And the payback is in-- in having yourself doing something, but also bringing up children who are creative in doing something. It's to me a payback to catch an old Nazi who is 80 years old now and to bring him to a court is not a great thing. I, however, would make him to realize that his life was very bad. That's something else. But the real payback is creation. And somebody said, our rabbi always said, Jews have no time for revenge. Jews have to build. And this is true, you have to build. And your generation are a payback for-- for-- for the bad times. 
INT: Do you think about those experiences very often? SF: Quite often. I spoke-- especially when I speak to my children. My children know every aspect of our-- we used to have a free house on discussion of that. And they know it. Even the grandchildren know. And-- but it has no-- we didn't do it on a specific purpose-- to look for revenge, or look to write a book, or look to become famous. I don't like that. I don't like to capitalize on problems. And I don't even like-- but what it taught me also about society in general, we have a very free society and everybody thinks that everybody owes them something-- that the government owes them something, that you are-- have right to do-- there's too much freedom specifically in medicine. Interfered with lots of transfusion. Hepatitis was the respect of too much freedom. People were afraid to ask intrusive questions to patients, and that was a big mistake. Because if you have too much freedom and you're don't guard freedom, you will have-- you will lose freedom. Freedom has a price to pay, and the price is to limit your freedom, too, for the good of our-- of our country, our society. This business-- we know facts about it. If people donated blood, being exposed to the gay society, for instance, to many other partners, the Red Cross didn't question that. They thought it's intrusive. It's not a good thing-- this was a great mistake. 
INT: Have you been back to Ukraine? SF: Yeah, I went back to visit my-- I didn't go specifically to see a place, to see where we are-- because to me all Europe is like not living. It's not anymore. But I went to see living relative, which we have to help. And that's what we are doing.  INT: Did you go home to Równe? Did you go to Równe? SF: I went to Równe to see our school, the place where we were and for-- we spent one day.  INT: When was this? SF: That was in '93.  INT: Do you dream about your experiences? SF: Actually, to tell you the truth, I don't. No, I tried-- it depends whom it hits. You see, I was lucky that it hit me at an age where you had no time to look back. I always look forwards, so I didn't want to dwell on that. But I can tell you generally I know many-- many people did much better after the Holocaust than they would do without the Holocaust. But this is not a very clever thing to say because immigrants always do better than the static population because immigrants are-- have a purpose when they come-- they change a country, one country to the other. They have a drive. And the drive is in them. And it's more genetically from what family they are. That doesn't happen only in Jewish family. I have Chinese people who lost lots of things in-- in Trinidad, for instance, and that-- I am speaking from experience. And they were taking away many things. They have, let's say, grocery store, a chain of stores. They were taken away. They came here with nothing. They are very rich people now again. 
INT: Is there anything you'd like to add as we wrap up? SF: To wrap up I have to thank God that we are all alive. That's number one. And it's no-- nobody did it on his own, only because of-- of-- of luck and my father and my father's foresight.  INT: Thank you, Dr. Feinman. SF: Thank you. This is a picture of my maternal grandmother. Her name is Ethel Welichko. This picture was taken in 1936 in Riga on the way from Soviet Russia to New York. This is the picture of my mother, Riva. This was taken at the-- the-- just prior to her marriage, and that was in 1921. And she was born in Russia, and-- and married my father in the city of Równe. And they moved to Germany, to Heidelberg, in 1922, where they lived for one or two years.  INT: What was your mother's last name? SF: Welichko.  INT: And her married name? SF: Her married name, it was Riva Feinman. This is a picture of myself at the age of two.  INT: What is your name? SF: My name is Saya Victor Feinman.  INT: Where was the photo taken? SF: That was taken in the city of Równe, after we came back from Germany.  INT: What year? SF: 1925. This is a group from our class at-- at the gymnasium in Poland. And if you can see, on the right side of the picture is myself, and there are three girl-- four girls from my-- from my class. Two of them perished during the war. One is alive in Israel. And one died in Switzerland one year ago. The gentleman in the back is a friend from school who-- who was an engineer in Russia and lived in Israel. 
INT: What's your name? SF: His name is Apel.  INT: What's your name? SF: Oh, I'm Saya Victor Feinman.  INT: About what year was this taken? SF: That was taken in 1938.  INT: Was this the Tarbut school? SF: Tarbut school, that was-- yeah.  INT: Do you remember any of the other names? SF: Yes. One of the-- the girl in the white coat, her name was Milla Axelrod. The girl in the-- in the middle is called Sawitska. She-- she was shot in Russia. And the other one was called Leah [? Botka, ?] and her married name was Pravchis. And she lived in Switzerland until a year and a half ago. This is my own picture taken in 1946, and my name is Saya Victor Feinman. And at that time I was second or third year in medicine-- medical school in Vienna. This is a picture taken at the day of my graduation on the 14th of July 1948. I'm there in the middle of the picture with all those flowers. To my right is my father, Rabbi Moses Feinman. To his right is a colleague of mine, Dr. Henry Neufeld. The lady to my left is Mrs. Neufeld, and the-- the rest of the people are friends from the University of Vienna.  INT: What is your name? SF: One is named Godfrey.  INT: What is your name? SF: Oh, Saya Victor Feinman. Should I start with that opener? This is a picture of my late mother, Mrs. Riva Feinman, which was taken in 1948 in Vienna. 
INT: When did she die? SF: My mother died in 1956 in Toronto. This is a picture of my wife, Felicia [? Bloch ?] Feinman. This is the day of her graduation in 1951 as a PhD of economics.  INT: Where was it taken/ SF: That was taken in-- in Vienna. CREW: OK. SF: This is a picture taken in 1952 in Niagara Falls on a trip. And from your right is my mother, Riva Feinman, my wife Felicia Feinman, my father Moses Feinman, and my younger brother David Feinman. It was taken in 1952. This is a picture of my late father Rabbi Moses Feinman taken in 1956 with his first grandchild and my first child Joyce Feinman Sasson.  INT: Where was it taken? SF: Taken in Toronto in 1956. This is a picture of my brother David. You see him to your left, David Feinman, and his daughter Ellen. And this is taken, I think, in-- in Boston in front of the Brandeis School. My brother lives in Toronto, and his daughter lives in Toronto. She is married, and her name is now Ellen Feinman Moss. And she is a mother of two children. This is-- this is my first daughter's family. To our right is Joyce Feinman. To the left is her husband Dr. Zion Sasson, and they have three children. In the middle is Tova, T-O-V-A, to the right is Gila, and the little one is called Shira, which means a song. And this is done on the day of the bat mitzvah of the-- of Tova. 
INT: What year? SF: That was 1995. This is a-- a picture of my younger daughter called Rena Feinman Siegel, who is a molecular biologist, a PhD. And her husband to the right of the picture is Dr. David Siegel who is an M.D. and a PhD. And their two children, the one with Dr. Siegel is-- the big one is called Avital, and the little one is-- [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] the little one is Ariel. And she's held by my grandchild Tova. And this was done in '95 during the bat mitzvah of Tova. This is my own picture taken on October the 24th, 1997 as a part of a interview by the covering the problems of hepatitis C in Canada. This is done in our laboratory, and you can see in the front lots of blood samples to-- to look more impressive. Oh, this is an award presented to me on June the 2nd, 1997 by the University of Toronto for-- as a life achievement award for the recognition of contributions to the development of gastroenterology and hepatology in Toronto.  INT: Do you teach at the University of Toronto? SF: Yeah, I teach in the University of Toronto, and this was presented by the Division of Gastroenterology at a special evening.