INT: Today is the 2nd of April, 1998. This is an interview with survivor, Rudolf Pollak. The interviewer is Joanna Buchan. The interviews taking place in London in the UK, and the language of this interview will be English. My name is Joanna Buchan, J-O-A-N-N-A B-U-C-H-A-N. I'm conducting the interview with survivor Rudolf Pollak, P-O-L-L-A-K. The interview is taking place in London on the 2nd of April, 1998, and the language of this interview will be English. And this is the first tape of the interview with Mr. Rudolf Pollak. Could you just say your name on tape for me, please sir, and spell it. RP: I'm Rudy Pollak, correctly Rudolf Pollak-- R-U-D-O-L-F P-O-L-L-A-K.  INT: And what's your date of birth? RP: I'm born on the 17th of October, the year 1932.  INT: And how old are you today? RP: 66.  INT: And where were you born? RP: I'm born in a small town with the name of Fischern, which nowadays lost its name because as the Czech Republic, it has now only the name Rybáre.  INT: And could you spell Fischern for me? RP: Fischern is quite easy to spell and to pronounce-- F-I-S-C-H-E-R-N.  INT: And when you were born there, what country was it in, in 1932? RP: In 1932, it was Czechoslovakian republic.  INT: And what was your father's name? RP: My father, too, had the name Rudolf, Rudolf Pollak.  INT: And your mother? RP: Klara-- I was born Pollak, before it was Fischer, F-I-S-C-H-E-R. 
INT: Why don't we start with your family, Rudolf. Tell me a bit about your parents when you were small. What-- what do you remember-- say of your mother, what do you remember of your mother when you were a child? RP: Oh, I remember those days-- at those parents near to me. My mother was a-- a doctor, and she was able to keep a surgery within the flat we had to live in. And this flat was built by my father. The-- he was a head of a department of construction in the small village, and community savings bank wanted a new building, which were at a-- party offices, and so on. And for a larger part, it was-- had flats. And so he was able to alter one flat, which was meant to be a four-room flat, into a seven-room flat, with-- so a-- with a small child's room, and my mother got her surgery. And we could be together for most of the time-- if my father had the chance to come from his office, so his office were also in this building, to join us for lunch.  INT: Where was this, you were growing up? What town was this? RP: Is it-- during those times, it was the town of Fischern.  INT: Where you were born? RP: There-- born, and this town was later to become a part of Karlsbad.  INT: Were your parents both Jewish? RP: No, my mother comes from a pure Jewish family, and my father comes from a pure non-Jewish family. 
INT: Do you know how they met? RP: Yeah, they met as pupils in the schools-- they went to same schools, became friends, went together to Prague-- the main city of this country-- to study. Were friends, was-- and a little bit later, they decided to marry.  INT: What year did they get married? RP: It was, I think, '29.  INT: Was it important for your mother that being-- your mother was Jewish, your father was not Jewish-- were you brought up, yourself, Jewish? RP: No, I was not brought up Jewish. But in those days, and in this part of the world, most people were very secular, so the question of religion was not a very important one to most of the people, and we didn't belong to the other part.  INT: What nationality did your parents consider themselves? Your father, for instance? RP: They were born German-speaking, my father as well as my mother. And there was a census, [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] during which they were asked to which nationality they belong. And they both-- because they were German-speaking-- considered themselves as belong to the German nation.  INT: At one time, that part of Europe was the Austria-Hungarian Empire, controlled by Austria-- RP: Yeah.  INT: --so that it would have been a German-- German would have been the accepted language. Is that right? RP: Up to the end of the Second World War, it was Austria-Hungarian, and multicultural, a multilingual state, with a main language, German. And in this region where we lived, many more German-speaking people just thought they had the right language, but it was the only one necessary. Many more Czechs living in this region learned German and Germans did learn Czech. And that was one of the region of later difficulties. 
INT: So that was up until the end of the First World War? It had been Austria-Hungarian? RP: Yeah.  INT: Was there any opposition, do you know, from either your mother's family or your father's family to them getting married? RP: There was no opposition, as far as I know, from my mother's side. But I don't know very much about it. But I could imagine that the mother of my father, yeah, didn't agree totally. But she was proud of this children, coming to a bourgeois rank, because she comes from a little bit lower standard of doing [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] manual work, more or less  INT: So she was pleased her son had become an engineer? RP: Yeah.  INT: Was marrying a doctor? RP: And-- yeah, and she more or less forced my parents to get a good flat, and to-- [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] stuff that was good furniture, belonging to their class. And that made some troubles to my parents, because they were indebted in 1938, and they had to leave.  INT: What sort of things did you do when you were a little child, growing up in-- in the village? RP: I don't remember very much about it. Just one thing I do remember is that from the highest floor in this big office building, yeah, from the attic, yeah, we could see always the trees, which were a football field, where my father could show me football play without paying entrance. [LAUGHS] 
INT: Did you like-- you like football, then? RP: No, I don't like it at all. [LAUGHS]  INT: Your father liked football? RP: I don't think he liked it very much. He was [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] of the sportish type, yeah. And [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] was a member of a club, but I was too small to take part.  INT: What sort of things did your parents like to do? RP: The-- they hadn't very much time to spare, because both were professionally engaged. My mother had to carry on this profession, which meant doing a little bit of learning, again. She once-- when she was at the university, she thought about staying there and doing a-- a career within the university. So she was interested in getting some information in her field. And my father, he also, those days, needed more times than he had in this office, for doing his work. So many evenings, they brought things, and plans, and to do it in his small office in the flat. And even doing those mathematical things, on statics, yeah, takes time. As the head of the office, he was responsible for doing those things. And one thing they tried to do was go into a small [? [NON-ENGLISH], ?] run by an Italian, family-- young man here with his sister, and they liked to drink wine at a small [? walk. ?] But it was not alcoholic excess, as they had a 1/8-- not-- not a quarter, or a liter, but the half of it was the normal measures. They-- but they enjoyed it. And sometimes, those Italians invited them to eat spaghetti. They were not only just customers, they were really friends. And later on, in-- if I can jump, because it fits right in here-- this small wine place was destroyed by the Germans. And this young man became a man-- who worked with [INAUDIBLE] as a double agent. He-- as he could speak very well German, yeah, he joined a German [? nice ?] organization in Italy, and worked as an agent for [INAUDIBLE]. And he survived. We later met him once. 
INT: What sort of friends did you have when you were a-- a boy growing up? RP: I don't remember any friends. I don't know why.  INT: You don't remember them, or-- or you think-- did you stay with your mother a lot in-- in the-- the flat? RP: I just don't remember.  INT: What about your mother's family, your grandparents and uncles, aunts, things like that? Did you have much contact with them? RP: Yes, [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] with my parents, we sometimes went to this small Italian place. And just around the corner was a house which belonged to my grandparents. And one uncle and aunt also lived in this house, and together with my grandparents, two other daughters. And that's one thing I do remember, being invited for eating a scrambled egg sometimes.  INT: Did they keep a-- RP: This was a very warm and welcoming family, just-- more or less different to my family-- to my father's family.  INT: Different in-- RP: Which of course, there were also friendly. But it's not easy-- the warmth, I could feel. And I miss today. Well-- it came from my mother's side.  INT: Were they observant Jewish family? Did they keep holidays? RP: They were observant Jewish family, but they were very secular, and didn't-- as far as I was told, I don't remember that, being so quite difficult and a ridiculous, using such strange a language like Hebrew, nobody knows about. And-- but as I belonged to this community, there were no absolute strangers to it. But they didn't feel very much attracted to it. 
INT: Was there a synagogue in-- RP: There was a synagogue which was burned down in '38.  INT: Do you remember that? RP: No. I haven't seen the synagogue burning. I remember being quite enthusiastic about this city full of joy, being freed by the Germans, and-- [PAUSES FOR 5 SECONDS] but for my parents, it was not so joyful in those days.  INT: Why did you feel joyful? Did someone tell you that this was a great event? RP: Everybody was on the streets, and they were shouting and waving. And I thought this could be a future for me full of joy. And--  INT: So what exactly happened in 1938 to the-- RP: The-- the German troops marched into the city, with-- in uniforms and tanks and cars. And the people crowded along the street, and--  INT: So you-- your village was part of the Sudetenland, was it? RP: It's part of the Sudetenland. And [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] as the Czechs were not regarded as being the same levels as the Germans during the Austria-Hungaria, they used the chance of their own state, to push a little bit the Czech languages on it. Not every one of the German population, yeah, could really like it. And so there was a kind of movement, yeah, with the name, Heim ins Reich.  INT: Heim ins Reich? RP: Heim ins Reich. Come back to your home as a German.  INT: The Reich? RP: And it was organized by sport clubs and this and that. And they were quite [INAUDIBLE] that in the end, it happened to a part of the upcoming glory. And most people were thinking in this way. And you know, I remember no details, but I remember the feeling. It was a joyful event. 
INT: This was-- this would be after the Munich Agreement in 1938? Is that-- RP: No, no, the Munich Agreement-- '38, brought as--  INT: Sudetenland-- RP: Sudetenland back to--  INT: --to Germany, yeah. That was the-- RP: But just to be more or less in time-- I have to jump back, if you allow me-- 1934, the-- there was-- there came to power the laws from Nuremberg. And I much later learned that the man who made those laws, [? practically, ?] whom wrote the comments about it, Globke, was the first state secretary of Adenauer. So the continuity, which I know about today, yeah, was not easy to know in those days. But my parents realized that inventing those Nuremberg laws, there is to expect some kind of trouble. They didn't know what is going to come.  INT: Your parents-- RP: So they-- my-- my parents knew about it. And they decided I should be alone. They always wanted three children, at least a pair that no one is alone, and so it was a kind of spare part. And after the Nuremberg laws, decided they couldn't take the responsibility to bring another life into the world. That's the reason why I had to stay alone. And maybe this knowledge, within my family, they couldn't talk about it with a child of three years. Maybe it could have led to a kind of depressing feeling-- depressed feeling in the family.  INT: So your parents consciously decided, after Nuremberg, not to have any more children? RP: Correct. 
INT: So you are an only child? RP: Yes, that's the reason why.  INT: Were-- were your parents-- did they talk about things in front of you, in 1938, when the Germans moved in? RP: No, no, they tried to hide it from me as far as they [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] could. And I didn't-- I can't remember the moment which I certainly must have known about, when my mother was taken out of the flat on this evening, when the synagogues were burning. They tried to make a little pogrom, just to prove their eagerness. And they tried to get hands on all the Jews, which they knew about it. But they didn't know about my mother being Jewish. Sometimes my mother was-- talked how can such a bright and beautiful woman like you marry a Jew? But she was Jewish, and this Pollak, which is sometimes a Jewish name, yeah, was absolutely not Jewish, yeah. But someone knew about my mother, and told this crowd, collecting people, yeah, why do you forget about this woman? So they called my mother, too. And they brought those people to a [INAUDIBLE] the city-- to the hotel, which has a great theater, a room like a theater, yeah. They were [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] told to stand with their face to the wall. And after-- behind their backs, and [INAUDIBLE] with guns, and so on, and the-- my mother thought that they would be shot at the next moment. But it later turned out they were all allowed to go, but they got a time limit, yeah. You have to leave this town after this period-- you are [? Volksfrei. ?] I don't know English expression for it-- free as a bird, yeah. That's your-- everybody is allowed to do everything on you-- it-- we never be punished. This a word coming from the Middle Ages. 
INT: So, in other-- what it meant was that-- RP: Everybody--  INT: If your mother didn't leave, it would-- RP: Everybody would be all right if he kill her.  INT: Anyone who attacked her or killed, or did any harm to her-- RP: Yeah, yeah.  INT: --would be unpunishable? RP: Yeah.  INT: It would be perfectly-- RP: And this was a solution not easy to handle. My father was told to ask for divorce. If he wouldn't agree, he couldn't stay long in his office. And my-- my parents tried to get papers to go anywhere, but they didn't succeed in time. So they decided to make a suicide. And I was told by my mother later that they talked with me as good as [INAUDIBLE], I would stay, whatever would be and wherever they would go with them. And or course, I wanted to stay with them. And my mother, being a doctor, knew what to do. They started with a sleeping pills and opened the gas. But my grandmother somehow got the idea that something could go wrong, and she took [INAUDIBLE], with some other people, broke the door of the flat, and we were discovered. [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] Brought to hospital. My mother was not treated, absolutely not-- let her lie. If she survives, she survives. She doesn't survive, her colleagues wouldn't do-- just not turn a hand. I was treated, my father was treated, and from this time on, my mother was not absolutely in good health condition. To add something which could sound curious, from the hospital, my parents were taken to prison and accused of murdering themself, of murder, that belonged to me, and of trying to arouse a public resistance. Because if a pair of people, being so well known and loved everywhere, yeah, could do a thing like a suicide, not for private reasons, [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] this kind of public reason, but only to try to rouse the community. And this was my first contact with police. And took a-- was later told that my statement was very good, and helped. And a doctor in Karlsbad, for neurology, [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] had to test my parents. And in this paper I gave to you, you found that text of this testimony? And [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] some weeks later, my parents were freed. The time set was run over. It became known that a-- this time setting was unlegal-- nobody wanted-- this was just one person who wanted to prove himself. 
INT: This deadline your mother had been told she had to leave town by? RP: The deadline, yeah, yeah-- says, someone who wanted to prove himself as being very loyal to this new regime. And the process, the court ruling against my parents was put down from Berlin.  INT: Was overturned? RP: Was over-- the-- it-- it never came to a sentence. But they were freed from prison. And during this time, in the prison, my mother tried to help a woman acting some way distraught, [? acting ?] her. And this led to a disturbance in her back, which caused her pain forever.  INT: She tried to help another prisoner? RP: She tried to help, to calm this other woman. And--  INT: We've just come to the end of the first tape there. RP: Yeah.  INT: Of the interview with Mr. Rudolf Pollak. We were talking there about the-- the extreme lengths that your parents were driven to in 1938. But just prior to that, when you-- you were six years old in 1938, you'd started going to school already-- RP: Yeah.  INT: A junior school. RP: Yeah.  INT: What sort of school did you go to? RP: It was a-- a normal school. And I have a picture, a photo, with a big cone we get for the first school day. A-- it's a--  INT: Full of sweets? RP: Full of sweets, of course.  INT: Yes, full of sweets. Yeah. RP: --and standing in front of the door. And later, when I came back to Karlsbad to show this place to my sons, I wanted to see this door, to-- to show it to them, and I didn't find it anymore. The building still existed, but the Czechs altered it. It's no longer a bank, but a [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] kind of government building, and they added another wing. They ruined my door. [LAUGHS] 
INT: Did you like school? RP: No, I didn't like school. Well, I liked to learn-- that was always interested in. But [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] I had to attend too many schools. It added up to 13 schools up to '45. And things which were taught in one school, yeah, were not-- haven't-- haven't been taught in other schools. I not always could follow the teachings very well.  INT: Do you remember what sort of atmosphere there was in the school around 1938, with the-- RP: No, '38, no. But one example-- I wasn't allowed to attend sports, and I wasn't allowed to be in a sports club for not being German enough. And this should have some influence not only on my physically state, but on-- onto my mind. It's-- I would have been a danger to every friend I could have found, so I stayed more or less alone. And as my mother didn't have her profession anymore, she had time to me-- and time for me. And so it-- it was quite OK. But in 1944, my mother was called to the school, and the teacher, class teacher, told her-- she-- why she doesn't send me to a secondary school, the gymnasium. Bright child like I, it's unreasonable to-- And this teacher always wore his brown uniform to school. He was a member of NSKK, this national socialist driving groups, that they had their motorcycles and [? enjoyed it. ?] And so my mother told him, it's not my idea, it's your idea. So he blushed and became silent. 
INT: So this teacher, guest teacher, was a Nazi? RP: This-- it was not a guest, this was a-- it's a normal teacher. And during his hours at the school, he always wore his uniform. He tried it. Yeah, and he knew about me, but he was too stupid to know-- to realize that this was a-- not of any sense to ask my mother to send me to a secondary school. So sometimes it's funny.  INT: Do you remember being in hospital yourself after-- RP: No.  INT: You don't-- you don't have any memories of that? RP: I-- I don't have any memories.  INT: Where were you when your parents were taken to prison? Where did you-- RP: I spent some this time with my grandmother-- my father's mother. And she took me on walks, because I had a bad cough-- you know those days, [GERMAN], don't know if there's an English word for it. It's this-- a special kind of a cough which can become serious. And I was taken to the gas works because breathing there was thought to be helpful. And afterwards, I was taken on a walk in a small wood, little bit above, yeah. This, later, I was told, this was done because my parents from the prison could see me there, but I didn't know that they were under--  INT: Was this your-- RP: --behind those iron bars.  INT: Was this your father's parents you were with, or your mother's RP: This was my-- this were my father's-- my parents. My mother's parents [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] were not able to look after me because they too tried to leave Karlsbad as soon as possible, so they went to [? Budapest, ?] afterwards to Prague. [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] One curious thing I was told of, in 1914, [PAUSES FOR 5 SECONDS] when the World War was about to start, and the Czechoslovakian Republic still didn't exist, my-- my grandfather was the head of the station in Karlsbad. And in Karlsbad, an internationally renown resort, there were many American guests. And I hoped to have a chance to come back to the United States. And my grandfather organized the train, the last train to reach Bremen for the last ship. And it was possible to do so. And when the American guests left with this special train, one person came to my grandfather and took his wallet out and was very thick, stuffed, yeah-- take whatever you want. He said, no, I'm an officer. I'm-- but if you would like-- I would like to have one of your cigars. I remember. He got the cigar, and he got the promise-- whenever you need me, I'll be able to help you. This man was later President Hoover. Here, my grandfather could have known what was going to come. He never wanted to see it. And so my uncle, the man of the oldest sister of my mother, yeah, he was a doctor, too, in Karlsbad, but not working with skin diseases, but working with the guests on the internal diseases, which they got cured in Karlsbad. And he was told by many of his patients, yeah, may we offer to-- to come-- we can help you. We have got some means. But he wanted-- he didn't want to know it. 
INT: This was your mother's brother-in-law? The husband of-- RP: My mother's brother-in-law, yeah.  INT: And what-- your-- your grandfather is-- this is your mother's father who was Jewish? RP: Yeah.  INT: They had gone to Prague, then. Did they stay in Prague during the war? RP: For a couple of years. And I remember that I twice visited them. They took us-- my mother and me-- [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] and even the other sister with this doctor, the man, when there were something to occur, we didn't know what will-- [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] things of which we didn't know the consequences. The introduction of the yellow star, for example. We didn't know if I had to wear it, had my mother to wear it or not. And what will be the reaction? What will be happening to [INAUDIBLE]. So they could go to Prague. And the doctor and his wife had a small flat, we could sleep. And my grandfather, the grandmother and the remaining two daughters had one room in a flat, and divided by a [? carpet. ?] It was possible to live in a restricted area, but it was possible to live.  INT: And did they stay there throughout the war? RP: No, at some point, they were transported to Theresienstadt. And we have one postcard from my grandmother telling us the death of my grandfather. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] She wasn't allowed to say that-- to write-- that he died, yeah. But as a sender, yeah, she mentioned Polina [? Sara ?] Fischer, widow. That was the way to say something happened to my grandfather. And from Theresienstadt, my grandmother, the-- and the two other sisters, were transported to the east. We have the transport numbers, and it is known that none of these transports survived. 
INT: What happened to you and your parents when they were released from prison? Could you stay in Karlsbad? RP: We-- I don't remember the exact state, but they knew it was better to go. And they got some help from the [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] dispensing chemist, yeah, with whom my mother worked very closely. He took over the debt my parents had, and had a [? pawn ?] [? front, ?] yeah. He agreed to take the things which belonged to my mother's surgery. And he deposited it, and it was-- there was an official version, but my father tried to pay back the debts, and this dispensing chemist just wanted to keep it for us for the time afterwards. This wasn't very successful, because in '45, there were some bomb attacks on Karlsbad, not very heavy, but one big bomb hitted this bank building my father had built, and we were living there at the foot of a tower. And only-- it was constructed extremely good, only the front side of the tower, yeah, collapsed like wings going down. And the storage room for my mother's inventory was just the upper floor. So a few things remained, a little bit damaged. And some of them fell down for maybe six or eight floors. And--  INT: So where did you family go then? Did they stay in Karlsbad? RP: No, they-- we went to Berlin, is it-- was a bigger city, the best place to look after a job. My father very soon had a job in building a factory site, a-- a small factory. And brother of his could make the contact to a small constructing company. This head of this small construction company didn't care about the family, and so on. But he said, it's too small to pay him as a engineer, [GERMAN], was the German title. Civil engineer was a-- earlier, and he had some additional degrees made. This was why he was called to be as the head of this department. In Stettin, he worked as a technician and sometimes as a lorry driver, but he had a job with this small construction firm. And we could look for a flat and live there. But many years later, I was told, that for asking for his brother, my father's brother lost his job. 
INT: What do you remember of time in Berlin? RP: Was beautiful. It was-- I was told we are going to see the world, and this was the start for me. I was six years old, and I never seen shops like those before. And I never was hungry. I just realized, very much later, we lived in a small pension-- pension-- it's a small kind of hotel.  INT: A little hotel. RP: Yeah, and it was not possible to do some cooking in this small room. But we could fetch a ready meal from a small restaurant nearby. And my mother not always had a good appetite, and-- but I was fed. [LAUGHS]  INT: Did you go to school in Berlin? RP: Not in Berlin, it started a little bit later, only a few weeks there. When my father had this new job in Stettin, we [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] could live quite normally. And I [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] had to attend the school. It was compulsory. The first place we lived in was part of a-- a flat. I don't know, was two rooms which were rented to us as a-- and [PAUSES FOR 5 SECONDS] in the floor below of this flat was this family we were living with, yeah. There was a-- a Jewish [GERMAN]-- [? orphanery? ?]  INT: Orphanage? RP: Orphan-- orphanage, yeah. And in one night, it was in-- before the start of the war, this orphanage was cleared. They were brought away. We didn't-- yeah. 
INT: Did you know that yourself at the time? RP: We know-- we didn't, we heard some rumor in the night, but in the morning, we were told what had been going on. And you know about this Nazi regime, it was putting some people in charge of houses, and then another one being in charge of a group of houses, [GERMAN]. And this [? [GERMAN], ?] yeah, stopped this crowd from getting us out from our own. He said, no, this is Germany, we have to deal correctly. You have the order to take these childs. You have no order to take this family. [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] Correct, they said. They--  INT: So they took Jewish orphans, but they didn't take you? RP: Yeah.  INT: What sort of school did you go to in Stettin? RP: It was just a normal, ordinary school. Nothing special.  INT: So was-- RP: We--  INT: You were there with all the other little German boys and girls? RP: Yeah, and we could later change to a small flat outside of Stettin, in a village called [GERMAN], and then could get a little bit better flat with three rooms and a kitchen and another small place outside Klütz, was the name of this city, Klütz respectively [? [GERMAN]-- ?] sometimes small villages are fitted together. And from this place in Stettin, Klütz, my father had to travel by train, just as a commuter-- [? you know, ?] a commuter does, and I went to school there. I just remember it was a very long walk. And it can be very cold in-- near the [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] eastern sea. 
INT: Do you remember what sorts of classes you were doing at this school? RP: In German [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] schools, you are-- have to do the same schedule, everyone, and I did the same schedule as everyone, except of going to-- attending the sport lessons.  INT: Were you regarded as Jewish in the school? RP: I don't remember, but I-- I remember of not being [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] able to find a friend, unless it were a small street group. We played a little bit together, and-- but no real friendship was possible. But in those-- in this place, we are allowed to have a little garden, part of it. And afterwards, another neighbor, which was a [GERMAN]--  INT: So he was in charge of-- RP: A little bit higher-- higher, [INAUDIBLE].  INT: --the neighborhood? RP: Yeah, who was a tailor, yeah, became very friendly to us. My mother helped him, when he was under pressure with some [? union ?] finishing. And he did some favors, and-- and even allowed us to cultivate a small garden just along his fence. It happened because my mother didn't have the-- a full ration book, and by growing some fruit, vegetables, yeah, it was quite good live-- a positive feeling. And even my father could put some-- some small cages to keep a-- oh-- so small beast you can eat-- kaninchen.  INT: Rabbits. RP: Rabbits, yeah, you could keep some rabbits. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] From this a place in-- which was 20 minutes by a train to Stettin, yeah-- I could see a very heavy bombing on [GERMAN], the 20th of April, in Stettin. And the city burned as bright, that-- that-- so that I could read the paper thrown out of the airplanes with messages-- it was, of course, it was strictly forbidden, but everyone did. But the city burning, summer-- 
INT: What year was that, when the bombing of Stettin happened? When was that? RP: It was in '42, I think.  INT: You were then-- RP: And after-- afterwards, we were-- [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] we had to leave, relocated, and my father's mother, yeah, took us in Karlsbad. We had no place to go. And she, nevertheless, was friendly to us and took us. And--  INT: So you, your father, and your mother then moved back from Stettin to Karlsbad. RP: No, I've to tell-- my father was drawn to the Organisation Todt.  INT: And what is that? RP: It's an organization run by the Nazis, that they wore uniforms, but they were doing construction works wherever it was needed-- mainly building, or rebuilding roads and the railway tracks, sometimes-- I read later-- constructing camps in-- and the whole construction company, with which my father worked, yeah-- was drawn as a total. So he was in a dilemma. He was not allowed to be an officer-- German officer, because of his wife. But as his family was strong, he wasn't allowed to resist, because this wasn't over. So he told the hirings about his dilemma. And they said, don't talk about it, this thing, just go.  INT: So he was conscripted-- RP: So my father was inscripted into this thing, yeah. And he had a uniform, with a Hakenkreuz on his--  INT: The swastika? RP: A swastika, yeah. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS]  INT: Did he-- RP: And he came-- he came to the east, the first place he worked was Vilna-- no Vitebsk-- Vitebsk was a place where had-- had to reconstruct the railway station. And as soon as finish it, yeah, the Russians reversed, so where the front is moving. And it was just as it was ready-- 
INT: Blown up? RP: Blown up. And he worked at-- near Vilna, in a small town, like Lida, and [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] there he-- [PAUSES FOR 5 SECONDS] I started telling another way around. He got a skin infection, which made it difficult for him, and he came to a military hospital. But they were unable to treat him sufficiently, and it itched terrible. And he had the same thing many years before, my mother could be very helpful to him. It was finished within a few days. And from this hospital, he had once to go to his unit, because secretary of this construction firm urged, yeah, said he must do the lists for payment for-- because this Organisation Todt, yeah, paid this construction firm, yeah, like it's done in a civil-- nonmilitary way. And he as a responsible officer, was the one who had to keep the lists and so on. And he surely would better have been treated, but he did it because his bosses felt he was so responsible, it was a area which had many partisans. It was a dangerous area. So they carried the guns, sharpened in the--  INT: Loaded. RP: Loaded and not secured, but--  INT: With the safety catch off? RP: Safety-- safety catch off, yeah. And [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] until they to his quarter, yeah, shot came out of his pistol, and another of his comrades was wounded. He-- my father didn't believe that he was only-- [GERMAN], it didn't get-- went into his body, but only it-- it touched his skin. 
INT: Slightly wounded? RP: Very slightly wounded. But he had to put some plaster on it, yeah. And my father thought, it must be heavier, and some [PAUSES FOR 7 SECONDS] [? guard ?] questions could arise. And so it could become known that he is a-- [? not ?] was a member of the German troops, is carrying a German officer's uniform, so he shot himself.  INT: And we've just come to the end of the second tape, there.  INT: You were talking there about the circumstances of your father's death. And I wondered if it would be easier for you to tell me that story in German. [GERMAN] RP: Thank you. Thank you very much. I think I can do it in English. Would you like to ask the questions? How-- it would help me how to start.  INT: Your father had the responsibility of making payments in the firm where he worked. RP: Yeah.  INT: And he was called back from the hospital to do this. RP: Right.  INT: On his journey back, from the hospital to the office, he was with other-- were they German soldiers he was with, or coworkers? RP: No, he-- no, he, he spent with some engineers he was working closely with and quite near the quarters and departments. And so he went to [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] a dinner. And coming from the dinner, home to the path, on this way, it happened that he-- a bullet from his gun-- 
INT: His gun went off? RP: His gun went off, yeah. And-- [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] an other engineer was slightly wounded. Only, it's his skin, but he didn't believe it.  INT: Your father didn't believe? RP: And my-- my father didn't want to believe it. He was very unstable, because this is a skin condition, which my mother had healed, very easily. And those other doctors couldn't heal him. And something itching can make you furious, if you-- [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] nobody could like it. And so my father was well cared of. And that's one word I love to use in German, because you know, this English expression, the [NON-ENGLISH] is a worker who is, slightly above the others, responsible, yeah? And this was a family which were really friends, in Stettin. And this Paul [NON-ENGLISH], I remember his name just now, was told, keep an eye on this Pollak. Yeah? And he spent some time with him and had, oh, just to leave the room for going to the toilet, or something like this. And when he came back, yeah, my father lay across a table, had himself a shot in his head.  INT: Your father had shot himself? RP: In the head, and, one day later, he died. And [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] it wouldn't have been necessary, because the other engineer wasn't severely wounded. But he was unable to realize it. And he left only a note, beside him. [PAUSES FOR 5 SECONDS] [GERMAN] 'Just give a note to my wife, nothing else is needed.' [PAUSES FOR 7 SECONDS] And this was a message for my mother to follow. [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] But she decided not to do so. She received his message some weeks later. But the moment my father died, he had an heart attack and fell. He was, for a moment, unconscious in Carlsbad. Later she realized what was-- what has happened. And she decided [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] for the living against the dead, give us a chance. And I was-- it was '44. I was 12 years old. It's-- it was-- I knew, very clearly, what it was, what it meant. [PAUSES FOR 5 SECONDS] And I agreed. And my mother proposed, let's try it. [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] But I nearly lost my nerves when the bombing of Carlsbad started in '45. And I knew what bombings meant. This living in Stettin. And one day, I saw the airplanes coming and small little black drops underneath. And I ran into the house, into the fireplace and tried to hide. And nobody else would realize, these were bombs falling. And neither I nor the others realized, if you see a up and just above you, something's dropping out, yeah? It will be-- it should be dropped down a little bit further away. I-- and, and those-- after those bombings, I-- [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] yes, I had-- those bombs were, were of [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] personal interest to us. Because when we came from Stettin to Carlsbad, we had a few things left. And these were stored with-- [NON-ENGLISH], it was a company which delivers furniture and so on, from one town to another. 
INT: Oh, a removal firm. RP: A removal firm, yeah? And well, I start with two removal firms. And both of them were hit by the bombs. [LAUGHS] I see later, they are discs, yeah, and they're stable like this. Touching it, it fall down. It was burned. And [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] I knew there was a [NON-ENGLISH] personal belongings. But nevertheless, I lost my nerve and I asked my mother to let us try. But she said, no. We agreed to try just for a certain time. Let's fix a date. One year after it was his death. And exactly on this day, the Russian troops entered Carlsbad.  INT: So you and your mother fixed the date a year after your father had died? RP: Yeah.  INT: And if things weren't any better, then you would also kill yourselves? RP: Yeah.  INT: But on that day, the Russians arrived? RP: Mhm.  INT: What had life been like for you and your mother in Carlsbad, with your father's mother? RP: Oh. [SIGHS] It was wonderful for us. We had a shed. We had a roof above our heads. It was terrible with [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] those small beasts, like lice. It wasn't lice. I don't know the English word.  INT: Fleas? RP: [? Wanze. ?]  INT: [? Wanze, ?] fleas? RP: [? Wanzen. ?] Not, not flea, fleas has jumping, yeah?  INT: Mhm. RP: But the [? Wanzen ?] are a little bit larger. And they like to hide in the walls and the beds. And in the night, they are doing their work. And I had 70 bites all over my body, and I couldn't do anything. And my grandmother didn't allow us to care for having these terrible beasts killed. It would be a shame for the house, for the family. And once my father came to visit us, at-- [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] during his holiday. And my mother tried to clean up everything. She longed to see him and wanted to be perfect. As soon as my mother had washed up the steps, you know? My grandmother came and did the same, just to prove my mother that she can't do even that. And on the 20th of July, when the attempt was made by Stauffenberg, yeah? She-- 
INT: The attempt on Hitler's life? RP: On Hitler, yeah. She knelt down on her knees between the crucifix and thanked for God's help to keep Hitler alive.  INT: Was your grandmother a Nazi supporter? RP: She was, as good as she could. Nevertheless, she took us.  INT: So she wasn't a Nazi party member? RP: I don't know if she was a party, a Nazi party member, another. It was only a very small house. And we lived in the attic. And my mother-- my grandmother had one room and the basement, you know, to sleep, to cook. And we had to use this as a kitchen, too. And a little yard with some chicken and so on, and little fruit in the garden, growing. And the main floor was occupied by a family, which had maybe six or eight children. And their mother was proud of those and [? Mutterkreuz, ?] cross, here, which was awarded for a mother who brought many sons for--  INT: The Nazi party gave rewards to women who had children. RP: For-- yeah.  INT: Yeah. RP: It's yeah, well, extremely. But-- so it was a place to survive.  INT: But your grandmother sympathies-- RP: Were absolute--  INT: --were with, with the Nazis. RP: Absolutely. And she-- I'm sure she was angry with my father for brought so much risk and shame to her family.  INT: What was her name? What was her first name? RP: Anna, Anna Pollak. 
INT: We should mention here also the names of your other grandparents. RP: Yeah. And my-- it was Polina, the name of my grandmother.  INT: And her surname? RP: Edward [? Hermann, ?] [? Hermann, ?] my grandfather. The three are her sisters, Valerie-- we have to talk about her later. She died in Theresienstadt-- and [NON-ENGLISH] and Annie. [NON-ENGLISH] is a-- a little bit lovelier form from Anna.  INT: A nickname. RP: And Annie, Annie, Anna, nickname, yeah? And the oldest sister was-- [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] Valerie. She married to a man who was doctor. I told you already about him. And [NON-ENGLISH] then came my mother and came [NON-ENGLISH]. She was very much interested in living in the house, and not [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] liked very much. Not the outgoing type only. And the, the last one was Annie, who had a small shop for coals and some construction materials. In those old days, the payment for even head of a station wasn't very good. But he was awarded some help. And one of the things what he was allowed to have, a coal shop. Because a company had coals. It was a easy way to make the life a little bit easier.  INT: And his name was Fischer? RP: Fischer.  INT: Yes? Your late grandfather? RP: And the youngest of his daughters, right, took over the coal shop. And it was a wonderful place for me to play. Yeah?  INT: Well-- RP: Becoming dirty and [LAUGHS] dusty. Yes, I remember you asked, much earlier, about any remembrance from the time before I was six. Those were some wonderful memories. And yes, I had my grandmother had two sons, also. But they're dead. They died, very soon, being small childs. 
INT: They died as-- when they were little children? RP: Very little children. They should have graves in the Jewish cemetery in Carlsbad. I looked for gravestones, but I couldn't find it.  INT: What sort of things did you do when you were staying in your grandmother's house? RP: Oh.  INT: Did you go to school? RP: I did go to school, with this [? nice ?] teacher, who asked my mother I should be sent to a better school. And I didn't do very much else. Sometimes we went to a neighbor, who had a shop for cars. He was a mechanic. And he was a communist. And he listened to Radio Moscow. He allowed us to listen, too. Nobody cared too much about that being dangerous. And he was only a communist up to the time the Russians came. Not every Russian behaved the way he appreciated it. [LAUGHS]  INT: So when the law came in saying that Jews had to wear a yellow star-- RP: Yeah.  INT: --did you and your mother have to? RP: No. We had the privilege, as living in a mixed family, not to wear a yellow star.  INT: What happens when-- to you and your mother when the Russians arrived? Do you remember where you were? RP: We felt, we felt, we felt free. We work already hard. My-- it's a little, almost like-- to jump back, to keep the line a little better. A few days before the Russians came, a friend of my parents came together with his wife. He was a German officer. And [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] of the German type. But he didn't think it was good to stay at the military. And he turned away. And we had him in this [? Nazi ?] house. 
INT: He, he was a deserter? RP: He was a deserter, yeah. We had him, with his wife, in our small room for nearly a week. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] Then my mother asked him to look for another place. And as soon he was out, yeah, he went to the German police. And he told them, he had-- she has something in mind. She doesn't want to make troubles, but couldn't that be possible that a German officer, in those times, where every man is needed, yeah, has so much spare time? So they greeted her, said, no, that's wrong. We will look after it. Yeah? She was always, there was no possible-- possibility to trace him. Yeah? But in case anything could have been told by those other people living there, yeah? She would have a wild west. She had nerves like steel in those days.  INT: So she went, herself, to report, before anyone else could do the reporting? RP: Yeah.  INT: Do you remember, when you saw the Russians arrive? Do you remember when you saw your first Russian soldier? RP: I don't remember any of that either. It's just, I knew it meant life for me.  INT: Do you remember seeing them in the street or anything like that? RP: Yes, we had a good conductor-- good conduct with the Russians. Because my mother was the only specialist for venereal disease. She was needed, even by Russians. She had to lead the department in hospitals. She had a small surgery in, in a flat. And I had to divide the visitors, which shouldn't better see one another. This one are Russian officers. These are Czechs. These are German. And someone put in this a kitchen and someone in the sleeping room. [LAUGHS] Yeah? And-- 
INT: Had your mother been able to work as a doctor during the war? RP: No. She was absolutely forbidden. And she didn't want to start. And soon-- I, I have pictures of her being so slender. And she hadn't been for, for many years, able to read medicine. And her profession, they-- of course, they didn't know anything. But she had to do it. She was agreed to do it and to try it. And she had even worked as a consultant doctor for the Russians. And I got my first Krim champagne, yeah, and caviar--  INT: Krimsekt. RP: Krimsekt, from those officers, which belong to the-- I think it's called, what's the name? NKVD, you know, in those days, yeah?  INT: NKVD, that became the Soviet Secret Police. RP: The Secret Soviets, yeah, yeah.  INT: Yeah. The-- RP: And, and I remember they tried even to interrogate me and to to ask friendly questions, over--  INT: I keep wanting-- RP: Because of, of [? sekt. ?] And I was told I never gave a wrong answer.  INT: So Krimsekt is Russian champagne, isn't it? RP: Yeah, yeah.  INT: From the Crimea? RP: Yeah.  INT: Yeah. RP: And--  INT: And they gave this to you and your mother? RP: It was-- it was-- it was a terrible [? cause, ?] you know, in those days. They knew they needed my mother. And she hadn't too much time. So they arranged for her to be carried by a car. A car? Just by chances, a car came. But, you know, they, they, they were unable to organize anything. And one Russian officer was very thankful to this hospital. And he told them he will bring the doctor, and she could make presents with this. He would bring a [NON-ENGLISH], a young cow. And here, they were eager to get some meat, which was a rare thing in those days. Yeah? And a group of a couple of people, and I belonged to this group, are standing before these houses, these-- you know, which belonged to the hospital, yeah? And the officer took his pistol out. And was prepared to shoot his cow, yeah? But it became late. And it became-- in the evening, it became night. And his soldier, with the cow, didn't come. I don't know where he organized it. Where they stole it, yeah? But later, we were told this soldier changed this cow into alcohol. 
INT: He sold the cow for alcohol? RP: For alcohol. He was absolutely drunk. [LAUGHS] So my I remember the Russians quite good. And as humans, yeah?  INT: And the NKVD-- RP: But, for, for one--  INT: --as you called them, the NKVD-- RP: Yeah.  INT: --they, they became the KGB? RP: Yeah.  INT: Didn't they, later on? RP: Yeah.  INT: Everybody the secret service, yeah. RP: But I-- there's no later contact, were only--  INT: But they were-- they very good to you. RP: Yeah. [LAUGHS] Two other small stories, yeah? The-- [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] one day, my mother had a short lunch break, yeah? Sister came crying from the hospital. It was just five minutes away. Yeah? A Russian is about to kill the assistant doctor. My mother was calm. But she was very angry. Yeah? My mother left her food. And-- which she had prepared for me, mainly, yeah? And went to the hospital. And there was this Russian officer, very friendly, smiling. Yeah? He was, you know, [? [NON-ENGLISH]. ?] No, no. [NON-ENGLISH], he says, yeah? So she was good, to give this shots into this blood, where they--  INT: Injections. RP: Injections, yeah. And they had to use medicine which hurts very much if you put it into the vein, the-- out of the vein. You have to inject it--  INT: If you get it wrong, it hurts? RP: If you get it wrong, it hurts very much, yeah. And OK, my mother, my mother could do it. The other one couldn't do it. So this Russian soldier took his pistol and said, out. The doctor put the needle and left the room. Everything was OK. My mother could-- [LAUGHTER] 
INT: So he-- so he just threatened the other doctor to get your mother-- RP: Yeah.  INT: --to come and give him the injection. RP: Yeah, that's it. Yeah, but another thing, in the evening, my mother did surgery in this flat, yeah? One Russian officer came very late. He excused, for him, something [? good. ?] the Germans had blinded a group of Russian soldiers. They gave them alcohol, mature alcohol, which makes the sight--  INT: Oh, like wood alcohol? RP: --kaput. Yeah, the--  INT: Poisoned-- RP: [NON-ENGLISH]  INT: --yeah, yeah. RP: This was poisoned alcohol, but alcohol you can use for technical purposes but not for drinking. And she had to conduct the [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] questioning, and so on. And he [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] acknowledged everything. Here the Russians are being killed, and the little village, all the men will be shot next morning. My mother stood in front of him with this injection in the hand She said, no. That terrible thing, I am tremble-- I do tremble. I can't give you the injection right now. Let's sit down. Let's have a cigarette. Let's talk. Yeah? And she talked about the difficulty of getting a bottle with something like alcohol away from a Russian's soldier's hands. And in the end, he has said, yes, it's not necessary that those soldiers have been poisoned. They could have got something in their hands, and it wasn't-- Surely, it is impossible to tell a Russian soldier to be cautious. Because it could be just their reasoning not the truth, yeah? [SIGHS] The [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] officer got his injection. Nobody was shot. 
INT: Could you and your mother stay in Czechoslovakia, after the war finished? RP: No. We hadn't the money left to pay for the rent of the flat. Just as the Russians came, yeah? My mother went to those officers. And we were granted a flat. Many Germans had left. Many flats were standing empty. And well, they asked my mother where she wants to go. Like heaven. My mother asked for a flat in the house of my grandparents. It was empty, we could enter there. But the officer asked us to pay the rent. The house was taken away from my grandparents, from the German authority. And--  INT: Which grandparents were these, your-- RP: This is my mother's grandparents.  INT: Your mother's parents? RP: My mother's parents, yeah, you know? They--  INT: So they had lost the house to the Germans? RP: They had their-- to the German, yeah. And-- but the Czechs were not able, at this moment, as I said, to--  INT: To give it back. RP: To give it back. Yeah. And just for reason of-- oh. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] Just for the reason of order, yeah, we should pay the rent, which will subsequently be given to us back with all the things we should get. And my-- so we paid this, the rent. My mother had a job as head of this department and could pay the rent. But this, the difficult situation flattened out and became quite orderly. There was a new Czech leading doctor for the council, was brought into this office, yeah. But my mother, doing this kind of work, this kind of work, her kind of work, had no time to pay him a visit. So this Czech doctor had the good Czech name of Schiller. 
INT: And we'll come to the end-- RP: Yeah.  INT: --of that story in a moment. RP: Yeah.  INT: We've come to the end of the tape there. RP: [SIGHS]  INT: Here with Mr. Rudolf Pollak. You were mentioning there what happened to your mother once things had settled down. There was a new Czech government, Czech organization. Was she allowed to keep her job? RP: The Czech organization changed slightly. And a new regional head of medical services was [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] brought into office. This Czech doctor has a-- a good Czech name, Schiller. And my mother was unable to pay him a visit. And he had-- we'll do this a little bit later-- a good friend which was a skin doctor, also. So he decreed my mother being [NON-ENGLISH]. Besides all German, she has no right to have her job as a [NON-ENGLISH], the leading doctor in this department. She can only be paid as a secondary physician. And the pay of the secondary physician was less than the rent we had to pay in our own house. So she were on a quite voluntary base, this invitation to leave Carlsbad, again, quite easy. [LAUGHS]  INT: Did you talk about it with your mother at all at the time? RP: Yes, we did.  INT: And what-- RP: And the other thing.  INT: --did you decide to do? RP: She-- there wasn't very much to desert upon, because we had no means, no saving accounts or like that. We had only the chance to sell the little bit furniture we have got [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] or purchased, you know, our radio, and so on. And to take-- to use this money to come-- to go to the German border. We got a small van, with some remaining goods. A brother of my father had kept some porcelain and glass and some books and the bookcases. And [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] the remaining ruins of my mother's surgery of the old days, which, of course, we, we used, or she used. I say-- I say, 'we,' because I was a helping hand in the practice and could do a little bit help at least. And [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] she took some kind of pills with, which helped her to keep fit, because she had to travel sometimes, to Prague, to get the allowance to leave, the allowance to enter Germany. And we got a kind of [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] intermediate passport. And we got the-- a paper from the American administration to come into the American zone. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] And we-- at the border, yeah, the removal firm, this small van had to be cleared. And Mother was able to sell a few goods, and the-- a coat from my father and boots and, you know, to get a hand on some money. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] And-- but she was so [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] tired or [NON-ENGLISH], because of taking those pills, so didn't realize so she sold it for a very unreasonable price. But nevertheless, we could come to Munich. The first time we found a family coming from over there who told us, go to Munich. There is another family you certainly know. And they took us. And everyone told us, you'll find everything you could just wish, and help, because of your history. 
INT: What time-- what year? RP: It was 1946. And we came to Munich and came to the Joint Distribution Committee. And there was a friendly American officer, who asked for some paper, if you had some. And my mother opened her case. And there was a, a certificate of birth and baptisment.  INT: Baptism. RP: Baptism, yeah, on top. And he got a red head and said, Catholic Church--  INT: Red face. RP: Red face, yeah.  INT: He's was angry by that. RP: He was-- seemed to be very angry. He was very loud, red-faced, and just shouted out, I don't know a Catholic Jew. And that was a end of-- nearly the end of [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] earlier contact with Judaism. I, for, for certain, knew that I didn't really enjoy seeing this.  INT: So they, they declined to help you and your mother? RP: Absolutely. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] But it turned out a little bit less. There were some German [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] governmental organizations which provided some help. And we were acknowledged as refuges, as if we had been drummed-- thrown out by the Czechs, not as a coming voluntarily. And so, step by step, I-- my mother got again the right to open surgery. It was rewarded back, the certificate of being a doctor. And I could go to school.  INT: So-- RP: And it became a, more or less, normal life.  INT: --you were treated as if you had been part of the expulsion? RP: Yes. 
INT: Because, after the war, the Czechs expelled the German-- RP: Yeah.  INT: --ethnic Germans from the Sudetenland. RP: Yeah. Right.  INT: And so you were treated as if you had been ethnic German refugees. RP: Yeah. Yeah, yeah.  INT: Were-- was your mother, were you ever given any sort of compensation for being Jewish refugees? RP: Yes. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] Some years later, during the [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] '50s, yeah, [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] my mother got a rent.  INT: A pension. RP: A pension for health damages. And that-- it happened nearly at the same time when she had a nervous breakdown. So she could [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] continue to have a living. And we moved from a small town near Munich to Munich, because it was my idea, sort of, to avoid for her to see again patients of her on the street asking just for a recipe, yeah, which would--  INT: For a prescription. RP: Prescription, yeah. Which would have reminded her of being, [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] twice time [PAUSES FOR 5 SECONDS] being thrown out of her surgery.  INT: Not being able to work as a doctor. RP: Yeah.  INT: Did the German government ever give her a pension because she had been Jewish and because she had been discriminated against? RP: Yes. This is a pension, which goes down to this [NON-ENGLISH], She was, in the end, recognized as having had health damages from the time of this suicide. And-- [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] thing which happened to her back-- 
INT: In the prison. RP: --in the prison.  INT: When she went to [INAUDIBLE]. RP: Yeah. But [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] she had different other claims, also. I had even a solicitor doing it. But she was so near to a [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] new nervous breakdown, yeah, she stopped everything. And, as a matter of fact, we didn't receive just one penny for this house of my grandparents, [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] and the flat rent, which was taking-- was a German administration. But we got some payment for the Czechs not giving us this house. We were treated as a German refugee expelled from the Czechs. And as my-- the refugee organizations had a very good account reorganized, yeah? It was known that my grandparents had large mortgages on this house so that the payment we could receive were not extremely high. And I got a compensation, too. I got 5,000 marks, which was a considerable amount of money in those times, because I was not allowed to attend a secondary school. And with going to this special kind of school, as a-- as a matter of fact, a Nazi-type of school. It was invented during the Nazi administration. And it was ended up afterwards. It had this-- it had the name of [? Aufbauschule. ?] It was meant for people who finished their primary-school education. And normally, you, you leave the, the school and go for gymnasium quite soon. And those people who decide late, yeah, they got a chance, by the German administration, during the Third Reich. And this type of school still existed. And I could jump into the first class. And the director gave me a chance. If he gets it, it will be all right. If not, well. And I could make it. And so I proved that I had been able to go to a secondary school. And I got 5,000 marks. 
INT: And what did you do as a profession, yourself, before you retired? RP: Could you postpone this, please? I have to add a few things--  INT: Yes, [? of ?] [? course. ?] RP: --which I jumped over.  INT: I'm just wondering what you-- RP: Yeah, yeah.  INT: --you'd done after you left school. RP: No, I-- I-- yes, I can tell it, of course. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] Two sisters, my mother and her sister Valerie, were Jews, both married to a Catholic. And when my father died, this privilege of a mixed marriage, yeah, broke down. My mother, if everything would have been OK, normal, yeah, would have had to go to a concentration camp. They never did it. I don't know why. And my uncle was-- had to do some official duty work, not, you know, in, in Prague, but in [? Konstantinbad. ?] Because they needed a doctor over there, and he was-- it was made his duty to stay there. And his wife was allowed to stay in Prague. She was still living and, on governmental order, working. A German doctor, yeah, was brought from Prague into the concentration camp in Theresienstadt. I don't know why. She survived there and has been interested in human help, yeah. She stayed there after the liberation, catches a infection, which [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] afflict you, yeah, in [? disastrous ?] times there, and died there.  INT: Your aunt? RP: Your aunt. And there is no grave-- 
INT: Yes. RP: --existing. They must be in a-- one of those mass graves. It's quite unreasonable. One sister surviving without being allowed to. The other one, being allowed to survive, died. [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] And another thing about the way the German administration worked. One day, we were living in this small house with my grandmother in Carlsbad. My mother received a postcard from the Gestapo to show up. And she was so scared, she didn't even leave a line for me. Went to this Gestapo house, the doors closed behind her. She showed proof, this invitation. And she was very afraid of not having left a note for me where she disappeared. And she was-- came to a officer, of course, wearing uniform, but being very friendly. He just asked her, you're reading a newspaper from Stettin here in Carlsbad. Why do you do this? Well, she said, I lived there. I found-- this is my home. I just had to leave because of bombardments. Oh, yes, that's quite reasonable. So, OK, bye. She left this early. That's the way order was conducted. And this building is maybe the only Gestapo quarter built by a Jew. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] A friend of my parents, architect Karl Riedel, built this as a new police headquarter for Carlsbad. And it was finished right moment. The Czechs didn't need it anymore. The build was a very good and modern building. The Gestapo took it over and left the old buildings as a, a normal police. And it was built so good, they had cells in the cellar. When the Gestapo moved away from Carlsbad, yeah, they left people in the cellars. Nobody could hear the screams. When those people were discovered, they were brought to the hospital where my mother worked. It was just another department. They were starved so near to death, doctors couldn't bring one of them through. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] And this Karl Riedel had a chance to immigrate to Sweden, together with his wife, which was my child doctor, when-- from when-- from when I was born. And I visited them in Sweden. And he, having good knowledge of the German language, worked in the underground across the border into Norway, where he could help some people come to Sweden. And one of his partners is well-known. It was Brandt. He worked on the other side, in Norway. 
INT: So you stayed in Munich after you went there with your mother [INAUDIBLE]? RP: That's the [SIGHS] thing which not everybody can understand. Even my wife doesn't understand it. When my father left for this kind of field service, [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] he wanted me to promise him that I should look, whenever he would be unable to, after my mother. [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] It was very clear [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] that nobody would have talked about it. It's quite natural to do though. When my mother came to Bavaria, she had no chance to go any further. Her financial means, and she couldn't imagine finding help. That was all. And [PAUSES FOR 6 SECONDS] when-- you never became as rich as to develop any further problems. But my mother developed severe [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] kinds of illness. Even when she worked as a doctor, she worked only half a day. And she did whatever she could. And it was clear to me, I never could ask her for going anywhere else. It's-- was just out of imagination. And when my mother died, I had a profession and couldn't even imagine that it could be reasonable to move. And I worked. I went after school, [? night-- ?] better put it in. And I went to a school for photography, [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] which I [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] was able to finish with a, a good examination, as I had attended only for three semesters of the four semester. Because I didn't start at the time-- school finished. I didn't agree that [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] these time tables they had, no? But I finished the best of the class. And afterwards, there was something about to being invented in Germany, too, which was invented already some years ago. It's something called television. And I joined this profession a year before we went on air. I did some kind of pioneer work, which proved to be quite reasonable in those times. We had absolutely no Nazi-types in this television department of the company. It, it was a kind of emigration from the main company. It was so small. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] So I fight-- I felt quite at home. 
INT: Was this-- the company, was this Bayerischer-- RP: Bayerischer Rundfunk.  INT: Rundfunk-- RP: Yeah.  INT: --a Bavarian television company? RP: Bavarian radio company. Excuse me.  INT: And, and what kind of people were in the main Bayerischer Rundfunk then? RP: They-- [SIGHS] [PAUSES FOR 5 SECONDS] sometimes you had history in the [? brown ?] side. All the-- it was absolutely common. The very famous prime minister in Czechoslovakia-- in Bavaria, Strauss, was a, a German political officer in the army. And--  INT: He was a, a Nazi Party member, Strauss? RP: [NON-ENGLISH] Wehrmacht. And--  INT: Right. So he was a political officer in the Wehrmacht? RP: Yeah.  INT: And so that affected the sort of people who worked at Bayerischer Rundfunk? RP: Oh, but is-- as you surely know, it is very common and nothing special. But this kind of television department was a place of freedom. It was not interesting for the politicians, because no-- at first time, nobody knew what will become out of it. Then no one was-- [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] will see it. There were just a few hundred [NON-ENGLISH], and millions of listeners to the radio. And in those early days, director of television made a speech, which had been printed in several media on the introduction of atomic weapons. And he was strictly against it. And he had this speech on the radio, at 8 o'clock, on the first program, yeah, not in his own television, because there was no audience. And the actors worked there nearly without payment. You could get a, a film actress, which received $5,000 a day, a quite a normal payment in those days, yeah, who worked for $2,000, for three weeks, for a play, just being interested in this new medium. It was fascinating for me. And this is-- it changed slightly, and ongoing. And at a special moment-- so when my mother already was dead, I would have been free. There was a, a hard decision to be made. We get a company-- a pension as well. But as soon as we leave the company, yeah, it would be ruined. This was the only way of securing my life, because a normal pension is not very interesting. And due to my history, I'm-- I have a tendency to be a, a loner and not to feel courage to try very much. 
INT: So you stayed in Munich? RP: So I stayed. I stayed in Munich. I married very late, have two sons of 20 years.  INT: What's your wife's name? RP: My wife's name is Sophie.  INT: And what was her-- RP: Or Crystal. She has two names. And her first name is Sophie. It's her official name. And [? Christiane ?] is her second name. And normally, I call her Crystal.  INT: And what was her maiden name before she married? RP: [NON-ENGLISH].  INT: And is she Jewish, your wife? RP: She is absolutely not Jewish. But she had thought about my history. I tried to tell her everything as good as I could. But [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] it would be unfair otherwise, I thought, yeah? And she, more than I did-- I thought I could, more or less, hide and get through without too many problems, yeah? She realized clearly, there are really problems. Problems will be all right. And she made me to go to a Jewish organization to have-- hear some talks and to read some books and to listen to special programs. And, you know, more or less, she started me to being more concerned about Jews, which led to the-- of onset, of being scared from neighbors. So I asked, you know, to send this cassette, because I don't want if some of neighbors could find us in [? this program. ?]  INT: Why? Why does that scare you? RP: One of the neighbors, yeah, a bus driver, yeah, a very friendly man, sometimes liking to have a bit to drink. He greeted me one day, yeah. You have several problems here. There's very few Jews. And strangers, the only thing we need is such a small Hitler. And I joined sport clubs, just for my boys, too, here. And you hear so many racist kind of jokes. And I don't feel at home. I would-- if I could afford, I would go to London. But there's no feeling like I had a chance to. But I had-- 
INT: So you don't feel safe, at the moment, in Germany? RP: I, I really, I don't feel safe, yeah. I don't-- I wait that a [NON-ENGLISH] is going to happen the next day. But I feel absolutely unsafe. So does my wife.  INT: Do they regard you as Jewish, though, in Germany? RP: Most don't know I am. But maybe, my mother, maybe I told some neighbors about it in a, a time. Just wanted just to show I'm [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] not Nazi. I'm a man who you could deal, yeah? And I know that now, that this was something which could regard as stupid. [LAUGHS]  INT: And we've just come to the end of the tape there. RP: [SIGHS]  INT: Mr. Rudolf Pollak, we've been talking there about your sense of being Jewish in Germany today. Do you, yourself, feel Jewish now, more than when you were a child? RP: Yes, I do. But as a Jew, certainly a child, ever to go through a bar mitzvah [LAUGHS] and having gray hair. [LAUGHS]  INT: So you, you are studying the Jewish faith now? RP: I'm trying to, to study the Jewish tradition and faith. I think it needs more than one life. [LAUGHS]  INT: Are you going to continue this when you go back to Germany? RP: I-- [? the problem ?] [? with this ?] were this. I certainly will be interested, but I certainly will not go to a synagogue in Germany. I don't want to be-- being traced as a Jew. Even if, in reality, not so risky, I, I'm just too much scared. If it's possible, I would like to come to London, once a year, and then I can attend service or a Seder, like I'm planning to do right now. And of course, I will continue to [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] go to lectures at the university. There's a quite new Jewish chair at the Munich University, with Professor Brenner coming from New York. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] He was, was a [NON-ENGLISH], a-- over the-- very well-known name over there in New York. And he tries to build up a good place from many literature, and his lessons-- lectures are extremely well attended. And within a crowd, I feel good. 
INT: Within the crowd you feel good, but you don't feel-- want to be an individual? RP: I don't-- I don't-- I don't want to go there to study Yiddish or Hebrew, because this is done in a small group in his institute. And if-- it gives me to think if someone who goes there, whom you'll meet occasionally. I live in the north of Munich. As I don't want to talk about the whereabouts and the-- other people give you a card, yeah, with a telephone number. The company I'm working with-- too much confidence is not easy to be found. I'm not the only one who tries to be more careful.  INT: Do you think you feel this way because of what's happening in Germany today, or because of what happened to you in the past? RP: You can't divide between those two sides. But I can say that, during the last time, I'm more interested in Judaism, itself. And the former times of my life, yeah, I felt more being defined as a Jew by German laws.  INT: And do you feel now that you choose yourself to be Jewish? RP: Yes, that's why I've asked if I could be converted to be a Jew. But I was told, why conversion if you are a Jew? [LAUGHS] But I'm a bit of a between.  INT: As we're coming to the end of the interview now, is there anything you would like to say here, yourself? RP: Maybe there are plenty of things I would like to say, but I-- they come-- don't come to my mind right now. But as I have two sons, aged 20, they ask me to write down a few things, just to know the names of grandparents, and so on, people they never had the chance to see. I did this, and I-- it is not a book, but it's a couple of pages. And you can add a copy of this notices for my sons to your cassettes if you want to. Maybe find one other thing which is interesting, not only to the family. And I want certainly to mention one more member of my family. I have told you about my uncle, Joseph Scheffler, and his wife, Valerie, quite wealthy doctors before the Germans invaded Czechoslovakia. In those days, it wasn't normal to have a car here. They had a car and had a gold watch. [LAUGHS] But he didn't believe it would be good for him and his family to emigrate. He was offered help from England, from Scotland, and his son was able to come as a Kindertransport to England. And I've seen quite recently an exhibition on that by the Jewish Museum in Finchley, which is a little bit too friendly to-- about this way the nearly orphans were greeted here in Great Britain.
And this cousin of mine, Gert, Gerhardt Scheffler, was able to do his A-levels here, when he was in Edinburgh. But shortly afterwards, he was regarded as a German, came into a camp, was interned. Had to-- was brought to Australia, not on the famous boat, the but on a prior boat, where the conditions were absolutely the same. He gave me this book on the So they were interned in Australia again. And slowly, slowly, the administration in Australia realized, there seems to be a division amongst the Germans, yeah. Some who greeted the Swiss diplomats, who visited them, as a contact with their homeland, and some who didn't even want to see a Swiss diplomat acting on behalf of the German government. And so he was allowed to start his studies. But not what he wanted to do. He had to learn something which is necessary for the country, so he had to do a science, mathematics, and geophysics. And at the same time, he studied arts-- thing he was interested, too. Finished with both degrees in '46 from the camp. And he died a few years ago, five years ago, in Australia, working not in the field of arts, but in the field of science. He became a computer professor at a university, and computer consultant, government and so on. The-- [SIGHS] but he visit us only twice, and I was never able to realize why he didn't come back to family-- the family existed only in one person. It was my mother. He could talk about her-- to her about her, her mother and those things. But he was unable to come here. But he-- and so was I unable to talk with my mother on many subjects. I didn't know how hurt she was, yeah. I definitely-- there came a trouble-- what are you grieving? We both are living. This is wonderful. But I didn't realize what it meant to lose a whole family, and only by the years, I realized the impact it had on, on my personality. And Gert was able to bring his father to Australia. He got some money lent to pay for the, the ship. And this doctor was not allowed to practice in Australia. He was told to go into the university and start from the beginning again to get an Australian degree. And he died before he could finish this. He has no personal grave. He wanted to be buried anonymous, because his wife never has a grave. And as the times went on, [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] Gert doesn't have a place to visit. And now he is buried anonymous in Melbourne, too. And I regard this interview as a kind of setting a gravestone for people who don't have a grave, but I think they should be anyhow remembered. And I did what I could. I have a map by his-- made by his comrades from where my father was buried. It was impossible during this times of the Cold War to have him brought and buried anywhere else. My mother died in Munich, and she wanted to be buried together with her husband. It was impossible to fulfill this wish. The only thing I could do was, I said I had her [GERMAN]-- how do you call this? 
INT: Urn. RP: Urn, yeah? To be brought to Carlsbad, where my father was the head of this construction department, one of his task was to build a crematory and the surrounding place. And my parents made a reservation for a urn niche for themselves. And in this special part of the building, where they had a plan to be buried together, there's this urn [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] [SOBBING] with ashes of my mother. And there's a-- on this stone an engraving that is to remember three families which have no graves.  INT: Mr. Pollak, thank you very much indeed.