INT: The survivor's name is Rabbi Samuel Halpern. The date is June 14, 1998. The interviewer is Mindy Kornberg. The location is Jerusalem, and the language is English. My name is Mindy Kornberg, and I'll be interviewing Rabbi Samuel Halpern. CREW: OK. SH: My name is Samuel Halpern. I've been born on August the 9th, 1922, in the little town, Biecz--  INT: And where was that town? SH: --where my father was the rabbi of that little town. My father's name was Rav Rabbi Yisochor [? Dov ?] Halpern, [? Bear ?] Halpern, in-- in English. And my mother's name was Dvora. Her maiden name was Horowitz. Her father was the previous rav in Biecz. He was a rabbi. And after him, my father took over. He didn't have sons to take over his position. My father was a son-in-law.  INT: In what town-- SH: That--  INT: --what-- sorry. What country was this? SH: This was in Poland, in the area of Tsanz, which is a famous city, and between Tarnów, which was 45 kilometers west of our little town, Biecz. The two next towns was in-- the east was Jaslo. And the west was Gorlice. The Biecz, our little town, or as we called it in Jewish, Beitsch, was a little town of about 2,500 inhabitants, or about 900 families. From those 900 families, 185 families were Jewish. Gorlice had 450 Jewish families, while Jaslo had 600 Jewish families. That's the area I grew up. Those towns usually were considered industrial area, because the-- in our area, there were oil wells and refineries. So this area in Poland was not considered the poor areas. It was not the poverty area. However, like in every town, there were also some poor people in some other towns further east. Or more to the west, you could find little towns in a lower financial situation. 
INT: So where would you say your family fit in in-- SH: Our family-- well, as a rabbi in a small town, which means he was not-- to everybody, he was-- he helped [NON-ENGLISH]. He made a living. After all, we were a family, and not a small family. My oldest sister, [? Chayche, ?] or Chaya [? Tilla ?] as she was called. She was the oldest. Then I had a-- I have a brother, Lazar. And after him, Chaskel. I am the third son. After me there was two-- four other brothers-- Naftali and Menachem Mendel, Aaron Chaim, and Nachum [NON-ENGLISH]. The four brothers after me, the younger ones, two of them were-- Naftali and Mendel-- were in Buchenwald. They were killed in Buchenwald at the very end of the war, by a dead march. Aaron was killed in Biecz, the second day of the [NON-ENGLISH], in 1942, of course. And Nachum [NON-ENGLISH], the youngest one, was killed in Cracow in the orphanage, among-- together with 500 other children, after the-- the head of the Gestapo had promised that the orphanage, nothing will happen. And then I have a younger sister, she-- now, her name is [? Manja ?] Miriam Scheinfeld. Her husband just passed away recently. And she was between Mendel and between Aaron Chaim. She lives in Brooklyn, in Borough Park. My older sister. Chaya [? Tilla ?] lives in London. She's a widow now. This is the picture of our family. Now it's obvious that in a large family, that we hardly make ends meet. My father was a very active person. He was the vice president of the Agudat Israel in Poland. Among the four vice president, he was one of them. He was a very chaver, a close friend with the Rav Meir Shapira, the famous Ljubljana Rav, who established the Yeshiva Chachmei Lublin. As a matter of fact, that Rav Meir Shapira was a-- a-- the rabbi of Sanok first, before he came to Piotrków. And Sanok is in Galicia, not far from us. It's about 50 kilometer east of Biecz. And he laid the ground stone on the Talmud Torah School in Biecz. About at that time, my father, [INAUDIBLE] was in America, on a mission that was-- I don't remember that. Because this took place in 1924. It's only a matter of history. 
INT: Could I ask you? Did you have extended family growing up as well-- grandparents, aunts and uncles? SH: I had one uncle, my mother's brother, was a sick man. He was living in Biecz.  INT: What was his name? SH: His name Alter [? Lazar ?] Horowitz, and he had a son who became later the [NON-ENGLISH] Rebbe. He was living in Brooklyn. He died in 1936 at the age of 60. He had cancer. He was a sick man all his life. Then my mother had another brother who was called the Biecz Rebbe in America. He immigrated to the United States in 1913, before World War number One, because he had the-- seen, in that time, no future in-- in that area, in-- in Biecz.  INT: What was his name? SH: Rabbi [? Hersch ?] [? Horowitz. ?] And in fact, that his son later was a rabbi. They called the-- the [NON-ENGLISH] Biecz, in Borough Park. He also passed away last year. And then my mother had a-- a sister in Hungary that I never-- I never saw her. I only knew about her. She was living in [INAUDIBLE] in Hungary. And then she had her youngest sister Zippora, who was living in Krosno, which is only 30 kilometers from Biecz. Her husband was in the-- in business. Now this was my mother family. My father, the [INAUDIBLE], had a older brother, was older than him by 20 years. He was living in Stanislaw. I also never had a chance to meet him. 
INT: What was his name? SH: His name was Nachum [? Ruven. ?] My youngest brother was named after him. My grandfather from my mother's side, I had the privilege to remember yet. And I saw him of my grandmother from my mother's side. I couldn't remember, because my mother was six years old when she passed away.  INT: And sorry. What was your grandfather's name? That grandfather? SH: Aaron Horowitz. He was the Biecz [INAUDIBLE]. And my mother's mother, who passed away when my mother was six years old, she was the daughter of the famous zadik, the [NON-ENGLISH]. And [NON-ENGLISH] Horowitz, her father, was the-- the son of the famous [NON-ENGLISH] Rebbe, the-- in [NON-ENGLISH]. Rav Meir Horowitz, which goes in in Jewish history, one of the leading admorim for-- in the last 200 years. My father's side, I remember his father. I saw him. Well, but vaguely. I was four years old when he passed away. But he was the son-- he were a-- first he was the one-- the [INAUDIBLE] in [NON-ENGLISH]. And he was the son of the famous Lemberger Rav, Rabbi Alexander Shmuel Halpern, which I am named after, who gave out several books in [NON-ENGLISH], on [NON-ENGLISH], and [NON-ENGLISH].  INT: And what was your grandfather's name? SH: That was-- my grandfather's name was Rav Chaim [? Jonah ?] Halpern. There are already some names after him. My father's mother, which me and my grandmother, the rebbitzin Leah, she lived till the age of 86, and died in 1940, right at the first year of the war. And she had the [NON-ENGLISH] yet to be buried in a regular burial, and like a Jewish [NON-ENGLISH]. My mother, ah-lahv hashalom, who died at the end of '41, which was six days in [NON-ENGLISH]. At that time, the situation was very, very hard, because people were afraid already to go out in the street. However, since she was a local known person, even by the goyim, so her funeral took place. And it was one that some people made very, very important remarks that time. They said, no one would dare to go out with such a large crowd at that time to a funeral. But the Biecz rebbitzin had that [NON-ENGLISH] that even the local goyim from the leading remembered her, and they came to pay their respect to her funeral. 
INT: And that was even after the Nazi occupation in that-- SH: Of course, it was already in 9-- in-- 4-- end of '41, where a couple months later, the shooting and the-- the making places judenrein took place. There's one thing I must remark-- that at that time, and I mean it's a time of the war after the Nazis occupied Poland, there was a-- they had a system, a side of deception and fooling people and spreading certain lies in order to cover up. They made sure there is no communication from one town to another, between cities, between places. We had no radios. We have no telephones. We have no televisions, of course. And we didn't know what's going on, because newspapers were not available, except the which is a German-- a-- a newspaper with the propaganda of all sorts, against Jews of course. And occasionally, we found a-- a old paper that they threw away. They could see something, but they didn't tell much about it. And all the news that we knew was that somebody heard a radio somewhere, and it was never verified. The only thing, it made-- it made us worry. And we didn't know. We heard rumors.  INT: Let me take you back before we get-- we're already by 1941. We have a lot to cover from before. So let's go back to earlier years. What's the earliest memories you can tell me? SH: OK, so now I'm going back. Now I'm going back to my youth and the life. As I grew up, of course, like every Jewish boy who went to cheder first, once you enter the cheder, you advance from cheder to a higher level, to a higher class. And it's all called cheder, or call it yeshiva ketana, whatever that called. And since as a son of a rabbi, like many other boys, I had to be involved in heavy learning. Polish and arithmetic we only learned by private teachers, be-- being that you had to sit in Polish schools, which was actually compulsory. But you have to sit bare-headed for a half a day, and my mother would never allow that. So my father had to engage some private tutors to teach us Polish, some grammatics, arithmetics, and all the necessary, like a little bit history, and this and that. And this was going on till I was about 12 years old, in Biecz, by different-- different teachers, changing here and there. By-- when I was 12, some of the teachers that my father didn't like in Biecz-- they were not qualified enough for him. And some other boys also, their parents didn't like it. And we were sent away to other places. I was sent to Tarnów. Tarnów had a well-organized Talmud Torah with qualified teachers-- well-known. And I spent, in Tarnów, about eight, nine months. Then came my-- my time of being bar mitzvah. And my father took me home. And he taught me, prepared me for bar mitzvah. And since, like every rabbi in that-- in those years, in every little town, every rabbi had about 10, 15 boys of the city. He was giving classes. But those were boys of a little bit of very more advanced in learning. But my father figured, I will fit in, even though I was only about-- before bar mitzvah year, and they were about two years older. He figured I can fit in and carry along with them, which I did. Then passed by another year. And my father figured he had to go in missions by-- from the Agudah. So he send me to Cracow. At the same time, I had my older brother, Chaskel, was sent to Lublin. And my older brother Lazar, was in Szubin, by the [? Szubina ?] rav. So [? already ?] the three older brothers were already out of the house, learning in different places, while our youngers were still at home and lived. 
INT: And how often would you get to visit home? SH: I would say every few weeks for a Shabbos. And most of the time, I would say, I was a little bit an exception, that my father used to bring me home and keep me for a week when he needed me, because he didn't know Polish. And sometimes he needed somebody to help him out for the-- with the authorities. So-- and since my oldest sister was already married, away from the house-- she was living at that time in Tsanz, then he took me to go with him and take care on a few official things. And then he let me go. My mother didn't like too-- too much the idea, that he keeps me too much away from learning. But we-- somehow, we managed.  INT: Could we just mention what your sister's married name was-- who she married? SH: My sister married a-- a young man who was named Yoel Thumim. He was the son of the [NON-ENGLISH] rav, the [NON-ENGLISH] rabbi, [NON-ENGLISH] Thumim. The Thumim family were well-known for all in the-- in the rabbinic world. In fact, they-- one of the famous [NON-ENGLISH], his name was Rabbi [? Yosef ?] Thumim. The Thumim family well-known. And-- and this is a story for itself about my sister's engagement and her marriage, which had a story that I will probably put in-- in a-- as we go on later on. Right now I go back to myself as living in Poland and learning in Cracow, and how-- how did we live in town of-- or in Cracow. My father was a-- a rabbi from a small town. He couldn't afford to-- to pay for me in a hotel or in a restaurant. 
INT: They didn't have dormitories for the-- SH: The--  INT: --yeshiva boys? SH: --we did not have that, that idea. And I'm going to come back on that too, because in general, the idea of yeshivas with dormitories were only either in Hungary or in the-- in Lithuanian. Because in Galicia, in Poland, till World War number One, didn't know from yeshivas at all. But in every town, either the rabbi of your other talmidim [NON-ENGLISH] used to sit in beis medrash, and [INAUDIBLE], and to teach younger boys and older boys. And this how the [INAUDIBLE] came up from there. But after World War number One, things, the atmosphere, the whole feelings of Judaism fell down deep. And there came two big Hasidic rebellion, and they started yeshivas. One was the famous Bobover rebbe, Rabbi [NON-ENGLISH], the father of the-- a rabbi of the Bobov rabbi of today, who came and started to swim against the stream, and has opened up yeshivas, in a such a way, such a pace, that he claimed every town has to have a yeshiva, because no-- then most of the parents will not want to send away their children. And at the time, in 1939, when World War II broke out, the Bobover rebbe had a chain of 47 yeshivas all over Galicia. The other rabbi was the Radomska rebbe [NON-ENGLISH], Rabbi [NON-ENGLISH], who was killed in the Warsaw ghetto. He started also at the-- about the same time, after World War number One. And he had about 12 yeshivas in-- under the name [NON-ENGLISH], while the-- the net of the Bobover yeshivas carried the name Yeshiva [? Chaim. ?] And those who were the two religious, the Hasidic yeshivas in Galicia. Otherwise, in the dormitories, they didn't have. So if a boy from a other city had to go to another, like I had to be in Tarnów or in Cracow until Biecz had his own yeshiva in 1936, '37, we ate [? take. ?] We called it the-- one day by Moishe, and one day by Beryl, and one day by Chaim. That means we had divided the week [INAUDIBLE] [? take. ?] You-- you eat every day in a different house, and it was accepted. In fact, they tell me now, that even in the [INAUDIBLE] at the beginning, were also the idea of eating each day in a different-- by a different [NON-ENGLISH], was also a normal way of existing. 
INT: And what about sleeping? SH: And sleeping usually used to be arranged already by the yeshiva. They used to have a rented, either a-- a-- a few rooms for some boys who have no relatives. And something-- most of the boys who had some-- their parents had some friends, some relatives, arranged somewhere to have a place to sleep. Oh, we-- there-- it was not Waldorf Astoria, but they-- we managed. And in fact, in the-- most of the time, young boys, they used to sleep two in a bed; or not even a bed, but on a-- a-- today we called it a-- a mattress. We didn't have mattresses at that time. In Poland, it was a large bag filled with straw. And on this you spread a sheet, and that was a bed to sleep. And you could put-- you put that bag of straw any place there is a available corner, and you slept on it.  INT: Were you happy at that time as a boy? SH: We'd-- I-- we didn't think about being happy and not being happy. You have to do it, and that's it. You accept it as is. Today's idea of-- to being content, being happy, having fun, those terminologies did not exist for us. We were just a-- a simple people. You-- you-- we obey what your parents tell you, or what your rebbe tells you. We didn't know any other way. We didn't know saying to the-- our mother or to our father, no, I don't like to do it, or not now; I'll do it later. He asked if you to do it, you went and you did it, because you knew he knows what's best. Now let's go back to the-- how the life in the little shtetlekh used to be. In a way, most of the-- there was a different between the larger cities and the small little shtetlekh. And more or less, they were all in the same style. However, as much as they were the same, still, they were different. For example, if you take a little town like Bobov, or a little town like Grybów, those were very Hasidic [INAUDIBLE], very Hasidic, very frum, very pious people. 95% of those towns were pious people. Zionists-- Zionism was something that you were not allowed to even to mention. At the other hand, you had little towns like Biecz, Jaslo, Gorlice-- more progressive. In other words, it had a mixture of-- of Jews in that time. You had Mizrahi. You had Agudah. You had Zionism. And you have even Bundism-- the Bundists. And that communism was not allowed. It was illegal in Poland. If somebody was accused of communism, he was put to jail. But let's go back to Poland in general. You have to remember that Poland, they gained its independent in 1918. 
INT: Could I interrupt you for a second? Where would you fit your family in-- in this mixture of Jews? SH: Since my father was the vice president of the Agudah, and in the Agudah itself-- in Agudath Israel, there was always a split, let's say-- two approaches. There was the one part of the Agudah which took the stand of [NON-ENGLISH] Rosenheim, the [NON-ENGLISH], as a type for Frankfurt, that-- who-- and with a negative view towards Eretz Yisrael. While at the other hand, the-- the Reb [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] and my father, and the [NON-ENGLISH] Rebbe [NON-ENGLISH], took a very positive stand towards Eretz Yisrael. It's well-known that the Gerer Rebbe was the first of the Hasidic rebbeim who came and made the first yeshivas, your [NON-ENGLISH], in Tel Aviv, and not in Yerushaláyim. And when he wrote home the-- a letter from Tel Aviv to [? Bendita, ?] his brother-in-law, the-- the-- the [NON-ENGLISH], [? Levin, ?] the father of Rabbi [? Meir ?] [? Levin, ?] he wrote [? poor ?] Tel Aviv [NON-ENGLISH]. And the--  INT: A holy city. SH: --and-- and the [? Bendina ?] rav asked him, how dare are you to write [NON-ENGLISH] in Tel Aviv! [NON-ENGLISH] is written only on forced towns-- [NON-ENGLISH]! So the Gerer Rebbe answered him, and he said, don't you realize this is the only city in the world that's 100% Jewish? And there isn't a single church in that city. So the [? Bendina ?] Rav said, I had never thought in these terminologies. So he says, if you will be studying more to love Eretz Yisrael, you will realize what that means, as a city 100% Jews, without a single church of goyim there. This was the-- at that time. And therefore, the-- 
INT: Go ahead. SH: --therefore, our family always had a very positive view on Eretz Yisrael, and especially in our town where Zionism took a very important part. The [? kol, ?] the-- in other words, the Jewish leadership, the [? kol ?] in our city, had always a majority of the Zionism and the [NON-ENGLISH] [? kol ?] and his helpers are all from the Zionist. What-- there was no a-- like a-- clashes. They-- the-- the rabbi of the town was the rabbi to everyone-- whether if somebody made a bris or a [? hassenah, ?] no matter whether he was a Mizrahi, or an Agudah, or a Zionist, the rabbi was the rabbi. And all the houses were kosher. Even those who were Zionists all ate from the kosher butcher, kept kosher houses, and except that they read a different newspaper. And some of them didn't wear beards. But the-- the idea of non-observant Jews did not exist. One was more Hasidic, one less Hasidic. But the-- it was only a matter of a different philosophy. But the way of life was more or less the same. The same goes for a town like Gorlice. Gorlice, probably the Hasidim took a-- occupied a largest section. While in Jaslo, the Zionists took up a part-- a-- but the rabbi was the same Hasidic rabbi. Krosno was the same way-- a more progressive. It was industry. And the same goes for Sanok. In Sanok, for example, the-- we known there was always a split in the city between the [NON-ENGLISH], the [NON-ENGLISH], the Mizrahi-- 
INT: I have to stop you. SH: And--  INT: I'm sorry. Just for a minute, to switch tapes.  INT: --with Rabbi Samuel Halpern. SH: For example, in Gorlice, which was considered the majority of the Jews more on the Hasidic type, still the Zionist group was quite strong. I remember the [INAUDIBLE] [? kol ?] in Gorlice with the name Lazar Landau. It's not the same Lazar Landau from the Bochnia ghetto, but it just so happened they have the same name.  INT: And did you, did you have opportunity to visit these towns? You were familiar with the neighboring towns? SH: Of course. Yeah. Because Gorlice and Biecz were only 10 kilometers apart. And the-- the rabbi of Gorlice and his family were relative, was my mother's first cousin. They visited by us. We visited by them. And the [INAUDIBLE] [? kol ?] in Gorlice at one time was Rebbe Halberstam from the Agudah, and at one time was Lazar Landau from the Zionists, and at one time Eliuken Weiss-- also a Zionist. And without beards. And the-- the college existed like this, and the people lived together with different philosophies, but without hatred.  INT: So did every group have its own synagogue, or did they-- SH: No.  INT: [INAUDIBLE] together? SH: This-- usually the, the cities had synagogues called the [NON-ENGLISH] shul or the [NON-ENGLISH]. This were-- in Biecz, for example, we have the [INAUDIBLE] beis midrash which still stands there. And there is another beis midrash from the-- under the Talmud Torah building. There were two shuls in Biecz. And the rabbi used to daven most in the [INAUDIBLE] beis midrash. But if there was two days yontif, he was davening one day here, one day there. In Gorlice, for example, was also the [INAUDIBLE] beis midrash and the [INAUDIBLE] shul. In the beis midrash there were nusach Sefard. In the shul there were nusach Ashkenazis. And the rabbi had to daven one Shabbos a month in the shul. And the same was in Jaslo. Aside of that, there was some-- like a shtiblekh. In Gorlice, for example, was a Bobover shtiebel, and there was a [INAUDIBLE]. In Jaslo there was a rabbi called Mendel Halpern. He was the [INAUDIBLE] rebbe. He had his own minyan besides the [INAUDIBLE] shul and the [INAUDIBLE] beis midrash. And other places more or less were the same thing. In Tarnów, for example, where I learned, there was first thing the famous [? Naja ?] shul. There was the-- and-- and there was the old shul. The old shul was destroyed, and the-- only what's left in Tarnów, you visit today, is the place where the [? beam ?] was.
The [? Naja ?] shul was completely destroyed right at the beginning. The [? Naja ?] shul was something-- the-- one of the most beautiful edifice that was in Poland built as a shul. There Reb [? Josef ?] Chaim [? Kirchenbaum, ?] the [INAUDIBLE] beth din from-- from Tarnów, was davening there. The, the cantor was [? Liber ?] Rosenblatt, the brother of the famous Yossele Rosenblatt. And at that time when I learned in Tarnów in the Talmud Torah, I was one of a soprano in his choir. And that why I am till today's day considered, I don't know, a good chazzan or a bad chazzan, but somebody that after I finished davening, everybody goes home, make kiddush. In-- in the little towns, as I mentioned before, they were different, one from another, and at the same time also the same. The-- in other word, in the little towns they were all using the same butchers. They all davened in the same shuls. And they-- they had the same rabbi, the same dayan, the same shochet. There are also towns that had differences. Like-- like came to Sanok. There there was two kind of Hasidim already clashing among themselves, besides Agudah and besides Zionism. Tarnów, for example, a big town. Tarnów had about 45,000 Jews, and Tarnów was a town of industry, merchants, importers. So you had there a-- the Szczecin [INAUDIBLE] Szczecin, [NON-ENGLISH]. And there was the [INAUDIBLE] rebbe of [INAUDIBLE] who had a-- a big beis midrash there. By way, the [INAUDIBLE] rabbi was shot in Cracow in ghetto. He was a great person. And then there was in Tarnów the Grodziske rebbe who was a distant relative to my mother. And there was a-- a rabbi. His name was [? Unger. ?] His name was Reb [? Saul ?] [? Josef ?] [? Unger. ?] He was the son of the [NON-ENGLISH] rav. He had a beis midrash in Tarnów on the [POLISH]. And those are the small minyamin in shtiblekh besides the Belzer shtiebel, besides the Bobover shtiebel, which was in Tarnów. So in the-- in those big shuls. And there was the big Sanzer [INAUDIBLE]. Now today, the Sanzer [INAUDIBLE] also was destroyed. And last time I was in Poland visiting with a group of students, they showed us where the-- the-- the bathhouse. Because there was the mikvah, and the Sanzer [INAUDIBLE] next to it. Now the Sanzer [INAUDIBLE] was destroyed, and from the bathhouse they made a little public bath, and next to it is a big business building, a edifice. It's a-- everything is gone. Otherwise, Tarnów is left almost intact like Cracow. Tsanz, for example, which was also about 45 kilometers west from our city, Tsanz was considered a very, very pious Hasidic city. After all, it was the place where the famous Divrei Chaim Reb Chaim Halberstam was the rav. And he-- after him was his son, Reb Aharon, the [INAUDIBLE] rav. And after him was Reb Leibish, which I was yet privileged to know him. When I was 10 years old I visited Tsanz where my sister was living, and I was in the beis midrash to see Reb Leibish who was a grandson of the Reb Chaim Halberstam who still was learning, get-- getting-- was taught by his grandfather, by Reb Chaim Halberstam. Was a big [INAUDIBLE]. And those little towns, it's interesting to know, because in the books and in the research we only hear about the big cities-- Cracow and Lodz and Warsaw, and Tarnów even, or-- or Lublin. What happened to the little towns? Most of the people don't know. A few little towns, or if the town was 500, 600 families, a small town like that, they gathered the Jews. The young people they took out for some work. And the rest have been sent to Belzec or to Majdanek or to other places or-- or somewhere. But the smaller towns they didn't even bother. They took them out to the forest and-- or the cemetery, and they just machine gunned all them. 
INT: Let-- let's not jump too far ahead yet. At-- in those years, if you can remember back, what had been your ambitions at the time? What direction did you see yourself going towards? SH: Oh, normally a bochur like-- a boy like me, if he came from a [NON-ENGLISH] house, from a regular layman house, his aim normally was if he was a more modern house he used to go try to get into a university, which was quite hard in Poland to get in a Jew. They got-- had numbers called the numerus clausus was all over the world at that time, especially in Poland. Poland was an antisemitic country as such all the way. However, since Poland has regained his-- its independence in-- in 1918, and it was not well-established altogether, they didn't have statesmen. But in 1926, after Pilsudski with the army took over the leadership on Poland, and they were running the government, Pilsudski had a policy-- not because he was a-- such a big friend of the Jews. But his policy was it is in the interest of the country that all minorities should be respected. And-- and at the time, as long as Pilsudski was alive, the Jews managed quite well. In 1935, on May the 12th, Pilsudski died. And the [INAUDIBLE] on the other party took over. And it was a turn to the worst as far as antisemitism is concerned.  INT: Did you notice changes in your own life at that time? SH: Of course we found changes. Because there were-- you couldn't go free in certain areas, because in our dressing, in the Hasidic dressing-- you know, the-- in our Hasidic garbs, if you went through in a certain area, you knew very well you're going to be beaten up by some Polish hoodlums. 
INT: And did that ever happened to you? SH: I beg your pardon?  INT: Did that ever happen to you personally, or-- SH: It happened many times. But I wasn't the only one. I wasn't [INAUDIBLE]. But usually a boy. So he-- if-- if he couldn't get into higher learning, either he-- if he didn't have a good head for learning, he learned a trait. They become a tailor or a-- a craftsmaker, or a-- the-- and anything, a-- a-- a tinsmith. Most of them, they were practicing like this. You learn. You get married. You go into business. You open up a store-- any kind of store-- or you learn something. But the son of a rabbi usually would try this. He-- sometimes he will find somewhere a little town that a rabbi will take him as a son-in-law and he'll give him over the-- his position. The-- which meant he's going to give you over a position that you'll be sure of the rest of your life to be a [NON-ENGLISH], to be a [NON-ENGLISH]. Because a rabbi in a small town in Poland hardly made a living. That-- that was the-- the famous, the famous joke used to go around that the Labowa rav used to say-- somebody asked him, how do you, rabbi from Labowa, from a little town with 40 Jewish families, have [NON-ENGLISH]? And he said, they don't realize that-- that since the kehilla has assigned that I get a dollar from each funeral, and since my wife and my eight children, we die 10 times a day from hunger, then I'm rich. I am a rich man. So this is the-- the side of the humor used to go, because normally a rabbi in a small town in Poland hardly made a living. But he was sitting and learning and that's all, and trying his best. So they did not know from luxury. And you existed. 
INT: But you assumed that would be your future at that time? SH: I did not. I did not. I had different views at that time, and I was considered partially a little bit rebellion too on that. But we can-- you could not reveal everything what you think, what you plan. But my future officially was, since my older brother Lazar was a chazzan by the [INAUDIBLE] rav, was already engaged. So they say the, the [? rabbinate, ?] the position of [INAUDIBLE], goes for him. My brother Chaskel, they said he's going to marry somewhere to another town. For our town he doesn't fit. He doesn't know Polish. And he is more, like they say, from the yeshivishe type, that he is-- hasn't got much to do with the outside world. So the only one who is in contention to take over to be by-- after 120, the position to be the rabbi of Biecz was Alexander Shmuel. He speaks Polish and he's involved in this. He knows, you know, he knows the-- the-- the articles in the paper. And he knows what's going on in Zionism. His views nobody did know. But people knew that even though I come and I go to the Bobover rebbe, but people knew that I'm leaning towards, towards Mizrahi style because I used to read a lot. And that was for-- as far as I was concerned. But life in Poland in generally in-- since 1935, till World War number Two, was for Jews very hard. 
INT: Let me-- sorry. Let me just clear that up again. But you said you had other plans. SH: Yeah.  INT: What were your other plans? SH: Plans I didn't have.  INT: Views. SH: Philosophy. Views I had. Plans, you couldn't plan, because-- and here I want to come to that point. Since after 1935 the life of Jews in Poland required heart, but everybody was trying to get out if possible. No one knew where to go. All borders were closed for Jews. However, in the '37, '38, in beginning '39, there were a mover-- a movement by the Betar, by the [? revisionist ?] Zionists. They-- under the leadership of Jabotinsky and Dr. [INAUDIBLE] and Menachem Begin. And they called that here Aliyah Bet. There was the illegal immigration. In fact, quite a number of boys from our city, from Biecz, live in Israel today because they went when the illegal Aliyah. Like Leibish Hettinger in Haifa, Yossel Bereger in Tel Aviv, Zelig Nussbaum in Ramat Gan, and Shulem Goldfinger in Haifa. They're-- those people went, and they [INAUDIBLE] together. And this how they were saved. And they had, had families here.  INT: And had you wanted to do that as well? SH: And at that time I was thinking in the times. And matter of fact, my older brother who was later drafted to the Polish Army in '38, Lazar, he also wanted to go with that. But the Polish government already had his seal. He couldn't leave the country because in their books he was already registered that he has to go to stand at the draft board. And they kept a very sharp eye on that. But I was younger. I still had a chance. But the problem was not only this. The problem was also the money, the financial cover. This was an impossibility. People were poor. We didn't have the money. And my-- my father wanted to leave Poland in the beginning of the '30s. But where-- who is going to take in? American was closed. And who is going to give an affidavit for a family with nine children? 
INT: Do you know if he made any actual attempts to-- SH: He made several attempts, and he was turned down. And he had connections. But he-- you needed an affidavit from a family that they will take responsibility that you wouldn't fall-- fall on the shoulders of the government. Who would give an affidavit to support a family with 11 people, 9 children, or-- or-- or 10 people? So he couldn't make it. So you want-- there is something that sometimes you get a-- a-- [? 4D ?] visa specially done. So you had to get from a big shul a contract from America. It also-- it was hard to get. And especially you have to remember that after the-- the-- in 1929, after the Wall Street crash, the-- the financial situation, especially for Jews in America, was not as rosy as the people thought in America that the money is on the street. People worked hard. Some people really didn't have no work. It was a very tough situation at that time. So this was our life in Poland. In other words, we did not enjoy life, but we existed.  INT: Can I ask you one thing-- you touched on it a little bit-- about the relations between the Jews and the-- the Gentiles at the time. SH: Oh, that depends--  INT: When did you-- SH: --also. And I'm glad that you asked this question. Because in Poland itself, in a-- each city was also different. In generally, the Polish people are fed and fed and again fed with antisemitism against the Jews by the Catholic church. We know that. For-- this goes on for hundreds of years. However, as the peasants [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] are not high educated in Poland-- not even low educated-- and they did business with the Jews, we did not go-- we did not going-- having a Christmas party or a New Year's Eve party together with the goyim. The only connection that the Jews had with the goyim was business-like. And in the city, for example, most of the, of the-- in our little town, most of the gentiles were occupied as officials by the government, because a Jew couldn't be a mailman in-- in-- in Poland. This was a government job. And even the local, there was all-- the-- the police-- a Jew couldn't become a police. It was all by the goyim who lived in that area in the city. And we lived like good neighbors. In fact, many of them had small little farms with cows. And where did we get milk? Across the street from us was the mayor of the city, the-- we called the [INAUDIBLE], burgermeister. He had four or five cows. And across the street, our-- my sister and-- and their daughters went together to the school because to the public school there was separate for girls and separate for boys. And the girls mostly used to go to-- to the public school to learn. Even though later they had the Bais Yaakov, but the Bais Yaakov was only for-- as an afternoon school. In the morning they had to go because that's compulsory. They went to the public school. And they were, like, good friends. And matter of fact, I also had some non-Jewish friends. Sometimes we exchanged books for reading. And we lived like with neighbors. We did not go to their parties and they didn't come to our parties, but it was well-known [INAUDIBLE]. There was an older generation from before World War number One who had a different, maybe still more-- more, we would say, more liberal. Like, for example, there were some-- some business people or-- and-- and big farmers. If they had-- instead of going to a trial, to a court, they would rather go in to the-- to the rabbi, to rabbinical court. In fact, one of them said if he has to-- they-- 
INT: This is a non-Jew you're talking about? SH: Huh?  INT: This is the non-Jew you're talking about? SH: A non-Jew. He said if I have to go to the court with that trial, it'll take six months to a year with three different appointments, and the lawyers will eat up the money. I go in to the rabbi. In a-- in a hour the two rabbis sit down and they work out some sort of a compromise, and both parties are happy, and-- and-- and the whole thing, we continue business. He says it-- it takes much less time and less aggravation. But this later didn't exist. However, some of them still remembered. The youth-- the-- our generation already-- was a different type. We used to know each other, only-- but only in the area. I-- since-- another thing that I did not bring in. Part of the rabbi's parnassa normally in a small town-- like take like ours-- was not only from the-- from the town of Biecz. There were about 15 or 20 farm villages, and in each farm village here were five Jewish families, eight Jewish families, three Jewish families. Those farm villages, those Jews in the farm villages, their livelihood was dealing with the farmers. For example, he used to buy several calfs and chicken and geese and eggs. Summertime he has-- have the shochet slaughter them and bring them to the summer resort to Krynica, which was only about 30 kilometers. Krynica in the mountains. We are in-- in the Carpathian Mountains area. And there there were a lot of Jewish guests in the hotels and restaurants. And this is how they made their business. In fact, that the summer season to some of those farm villages was the supplier of parnassa for the rest of the year. Then there were farm villagers who used to deal in-- in the flour business or in the egg business. And this has been part of the rabbi's income. He used to come into the rabbi to sell the [NON-ENGLISH]. Or he made a bris or a simcha. You had to come to the rabbi. And he always comes in, and he brings something of his products to the rabbi with a few zlotys. And especially it comes summertime. We didn't go. We're a large family. We didn't go to Krynica or to Rabka. We couldn't afford it. So what happens? In [INAUDIBLE] there is a [INAUDIBLE] called Lazer Kranz. He has a big house, about eight rooms, a big house. Well, he's giving over three rooms from the back. They're for the rabbi with his family with a kitchen for six weeks, and the rabbi goes out with the family for five, six weeks there. Meanwhile, we have to take along a little melamed, a bochur, to teach your children. Otherwise what mean they're going to hang around five, six weeks not learning anything? This how was the-- the summers went. And the one summer we went through Czarna. Czarna was already a-- a farm village that had about 15 Jewish families. Some of them were already [INAUDIBLE] who knew how to learn [INAUDIBLE] mishnayas from the better class. And there they did not give three rooms. Ah, a Rav [? Fishel ?] [NON-ENGLISH]? He had three houses. This house for the summer? Clear it out for the rabbi. So we had six rooms there for the summer. And I remember. And how did we live? Also very cheap. For six zlotys you bought, you bought a little calf, a two-week old calf of-- of-- of 12-- 12 day-- a two year-- for six zlotys. Two zlotys you got back for the skin, for the hide, and three zlotys you got back for the bottom part. So the front part cost you exactly three zlotys, and you had about 10, 12 kilo meat for the three zlotys. And this how we-- we lived. That was cheap. Eggs were very cheap. And bread. Since there was a-- the flour mills in our area-- there were four flour mills. They all belonged to the Jews. And a-- a bag of flour from 100 kilo, for the rabbi a special price. It cost 25 zlotys. [INAUDIBLE]. So we baked our own bread, our own challahs. And we did how we had to figure out our living. But since our mother, ah-lahv hashalom, in winter time she could not do work with her hands and dough or-- or crushing the meat because she-- in winter time her skin kind of. So we had to help, because we never-- it couldn't always afford to have help in the house. We has-- occasionally we had a goyishe maid to help in the hard work. But we didn't have no washing machines. We had to wash to keep-- and especially when it came once a month or twice a month, we had to do the big wash. And that was a-- a-- a sort of a revolution in the house because for-- for about three, four days was no eating, no cooking, no [INAUDIBLE]. Everything was busy with, with the laundry. So having that, that goyishe maid do the laundry and for us take-- take a [NON-ENGLISH]. You take a piece of bread and butter and go on ahead. And go beis midrash and eat it there. 
INT: OK. I have to stop, sorry. We have to change tapes.  INT: Just finish that laundry story-- SH: Yeah.  INT: --that you were telling. SH: And this was--  INT: How the family stopped. SH: And this-- this was going on in every Jewish house in that time in Poland, since we didn't know from washing machines. But somebody who could afford-- he had a big house. He had a specially laundry room. And they had all the [? kalim. ?] And he had one or two Polish women do the work. A house like ours, we couldn't afford to have there. We didn't have this kind of thing. Like we didn't have refrigerators. You asked a question, how did we live in summer? How did we eat? We didn't have no refrigeration. We didn't have no, even, ice boxes. Ice boxes was for the rich people in the big cities, in Cracow and Tarnów. And even in Biecz there were a few rich people who had that. But how did we-- we had to live by our means. We ate everything, of course, fresh cooked. Milk was not such a thing as, we know, you buy pasteurized milk. We used to go to the farm, stay at the milking, bring it home, and boil the milk. By the way, it was quite good milk because you had a little covering called the [NON-ENGLISH] from [INAUDIBLE]. And this, if it's cold, it's very good. And this how we used to live. And we used to have in our cellars-- our cellars were very cold. If we put down there chicken soup or fish, it [? chilled ?] overnight. It was very cold. It was a very low degree. And this we had to live with. And our cellars were for-- for cold and for potatoes, for vegetables. And then we had a little, called a [? runderschenkel, ?] at the entrance of the house, a little [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] [INAUDIBLE] how to call it? A-- a little [NON-ENGLISH]. 
INT: A storage area? SH: Yes, a little-- a little storage that we kept there, the milk after-- after boiling, cold, after just-- but this could only last for-- for a short period of time. Fruit we used to keep there. But this was in every house. The lifestyle was a very primitive. This we have to remember. And how did we dry the-- how did we dry the laundry after we washed it by hand in the [? whole ?] [? thing? ?] In the-- on the attic, usually, every house-- houses were cheap. In our house, for example, in the attic there were made poles, long poles like-- like sticks. The woman, after she finished the laundry, she has to go up every time with a pile with the-- there, and hang it out there. In the summertime it dried very fast, because it was hot beneath the roof. And in wintertime, since by us the-- the snow fell down before Hanukkah. It was laying there till almost Pesach. So most of the time that laundry, in the first few days, got so frozen that it's-- it was like boards. It was of ice-- sheets of ice. And if you went up careful, we went up to the attic, you got a good [INAUDIBLE] from a-- from a-- like-- like from a board of ice. But this was the primitive way of life. Nobody had it any better. And we lived with it. And the baking was done. Usually every house had a oven-- a baking oven-- not from metal. It was from brick ovens. And the bread and the challah came out very good. The challah used to be put on pans into the oven. But the bread, the rye bread, as you call it [INAUDIBLE], used to be put right on the-- on the brick. And it was very good. Now I'm still looking to somewhere for a [INAUDIBLE] good piece of bread bake-- baked on-- on brick oven. 
INT: Can I take you back again to when you were living as a student in Tarnów? SH: Yeah, or in Cracow, yeah.  INT: And what was-- what continued after that? You were about 13 at that time? How long did that-- SH: No, no, no. I was already-- in Cracow, I was already 14, 15. And then I came home because my father want me. And then [? Bobov ?] established a yeshiva. And so I had to be home, and-- to help the younger children. And then I-- when-- when-- when I-- I reached 15 and 1/2, my father wanted me to learn more in the rabbinical, now that he got [NON-ENGLISH]. And in fact, in the year at that time, a couple months before the war broke out, I got my [NON-ENGLISH]. And this was after I came back from Cracow. But till today's day, when I come to Cracow, the town, I remember all the houses. I remember all the addresses, where it was. Because in-- in Cracow, I had my-- it was an uncle, my-- my mother's uncle, the [? Reb ?] Shayale, the [NON-ENGLISH] Rav. He was living on the [NON-ENGLISH], 36.  INT: 36. SH: Then-- and there I used to eat Shabbos. I didn't like it because he was also a poor man. I'd rather sometimes go for Shabbos to some of the rich balabatim who invited me. But anyway, we managed. Now, again, I'm not-- I was not any special kind. I was no special kind of-- in a-- of a genius. I was a regular, normal meshuggah [NON-ENGLISH] child. Like all youngsters in a-- in a-- I used to enjoy sometimes to go to listen to a good amateur, where nobody should see, because it happens. And it-- and it-- there is something what to see-- to read. And many times, of course, I had to hide something, what I'm reading-- even today yet. 
INT: What-- what did you have to hide? Do you remember what you read that you wouldn't have shown? SH: Anything that had to do with Zionism. I-- it was not kosher for everybody. Especially-- the only thing is, I-- sometimes I have to hide more from my mother than from my father.  INT: She was from the Hasidic side. SH: She was afraid that I'll be affected more. While my father knew-- he was a more open person. With all his Hasidic [INAUDIBLE], he had more looking at the world a different way. In fact, at one time I remember when I-- a kallah came to register for her wedding. And I had to make this there. And my father watched through the window that-- that I did not ask her to sit, and I didn't even greet her when she comes in. When she left, my father gave it to me. He said, where did you learn to be such a [NON-ENGLISH]? A-- a Jewish daughter, [NON-ENGLISH], comes in, a kallah? You don't even say good morning? And you don't even ask her to sit? And you-- you're of-- [INAUDIBLE]. You didn't let that by me! And that's because he was not [INAUDIBLE]. So when he saw me reading a certain [NON-ENGLISH] in the [NON-ENGLISH], or something about Rav [? Koch ?] [NON-ENGLISH]. He didn't say nothing. But he says, put it away. Not everybody has to see it, because he-- but one thing I remember, when somebody came in-- it was already in '35, before Rosh Ha-Shana. And somebody came and told him, did you hear? Rav [? Koch ?] passed away. And my father start crying, bitterly. So one of his students sitting there, he say, why is it the rabbi crying? He was a Zionist! My father says to him, [NON-ENGLISH], fool that you are! You didn't know him! We may have differences of opinion, but this man was a great man! I knew him! So my father's-- so-- so-- that was his policy. You don't have to agree with a person, but you don't have to degrade him because you disagree with him. And he used to say, the world makes two big mistakes. First thing they make a big mistake, they think that a great person never can make a mistake. That is not true. He said, even Moshe Rabbenu made some mistakes. And another mistake they made, they think after he made a mistake, he's no more a big man. That is also not true! It does not diminish him! He may make a mistake, but he-- he's a great person. And this how I grew up. And-- and in my life, every person has his individual style of life.
And-- and my brother, Chaskel-- and I'm very close with him. We love each other. But in our younger age we couldn't stand each other. We were jealous of each other. I was trying to jump him over. And my mother-- ah-lahv hashalom-- didn't like it. Today, when I'm already a grandfather and a great-grand, I understand her views. At that time, I couldn't understand why. Because he was a little bit-- always a little bit sick. He was weaker. And I was considered the strong one. And I will try to show off that I know better. And this, of course, caused friction between us. And my father wasn't always home. And my mother didn't like it, that I'm trying to outdo him. But this was always a style of life, not only by us. It happened all over. And-- and generally, Polish Jewry was a very colorful type of Jewry. And I only knew Polish Jewry. I didn't know the Lithuanians or the Hungarians until I came where-- in-- into the war. But before, I-- I knew they were different than the Polish Jewry. There were a big difference between the Jews in West Galicia to East Galicia, and between Jews and [? Congress ?] in-- in-- in Poland, in the larger part of Poland. The-- for example, you can always say that the Hasidic Jew from Cracow and the Hasidic Jew from Warsaw were not of-- from the same caliber. Different type. The Cracow Jew was an aristocrat, because the Polish was a-- a-- were aristocrats. It was considered an aristocratic city. Till today's day you can see that. If you meet a-- a Jew from Cracow, he is a sort of a sport, a open wide. And he likes to eat well, but he likes somebody else to eat well. In Cracow, a-- a boy like me, who ate tack-- he ate [INAUDIBLE]-- had it like a prince, treated like a prince. I didn't have such good food in my house. My father couldn't afford to give us that what a-- a-- a baleboste in Cracow gave-- gave us. And I wasn't the only one. Every day a nice portion of-- of a-- of a lunch, we call that a [NON-ENGLISH] to eat. You know, a-- a broiled geese or [NON-ENGLISH]. And all of this, and-- and especially in Cracow, the Jew liked to eat well. And he liked to treat others-- generosity, generous people. The same was in Tarnów. The same was in Tsanz. The only difference was, the Jew in Tsanz was poor in comparison to the Jew in Tarnów. The Jew Krosno was well-to-do, while the Jew in [NON-ENGLISH] was a poor man. But that poor man in [NON-ENGLISH] whatever he had he liked to share. 
INT: OK, let's move along now in your own life story to when things changed. SH: All right. Now, in the 1939, September 1, the war broke out.  INT: And what were you doing then in your own life? SH: At that time, I was home. I was home learning. And that-- it was my [NON-ENGLISH] year. I was well involved in years in learning. My brother came home from-- from Lublin. They were-- because the last few months before the war, the situation was very tense all over Poland, especially after [? Munich. ?] Everything was tense because everybody knew, somehow, it's going to break out. You just-- we didn't know when and how. My brother, my oldest brother, Lazar, was recruited to the army, to the Polish Army. After he came home from Lublin, I came home. And I was home that time. And we're learning. We read in the paper what's going on. Everybody is tense. And we don't know what. But it was a Friday. It was a nice summer day, like today, a big-- in September 1. Friday morning, we got up, like a-- like a Friday-- make challahs and you got to make-- prepare for Shabbos. At about midday, about 1 o'clock, I wanted to go down to the river for a swim. It was warm. Then my father decided, no, I want to go to the-- to the mikvah. I said, OK, I'll go with you. We go to the mikvah. We go to the bath house. You know, we-- in Biecz was a-- had a, not like other cities, a primitive. We had a very modern mikvah, nice, with the nice bathtubs. A guy, Chaskel Melamed-- it's a family name, Melamed. He was one of the leading Zionists. Very smart man. He came in. He sees us, you know. And he says, do you know the war broke out last night? I looked at him. You serious? He said, don't ask me if I'm serious. I'm just coming, walking from Jaslo. There are no trains. I had to walk. I couldn't get any other way of transportation. I walked 18 kilometers. I passed by [NON-ENGLISH], which is a farm village near Krosno. There was the airfield. [NON-ENGLISH] was bombed. I was a kilometer away. I saw the bombs with the flames. I listened to a radio. We got dressed. We come home. We go over to one of our neighbors, a goy who had a-- a-- a radio. And we hear the new on the radio, with the-- already with the code for this Polish soldiers. And we figured Biecz is only 15 kilometers-- not even-- 14 kilometers from the Czechoslovakian border.
Well, we didn't know anything, [INAUDIBLE]. Now we know. But everybody is concerned. But you can't do nothing. We don't know what to do and where to do. Shabbos morning my father was very-- already nervous. Gets up in the morning. He says, I suggest we should daven early this morning. We don't know what's going to happen. First let's get them to the shul, get a minyan, and daven. Sure enough, I was about [NON-ENGLISH]. So we come and we daven early. In the middle of the davening, I was about to go up to read in the [? Torah. ?] The chief of the police and the mayor are in the shul. I took off my tallis and went over. [INAUDIBLE] my father doesn't speak Polish. Greeted them. They tell us, look, we just got a order from the [NON-ENGLISH], from the higher-ups, that all the leading people of the city should leave the city. And we will provide transportation. And we want-- since your father-- you're the rabbi of the city, the Jewish leader, we are going to ask you to leave town, going towards east. And we will supply. Well, finish davening, go home. First my father went over, and he spoke to the [INAUDIBLE], the [NON-ENGLISH] Wagschal, [NON-ENGLISH] Shabbos. So Motte says, look, they didn't tell me. They tell you. For you it's [NON-ENGLISH]. You have to go. So my father went home, took something, made kiddush and [? along ?] changes. Took off his shtreimel and changed. In front of the house was already a-- two horses waiting with-- waiting for the rabbi. My father took along my younger Mendel, my younger brother, Mendel. And he went with him. What are the direction, I asked the chief of police. He says the order is to go in the direction of Mielec. Mielec, from us, is northeast. But it just doesn't make sense. But you don't ask questions. Go. It's quite a distance. My father and Mendel went. And they-- they reached Jodlowa. Jodlowa is about 20 kilometers-- not even-- 18 kilometers in the direction of Tarnów, a little bit to the east, just-- they hit Jodlowa. The people in Jodlowa-- Jodlowa, it has no-- has no line on the-- on the train. You see, Biecz is on the-- on the train line, while Jodlowa is like a village on a mountain there. To get there you need either a helicopter or a donkey or a camel maybe. A horse you don't like to go either there, on those roads there. But finally they reached Jodlowa. They [INAUDIBLE] Jodlowa-- look, there's the Baytsher Rav. Yeah, don't believe those nonsense. Let the goy go home. You stay with us.
They invited him to shaleshudes to say Torah [? and ?] [? ate lunch. ?] Monday morning, my father and Mendel are back at home. Yeah. Here we don't see no changes. But as we were sitting in the evening Monday, there's a change in the air. People are walking towards east. Hundreds of people passing the streets, going to [INAUDIBLE], going-- going toward east, towards [NON-ENGLISH]. And my father was already very tense. [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] Yeah, we cannot stand here. We cannot stay here. Then if we have to-- he says to me, go out and try to get somebody on Tuesday morning, early morning, to leave the city. [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] I says I will go try. But around the city it's very hard to get any, because all horses are requisited for the army. Can't get anything around here. I went out about 3 kilometers out of the village, of our little town, towards the area called the [NON-ENGLISH]. I had some acquaintances, some maybe. You know, I-- I've heard one of my old friends, and I says to him-- forgot his name. I think his name was Tribinski, if I remember too well. And I asked him, look, can you take my-- our-- our family? He said, how far? I said, how far would you go? He said the furthest I can go is Strzyzów. I said all right. Strzyzów is about 35, 40 kilometers. And it is closer to [? Russia. ?] So I figured it's more to the east, more to [? the Russia. ?] OK. He said, but one thing, besides the money, I'll make a price with you. He made a [INAUDIBLE]. But I want you to-- to buy me two bags of oats. I wouldn't be able to get oats there. I said buy it here and take it along. He said, for here, he said, I have. But in the-- in the-- for the way back-- I says, I'll buy-- buy you two bags of oats. Made a deal, and we started out. He couldn't go before Tuesday evening. Tuesday evening we got together, the whole family, everything, and we start traveling. We traveled, at that time, the whole night. We arrived Strzyzów about 5:30 in the morning. In Strzyzów there was a rabbi called [NON-ENGLISH] Shapira. He called himself from the [NON-ENGLISH] rebbe, a rebbayim, an aborim. We come into him, in his house, because he [INAUDIBLE] was related a little bit. He [? brought ?] before davening? Yes, of course. He's drinking coffee. He's learning. He looks at [NON-ENGLISH]. What are you doing? [INAUDIBLE]? He-- you had the impression he doesn't know what's going on. And I-- and I-- and I think I was mistaken. He didn't know what was going on. I found out later he was shot right from the beginning. Finally, we say-- we are in Strzyzów. In Strzyzów, in the morning, first thing we davened. We rested a little bit. And my father says, well, what are we going to do in Strzyzów? This-- this is no way of-- this is not my-- the purpose of running. At-- at least let's get into the next little town, to Czudec, [NON-ENGLISH], [? Cziec ?] called in-- [? Cziec, ?] the rov, Rav [? Hertzig, ?] is my old chaver, my old friend. And he has a big house. And the-- the-- the-- the rebbetzins know each other, old [NON-ENGLISH] it is. Well, again we go out to-- in-- in Strzyzów to find a horse driver with a wagon to take us. It's only 12 kilometers from Strzyzów. The trip is not so bad. We find. 
INT: Had you-- sorry. Had your family taken things with them? SH: We took whatever you could, just for food. Yeah, what could we take? Nothing, just we take a set of underwear or something, a few have to change-- not much, whatever you can pack. Because on a wagon with-- with seven, eight people together, how much can you load up? You load up a little bit, as much. And you have to take food, and-- We went-- we came-- finally we came to [? Cziec. ?] We came to [? Cziec. ?] It was already Wednesday. And it-- the rov from [? Cziec ?] was a Rav [? Herzig, ?] and his children, very fine, old, like-- like old friends. And they gave us a [? hi. ?] They had a big house. Don't worry, you'll stay. Good. He took even along a Sefer Torah. We took along, we had in the house Sefer Torah, you know. Friday morning, the police chief comes to the rabbi in [? Cziec ?] with the same, same story. Men, leading people, should leave, go towards east. Women and children don't have to worry. We didn't know. Now, the rabbi of [? Cziec, ?] his two sons, [? Chaim ?] and [NON-ENGLISH] and Shulem. And here is my father, my brother Chaskel, and my-- and myself. Naftali and Mendel are considered minors yet, young. They will stay with the children, with the-- with their mothers. So we left the mothers and the younger children. And we start going. You couldn't travel anymore. You couldn't get anything to travel. But we started out by foot. We ran out from [? Cziec ?] Friday about 10 o'clock in the morning. And we walked. We walked first towards direction-- what's the best way? We didn't know, really. One of the-- another few people who came along with us as a group, we're walking-- we took along some food-- towards [? Nebolitz. ?] [? Nebolitz. ?] [? Nebolitz ?] is an also not on the train line, a separate little town. It has about 40 or 50 Jewish families. It's the other side of [NON-ENGLISH], towards city-- [INAUDIBLE] more to the south, southeast. We go towards [? Nebolitz. ?] But we don't go into the city. [INAUDIBLE]. We passed by the side with the roads, and we walk. We walk on the way with some Jewish farmers. One Jewish farmer wanted to give us bread. We didn't have where to take. Who wants to schlep so much? We had bread. All we needed is a drink of water. We picked up some water here. And we come. It is Friday afternoon. Friday afternoon, and we come to a intersection. The intersection is one leads towards Domaradz, Dembitz, Mielec. The other road leads towards Dynów, Dubiecko, [NON-ENGLISH]. Which road do you take? You've got to be very smart or a genius, or a [? novy. ?] But my father says, I really-- I can't make up. But I says to my father at that time-- this I remember. I think that the road to Dembitz, Domaradz, is not the right way to take, because towards Mielec, toward there, Poland has there their ammunition factories. And I have a feeling those are be-- the first going to be bombed. So I-- my father says, you are right, and we are going to toward Dynów. And we went towards Dynów. We went towards Dynów. And we arrived Dynów, was 9 o'clock at night, 9:30, towards Dynów on Friday night. And we want to go to Dynów. There is the Polish guards standing already. Dynów is overflowed with refugees. You can't get into that city. We [? don't know where. ?] So where do we go now? So one of our group says, quietly, he says to us, Baytsher Ruv, I'll tell you. I know a side road that the guards don't know. If you want to follow me, we'll go with the side roads. We come in to the other side. We will get into the city of Dynów. 
INT: OK, we'll have to stop right there for a minute. SH: [INAUDIBLE].  INT: --with Samuel Halpern. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] So if I can remind you where you were. SH: I was in Dynow at 9:30 Friday night at that time.  INT: And the man had told you about the secret side road. SH: And, and when the man told us, they showed us the side road, we came in. And we found out where to go, because my brother, Chaskel, who learned in Lublin, had a friend that, also, learned with him in Lublin, together from Dynow. And his father was the dayan of Dynow. So we find out where to go. And we came in. Of course, they're, they're not rich people, but the house was already full, packed with refugees. They accepted us with warm, with a warm heart, with open hands, very nicely. They gave us food. They get us a place where to rest-- not, say, too comfortable. But wherever there was a spot, there was somebody to lay down. We were knocked out already, all broken down from a, a whole day long, walking so many kilometers. And we fell asleep, finally. We got up Shabbos morning, and my father was very tense and says, I cannot stay here. We have to leave, we have to leave. My heart tells me, we must leave. We, later, found out it was the intuition from a person. Dynow was one of the first victims, that the minute they came in, they took 200 people out to the forest, and they shot them. 
INT: So how much later was that, after you had left Dynow? SH: That was only about a week later, or some, something like this. My father said, you have to leave. And my brother, Chaskel, says, I cannot walk, I'm not in a position to walk. I can't, I'm falling. And I said, Chaskel, put yourself together. We're going to help you. It's danger, we have to go.  INT: How old was he at the time? SH: He's older than me by 3 and 1/2, 3 and 1/2 years. He's a weak type. I was always, the, the husky guy. And so he got to start walking. Where are we going? Towards Dubiecko. It's another 12 kilometers. We walked. And then here, a stream of hundreds of people, thousands of people, going, running towards east, and also retreating soldiers from the Polish Army. It was chaos. In other words, chaos is the word. And we're going. On the way, there's some-- pass by some farm villages with some Jews still there. So we'd get a drink. We relax. We stopped a little bit. Finally, at about 1 o'clock, 1:30, noontime Shabbos, we arrive to Dubiecko. Dubiecko is a little town also without a train station and a very pious little town. It's not a Zionistic town. They don't even have sidewalks. So you don't have [INAUDIBLE]. Only, they don't have Zionists. They don't even have sidewalks. It is a very primitive old type, very pious. And there's Hasidim-- [? Grodzisk ?] Hasidim, more, mainly Hasidim from our uncle [NON-ENGLISH], and a few [? Belz ?] Hasidim. And we found out that my father's family-- his mother, his sister and all that-- are already in Dubiecko. They came there before us. And they came already three days ago. And they are at the house of Shimon Melber. So we went to see them, of course. The-- what kind of a meeting that was, very touchy, of course, very emotional. But we cannot-- he had no room for us. He has a large family, and again, he has them. Till finally somebody find for us a place in another house called by the Mrs. Sulczyk Knoller. And there there was a room for us with the-- yeah. And we were there. We were in the beds. It was-- that was already the week of Rosh Hashanah. And so we came Shabbos to the beds. And Sunday night-- no, no, no, no. We stayed the whole week, and Rosh Hashanah was Thursday, Friday. 
INT: Now at this time, was there any way for you to communicate with the family at home? SH: No, none whatsoever. None whatsoever. I'm glad you asked that question, because there was no connections. Nothing was working. And finally, it came Friday. Thursday and Friday was Rosh Hashanah. Thursday, the first day of Rosh Hashanah, we still davened in a shul in Dubiecko. The Germans were still-- they out before. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] But at the, at the-- in the evening, the first day of Rosh Hashanah, here comes-- we are in Dubiecko. The Poles are on the east side of Dubiecko, the Germans on the west side of Dubiecko.  INT: That's a river? SH: No, no.  INT: Of the town? SH: The town. And they are shooting with artillery, one to each other. And we are in the city. And in some houses, shrapnel fell in, people were killed. We were hiding in a different house which was a brick house by a Jew called [NON-ENGLISH]. He had-- [NON-ENGLISH], he has a [? ball ?] [? park, ?] some. And they were hiding too. And finally, at 12 o'clock at night or 1 o'clock, it quiet down. In the morning, these, the Germans walked in, the German Army. Not-- that time just the army soldiers. They came around, looking every house and threatening they were. They didn't do anything but beatings here or there, checking. We didn't daven any more in the shul, of course. And this is how we passed the second day of Rosh Hashanah, in fear, and whatever you had prepared for eating on Shabbos. After Shabbos, so my father says-- so what's the sense staying here? We are already under the German occupation, where are we going to go? We have the family there, now, let's try to get back, at least lets us be together. So how do you get back from Dubiecko to [NON-ENGLISH], which is already quite a stretch of about 50 kilometers, 45 kilometers. First, we had to find somebody with a horse and buggy to take us. This is number one. Number two, how were we going to go through the, the German posts and the [? ropes ?] and all that in our dressing, with our Hasidic dress from Poland? So our good Jews in Dubiecko-- very fine people-- said, don't worry. We are going to supply you, we're going to dress you like Polish peasants. You'll take off your Hasidic garbs [? from, ?] we'll give you caps. Put your payos underneath. And you'll go. Sure enough, we did that. And we started out from Dubiecko to travel back towards [NON-ENGLISH]. The driver was smart enough to understand. And he explained to us, he's not going to use the main roads. It'll take a little bit longer, maybe more than a little bit. But because the main roads, as we saw-- the Army full equipped with all the equipment. And we don't know, we are, we are happy if they don't [? check ?] us, they'll leave us alone. But we don't have to-- just to go in on the side roads, maybe, even if there'll be some, there'll be less. Sure enough, we went. We went through some posts, some checking. All we had to explain that we are refugees, we are only going home. At the beginning, some curses. All right, we passed. Finally, we arrived after a day and an, almost a night, traveling slowly, coming back to [NON-ENGLISH]. And we are already-- Yom Kippur we will spend in [NON-ENGLISH]-- small, little town. It's not so [? that-- ?] the Sefer Torah that we took along we left in [NON-ENGLISH] by a Jew on, on the recommendation of Rav [NON-ENGLISH], the rav from [NON-ENGLISH]. And now we have, in [NON-ENGLISH], we have to try to get food, to get flour to bake bread. [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] We passed Yom Kippur in [NON-ENGLISH]. Fasting is not a problem. The problem is now on food. There is no communication where-- whatever food is available in town-- flour, I mean, because there, there is no bringing in. Finally, they finished with [NON-ENGLISH]. We decided what's the sense of staying in [NON-ENGLISH] now. Just like there was no sense staying in Dubiecko, we have to go back to Biecz. Again, to hire somebody-- [PAUSES FOR 5 SECONDS] nobody wants to go. Finally we find one. We promised him a higher price. He took us. And this was some ordeal. 
INT: Were the drivers Jewish or non-Jewish? SH: No, no, Polish. Who had a-- were Jew, had the horses but they wouldn't go. A Polish driver with two horses, he is going. And this was an ordeal, because he had to go through four bridges. And those four bridges were well guarded by Germans, you see. Not like a German Army is patrolling forth and back. These were posts. And of course, [NON-ENGLISH] papers. And at nighttime, you're not allowed, and you-- and they wanted our papers. Our papers were not on there. We didn't have many papers. But since my, my mother, alav hashalom, spoke fluent German. She explained to them that we are [? trying to ?] [NON-ENGLISH], that's all small children and that. They let us pass. That the driver was wondering how they let us through just like that. But finally, we arrived to Biecz. [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] That was Tuesday after Yom Kippur. It was Shabbos Yom Kippur. And Wednesday was erev Sukkos. As we arrived Biecz, my father says-- I'm not going into the city. It was dangerous. Some of the non-Jewish neighbors, the goyim, will snitch on me to the Germans. So what are we going to do? So at the end of-- right before the outskirts of the city, we are seeing some Jews living there. They called the tailor, [NON-ENGLISH] the tailor, [NON-ENGLISH]. So he got off there. He was sitting there. And until he's trying to get to Olpiny. Olpiny is that which is a, a-- like they say-- [NON-ENGLISH] little town, [NON-ENGLISH], like, it is a farm village, a farm village with very few farms. But there's about 25 Jewish families, very poor ones. But it used to be, once, a little town on its own. But it belonged to my father's jurisdiction already. There you could hide. It's far away. It's off the road about 10 kilometers from the main road. And there it-- so by here, this is Tuesday. And as you come into the city, one of the Jews, he is with the [NON-ENGLISH] in the shul, came and runs towards my mother. It was 6 o'clock in the morning, I would say, yeah. He said, rebbetzin, I got a good news for you. Lazar is here, your son from the Army, from the Polish Army. My mother was giving him all the blessing. She starts, you don't know what you did for me, you, you, you've gotten yourself [INAUDIBLE] for that. Now, now we got home. We got into the house. We start setting it up. Everything was a-- more or less-- not in the best of order, but it was-- we start trying to get things together.
And Lazar, my older brother, says, I will go out to meet Daddy. And I'll go with him to Olpiny. And I'll try to get there, from the outskirts of the city, some sort of somebody-- this is no problem already-- to get a horse and buggy to get to Olpiny. So Lazar went out to meet my father. And he went with him to Olpiny. And here, my brother Chaskel, and my, and myself, and my two younger brothers, we start getting ready the sukkah. We had a built-in sukkah in our house. We only had to remove the boards and put up the [NON-ENGLISH]. So we put up the sukkah, and we start making-- we get flour and some eggs, and there's-- and to get some, some chicken. The Schochet is there. And we're making yontif. Wine, of course, forget it. There was no wine available, no raisins. But we had chicken, and we had some vegetables. We had the challahs-- good. And especially, there were some refugees who came along also. So we were all together. We had another few people. And we ate, and that was Sukkos. Nobody knew it. Everything was [? ill ?] in disarray, disorganized. Nobody knew what is, what was coming. It was still, you know, fresh, like from after a fire. First day of Sukkos, all of a sudden, they're grabbing about 25 people-- the German soldiers. 25 people, taking them to [NON-ENGLISH]-- that is a big farm just outside of the city. I'm among them. They caught me too. Well, some people got some beatings. But what is our job? They want us to help, first thing, to load up a car or two carloads, two trucks with straw and bring it to the city to a school to lay it on the floor. Soldiers who are passing by will have to stay overnight. They'll sleep there. Well, if this is the worst-- so we figured, you know-- with this, [NON-ENGLISH]. As a matter of fact, there, some of them they took to, to, to the stable to help them with the horses. In the afternoon, they freed us. And they gave us even a piece of bread with jam to go home-- have a bread, have a loaf. So when we see that, we see it's not as, as terrible as we thought. But we were, of course, mistaken. This was going on on Sukkos. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] Meanwhile, here, it's the end of '39. You know, it's already in, in, getting into October. Whether here, you go out, you tried to do some, some black, black market thing, in order to, to make a-- you know, there's no salary. Everything is-- but you have to live, you have to eat. So you went out to buy this, to buy that, go to this store. 
INT: Was the synagogue allowed to function at that time? SH: The synagogue was still functioning and not functioning. People were afraid. So the synagogue was standing. But people used to make a minyan at home. Kind of people got together in somebody else's home and davened.  INT: Your father, too? SH: No, my father was already in Olpiny.  INT: Your father was away? SH: He went to Olpiny.  INT: And from your family? SH: Hmm?  INT: From you and your brothers, you also made it home? SH: We were all home except my, my father, and my older brother, Lazar. And we were talking on it. It moves in towards the winter. Here and there, you hear, but nothing is real organized. And when I was starting to, to do some, some black market business. I, I heard that there's a shortage of bread. The trains begin running, not regularly. In [NON-ENGLISH], there's a shortage of bread, shortage of flour. By us, it's as easy to get. It's cheap. I went out. I bought 25 kilo of flour, 10 loaves of bread, pack it [? into that, ?] got into the train. I looked like a peasant. On the train, I come to [NON-ENGLISH]. I had connections. I knew something with people. I go into [? market ?] [? and bargain it. ?] I sell it. I make a good price. I take the second train. In the evening, I'm back home. This is how I [? started. ?] Then I found out there is-- you could make some money. There is a guy who has a couple-- about five, six bags of sugar. There is a shortage of sugar. I buy sugar cheap. I'll keep it. I sell it there. There-- I start doing some black market business. And starting then, my brother Lazar, sitting in Olpiny, after two weeks there, I said, Lazar, why are you sitting, there, leave my father, leave Daddy there, there with some friend, we can make-- we have to do some, some business, you know. You know, [? rations-- ?] the, the-- to buy, you know, things that they need for building material, some handles to doors. You can't get it, here. I'll-- you bring this here, we'll make something there. And the same thing, I'll go to town, [? over there, ?] so we'll start doing business. And we talked. It's going to work, and we did it. Then came out in March, in March, '40-- 
INT: 1940. SH: 1940, since they began organizing, a law came out. First, number one, every Jew has to wear an armband with a Magen David on it, number one. Number two, no Jews are allowed to, to travel on the train-- the train belongs to the government-- unless with a special permit. No? Out. So you can't do that. So still, you go here or there with some black market things with, by horse and wagon, to another part-- to [NON-ENGLISH], to there. We, we was trying, we were trying to do something. But things are getting worse. They start demanding work here-- everybody registered. They know their names. My brother and I decided that since they're grabbing people from the street, [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] we are going to hiding. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] Meanwhile, [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] we went to spend some times on the farm villages. And from the farm villages-- the Jews were still living there-- we could bring home something. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] Meanwhile, the German Army was succeeded to break France. This was in March-- in summer, 1940. So the end of the summer, a large group of the German Army came to spend their furlough in Biecz. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] Head of them was a mayor-- a major-- a big antisemite, a [NON-ENGLISH], and he was very smart.  INT: Do you remember his name? SH: I don't remember his name? Maybe, I have it somewhere in the books. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] But I don't remember his name. I only remember that when he saw one of the Jews that they grabbed to work, that he saw that he had some payots. He says to him, [NON-ENGLISH]? That's what I remember he asked him, [NON-ENGLISH]-- are you a schochet? So I, I realized that he knows already, he comes from an area where, in a town that there were Jews there. And he was a big antisemite, big [NON-ENGLISH]. And they were grabbing people in the street. Meanwhile, the, the Judenrate had been organized. Because right at the beginning, when they gave out the order for the arm, they had put together a Judenrate. And the Judenrate has been responsible to execute all those orders. And you know, I said to the mayor, I'll make a deal with you, tell us how many workers you need every day, we'll give them to you, but don't grab people on the street. Somehow, they make a, a deal. And at one time, they got about three workers less, he took and put the Judenrate in jail. He put the Judenrate in jail. He didn't had no workers the next day. Everybody was hiding.
So he came and let him out. And again, they worked with him. But meanwhile, we realized this is not going to work. I don't want to go every time. My brother Chaskel was-- the weak one-- he was always excused. But Lazar and I-- Lazar went out to a farm village in [NON-ENGLISH], sitting for a few months. I went out to [NON-ENGLISH] to a, by a Jew, Moishe Silber, who was an egg merchant, teaching his children davening [? there some. ?] And I'll eat there and stay with him. I don't have to go into the city. They will look for me. They can't find me. If they can't find me, they can't find me. But this couldn't last long also. Then we got back to the city. I had to come back to the city. They have to send us to work. First there was a [NON-ENGLISH]. And, and [NON-ENGLISH] and [NON-ENGLISH], two German firms who were building roads between Biecz and [NON-ENGLISH]. And they said, anybody can volunteer. However, it is hard work, but they're going to pay 2 zlotys per hour. I figured, I said, I'll go. I worked two weeks. It was very hard work, besides beatings. And they did, they paid $2-- 2 zlotys an hour, but they took off from the 2 zlotys so much that when you came home, it was 75 groszy or 80 groszy-- for this and for that and for that, because they gave once a day a piece of bread. They charged. We had to pay for that, and then for this, for the traveling and that. But after two weeks. Meanwhile, there was-- we heard, there is a firm, [NON-ENGLISH] opened up at the river banks at the city on the [NON-ENGLISH], which is the river. The river banks opened up. And they're engaging about a few hundred people to work on the [NON-ENGLISH]-- I mean sand and gravel needed to-- for the army. The German Army needs it. And so I figured I'd leave [NON-ENGLISH] and let them-- you know, I don't want to-- I'll go register with [NON-ENGLISH]. [NON-ENGLISH], not everybody could go in, but all our brothers, our five brothers, were registered at [NON-ENGLISH]. And we were accepted. It was also very hard work, loading there. But also, minor, little pay, but at least you're secured. You're not going to be sent away, because the-- otherwise, we heard in other cities, they grab groups of people, and they send them away to work, [NON-ENGLISH] in hard labor camps. And I know that those were hard labor camps that most of the people did not survive. They died just from the beatings and the hard labor. So we were working at, back at that [NON-ENGLISH]. [NON-ENGLISH] was a firm that worked for the-- they supplied the gravel and sand and all the material for the Wehrmacht, for the German Army. And in that case, we were staying in the city. Especially, our two younger brothers and some-- and myself, sometimes, could stay away a day or two, not to appear, because you need to help in the house. Don't forget, the household required, also, in that family-- somehow, you had to chop wood. You didn't get gas. You didn't have a gas oven. And we didn't have electricity. We had to use either kerosene-- the kerosene-- the, the electricity we had. But they stopped it for the Jews. So we had to use kerosene lamps or candles. 
INT: OK, we have to stop now for a moment. SH: This was already in-- in 1941, by the end of the summer. And we were working for a [INAUDIBLE], hard work, but we were in the city. Life was not easy. Meanwhile, my father came back to the-- to Biecz from Olpiny. And in hiding, of course, they didn't want that the neighbors should know. And-- and it was sitting mostly in the house. But for Rosh Hashanah and Yom Kippur that year, we went to-- to the farm village of [NON-ENGLISH], because to have a minyan in the city was dangerous.  INT: Was your mother still living at this time? SH: My mother, yeah. But my mother took sick before Rosh Hashanah. And between Rosh Hashanah and Yom Kippur, she passed away. Six days in [INAUDIBLE]. In that year, [INAUDIBLE]. It was a very bleak day, and it hit our family badly. But this was-- we were continuing working back-- back-- back at the [NON-ENGLISH]. But as time went along, as close as we got to 1942, situation in generally deteriorated, became worse. As I have mentioned already, that communication between cities, between places, were nil. This was a special way of-- by the Germans to keeping the-- the people misinformed. Besides that, each place, each commander, each commander of a certain area made his own rules. The command-- the commandant from [NON-ENGLISH] and the commandant from Tarnów, two different dogs, but with two different faces and two different orders. The same was in our place. The Gestapo from [? Jaslo, ?] who had the jurisdiction over Goritz and over [NON-ENGLISH], over our city, were keeping a very, very strong watch on what is taking place. They have their orders from above, which we didn't know. Radio, we didn't have. But from some of the very few from the Polish underground, we heard some news, very bad news. But we were not sure whether they're true or not. We couldn't verify it. 
INT: What kind of news was it? SH: That in-- in this place, people were taken out and shot. These little places where people were-- were just cleared out, liquidated. This one was caught. But first thing at the beginning of '41, '42, I mean, there came the order called on the pelts. Anybody, any Jew, must give out any fur, coats, hats, whatever it is, jackets. Anything of fur has to be delivered to the police for the-- for the German Army on the Eastern Front. Anyone who's been found that he still has in possession anything of fur will be shot on the spot. And-- and this was true by them. Right away, several people in every town were shot. Even something which was not real fur, they'll say it is fur. It's an excuse to kill a Jew. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] And then one Shabbos that was at the beginning of January somewhere, in the middle of January, it was [NON-ENGLISH], if I can remember. They came in in the middle of the day on Shabbos, in winter. And the shot [? turned ?] people. [? Turned ?] people in-- in the-- in the-- Shabbos. This one, that one, that one, whoever they found, gone.  INT: Did you see any of this? SH: I saw them dead. I-- I helped bury them. I-- I took them-- I went out to be part of the burial group. Of course I-- I-- I saw them dead. I didn't see him do it, but I saw them shot. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] And as I said, what the fur, then every once in a while, a few weeks later, another excuse. Three families were taken out to the cemetery, near the cemetery, and shot for an excuse that one of the sons has stolen a piece of-- of a-- for a belt in a factory. And then there was-- a-- in another day, they're getting [INAUDIBLE]. That was already somewhere in April, Pesach time. They took out-- they-- at 5 o'clock in the morning, they came into the city, and they picked out about five, six families. They took them, and they shot them. Why? Because one of their sons was registered as a Communist years ago. It's just for an excuse to kill Jews. This how the situation. Meanwhile, we-- 
INT: Can I ask you how the-- the Polish population, the people that you knew, how they acted at this time? SH: The Polish people were being silent. They couldn't do much. They were-- except a few Polish among them was Dr. Sherchinsky and two others who were trying to help as much as they could. In other words, if a Jew had something to hide, they give it. And Dr. Sherchinsky was-- became-- before the war, he was considered an antisemite. But in the wartime, he didn't want to take no money from poor Jews. If-- if any from the poor Jews got sick, he came, and he didn't want to take no money. But later, in fact, they found out that he-- he was helping Jews. They sent him to Auschwitz, and they sent home a-- a box of ashes. Yeah. I'll come to the-- the Dr. Sherchinsky later. Sure enough, it was going on, the shootings, one after another. And-- but we were still working, but back at the [INAUDIBLE], because the-- the head of the-- of the district said, [NON-ENGLISH] is working for the Wehrmacht. No one is going to be sent away. He kept his word. But meanwhile, right after Pesach, all the Jews in the farm villages have been sent in, pushed into the cities, and their wealth and all their farms, the houses, have been requisited, taken away. And we knew that this doesn't mean any-- he wants to have all together, you know, this doesn't say anything good. But there's nothing you could do. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] Then all of a sudden, we hear-- and meanwhile, in our section, and by [NON-ENGLISH], the Gestapo were well bribed until they had-- they got the last order. Somehow, they didn't touch us. They gave us [? work, ?] but they didn't send away, they didn't liquidate, because it was-- Biecz was considered a well-to-do people. And whatever they had, they paid them, they gave them. But till one day in July, we get an order that all youngsters from 14 to 35 must appear 5 o'clock in the morning in the main square, in the city square, [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] to-- for register for work. Going to be sent to work. We came there. The Gestapo came, the SS, selected 170, 170 odd people. And they took us to the train station. That was myself and my other four brothers-- Lazar, Chaskel, Naftali, and Mendel pushed into cattle cars. But they gave-- they kept the cars open for another hour, that if anyone from the family wants to bring any necessities like underwear or that, they then [? fetch ?] it, they can bring it.
So of course my-- my father and my-- my younger brothers, they came right away. They brought us the tefillim and whatever it was, whether it was bread or something. And they closed us in. We didn't know where we were going. All these little openings in the side, as you probably saw already, so many pictures. And they took us, and we traveled all day, till in the evening, we came. They opened up the car. We were at the station, Cracow-Plaszów. That's a train station, Cracow-Plaszów. There, we didn't have a drink-- a drop of water. There were some Jews working there who came there two, three weeks before from other places. They worked night shift. They gave us some pails of water, fast, fast, fast, fast. And the guards, Ukrainian guards, SS guards, surrounded us all over with machine guns and start marching. Whoever couldn't do the march was shot right on the spot. And we marched about three kilometers. Called [NON-ENGLISH]. There were wooden box there, surrounded with barbed wires and Ukrainian guards. You could not-- the SS guards, the Ukraines, you couldn't get in or out without a group, without a leader. Otherwise you were shot. It was not the-- the electrified yet, yeah, but-- we came there quite late at night. We fell down, each one, on-- on a [NON-ENGLISH]. They called those like on boards, made. Yeah. In all the concentration camps, they had that kind of bed, two, three levels, no-- no mattresses, no nothing, not even straw, just board. But we lay down. You knocked out. You fell asleep. 5 o'clock in the morning, they wake up with-- with the rubber sticks and-- and beatings and curses. Up, up, up! Give us black coffee. And out we march to work. We go out to work. [PAUSES FOR 5 SECONDS] To describe the type of work, we-- again, we marched another three kilometers. And they marched us, in other words, the ones who were in charge of the work, each one, with a rubber stick. And if you're not fast enough to lift or to go, you get beating. We saw what means a hard labor camp. That's what you have. Go back in the evening, after 12 hours' work. You work from 6:30 till 6:30. [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] Go home. Same on the-- the guards, with the beating. Little by little, we start finding out, after a day or two, my brother, Lazar, was assigned to be a Gruppenführer. That means you go with the group. You're the leader. You're responsible. Then you can go out. We found out that every few hours-- days, they sent a group into the ghetto, Cracow. Cracow ghetto still exists. And there, there is a big bath house. And they sent us out for bathing for the clothing, because they don't want us to become full-- infested with lice, because it may affect them. So good, though we find out that the-- there's a ghetto. And then the Jews in the Cracow ghetto, when we came in, they helped us. They gave us bread. They gave us soup. They knew what they already-- in fact, there was a-- a special group organized in the ghetto. The Cracow Jews were [NON-ENGLISH] that they organized a special way. There were families who baked and cooked. Now, of course, the first one I saw was my old friend, Mottel Greenberg. They had a bakery. When he saw me, he start crying. I said, Mottel where-- so first, listen. First, you are all torn. Let me give you a pair of pants, and take a loaf of bread. And you'll be here next time, I'll give one then. First we had something to go on, my brother. And we-- meanwhile, we go through about-- and we don't know anything, what happened in the house. But to that camp, they're bringing more people from other places, and this and there, over here. This one was liquidated, the city. This one, they took away the whole city. Where they go there, nobody knows what happened to them. Then we found out that a-- a whole [NON-ENGLISH], that took the people out to the cemetery, and they machine gunned them. And some of the youngsters are here. One day, we come home, one evening, there is-- somebody comes in and tells us there is a Gentile girl standing outside the wires. She's asking for Lazar Halpern. [PAUSES FOR 5 SECONDS] My brother Lazar hears her, goes out. It's the daughter of Dr. Sherchinsky. She brought us a letter that our father and my sister, Miriam, and the youngster, [NON-ENGLISH], are hiding in a forest in [NON-ENGLISH], in that place, in a certain place there in a forest. And writes, I am here in this and this place. If you could help us somehow, try to. Otherwise, this is the last you will hear from me. You know-- 
INT: It was in your father's writing? SH: That's Father's handwriting. [PAUSES FOR 6 SECONDS] My father, with Dr. Sherchinsky, who was the chief doctor of the [NON-ENGLISH], the [INAUDIBLE] in that town, he was a very devoted man. When he found out where my father is, my father sent a message to him. My sister wrote it in Polish, because my father didn't know. He sent him out some money, and he-- and got this, his daughter. Right? And to take what-- to make contact. They knew already where we are. They found out [INAUDIBLE] maybe with them. So my brother has that letter. He gets into the ghetto. In ghetto, Cracow, it was in that time two big tzadikim, the [NON-ENGLISH], and the [NON-ENGLISH], who was a-- a first cousin to my mother. My brother says-- shows them. In the Cracow ghetto, the head of the Jewish police, the Jewish [NON-ENGLISH], was Simcha Shapiro. He was a [NON-ENGLISH]. He was a [NON-ENGLISH]. And he made sure that the [NON-ENGLISH] is in-- is safe in the [NON-ENGLISH] ghetto. There was a Jewish Spitz who was working with the Gestapo against the Polish underground, against the [NON-ENGLISH]. That Spitz was a-- was killed later by the partisans. But for the [? Belzer ?] Rebbe, there was no such a thing. He-- he was afraid for the [? Belzer ?] Rebbe. And-- and the [? Belzer ?] Rebbe told him, for every Jew you save, I promise you [NON-ENGLISH]. So when they-- my brother showed that letter to the [? Belzer ?] Rav and to the [NON-ENGLISH], he sent for Simcha Shapiro. The [? Belzer ?] Rebbe is sent for Spitz. And they told Spitz, what-- what can we do? So they find a way, an idea that there is a firmer-- a firm, Fischer, that builds and works for the Germans, building in a [NON-ENGLISH], you know, concrete with iron [INAUDIBLE]. And their [? haftlinges ?] are special, are specialists in that field. And [NON-ENGLISH] Fischer would like to have them. And on that ground, on that letter from [NON-ENGLISH] Fischer, the Gestapo will issue a permit for him to come, wherever he is. But how do you get those papers to him? There were among us, who took our 173 people there, they were from Czerno, from the-- from that farm, the rich Jews. So Sruel Trapna was his name. He says, I know all the side roads and the field roads to get there. I know where-- where your father is. Give it to me. I will bring it to him. Sure enough, he took it. And he went there, and he gave it. And my father, in the road from that place to the Cracow ghetto, how they went through with the papers is a story and a miraculous story on its own, which I am not going to tell you now, because I heard it from my sister, and I don't want to bring it in now. Maybe at the end, I will add it. Finally, they came to Cracow, to ghetto. And we were still working by-- on the-- in the-- by [NON-ENGLISH], in-- in [NON-ENGLISH]. But my father and-- and my sister already in the ghetto, hiding. Because officially, they didn't go to work, somebody. 
INT: Where was your married sister at that time? SH: My married sister was living already in London. She-- she was living-- she went already a-- in-- from Poland to Italy in '38. And she lived in-- a year in Italy. And the last few months before [INAUDIBLE], my father had made arrangement that they went over to London. So she was safe in London. Now, we come here to [INAUDIBLE]. Meanwhile, every once in a while, we snuck into the ghetto really [INAUDIBLE]. But we did not want to stay there. But how do you get into the ghetto, run away from work? So we-- we didn't appear to work. And we-- we hide ourselves in the ghetto.  INT: It's you and four-- your four brothers at that time? SH: Yeah. With-- with my-- my four brother, all of them, each one a different place. We were sleeping in an attic, in a cellar, here. If we were caught, that would be the end. Meanwhile, Rosh Hashanah-- and-- and don't forget. We were still in the year of Kaddish. You want-- in the ghetto, still here and there, had a minyan to say Kaddish. Finally, it came towards Rosh Hashanah, and we davened in-- in ghetto, in-- in Rosh Hashanah, in ghetto. And in hiding, of course, a small [NON-ENGLISH] and a bakery and a-- and a-- somebody standing up. Meanwhile, we hear that a-- we had already clues. They knew there's going to be another action. In other words, they're going to take out a whole group from the ghetto, send somewhere to Belzec as usually. So what we going to do? In order to avoid this, we went back with the group who came into there, back to [NON-ENGLISH], to the work. I came to the [NON-ENGLISH], to the work, Mr. Lidner, one of the head men, [PAUSES FOR 5 SECONDS] Halpern, where were you? You escaped. I'm reporting you to the Gestapo. You're going to be shot. I says, no, I didn't escape. I worked night shift. You worked night shift? Who is the headmaster of the night shift? Since I worked for four days-- a week-- two weeks before, night shift, two times, I said, night shift is Mr.-- Herr Kaiser. [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] When you [NON-ENGLISH], look, he said, if you lie to me, and I says, he saw that I remembered. I was saved. My brother had the same-- and I told my brother, if you go to the other [INAUDIBLE]. But he wasn't asked. He wasn't bothered. He didn't recognize him. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] Finally, after the action was taken, and another few thousand were taken out, Yom Kippur, we went back to the ghetto. We didn't daven anymore, because it was dangerous. Things started normalizing in the ghetto. Meanwhile, we were living like-- like Gypsies on this attic and at that attic, running from place to place. Because I don't know whether he mentioned to the Gestapo, he couldn't find it, and this. Anybody who was caught in ghetto, who doesn't belong there, or he escaped from a labor camp, was given over, never heard of. OK, once the Gestapo take you on the [NON-ENGLISH], that's the end. [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] I remember, I was a-- a-- Sukkot in ghetto. There was one Sukkah that I knew, the [NON-ENGLISH], in Plaszów. In the side, they had a little Sukkah. And I went to him to eat the [NON-ENGLISH], the [? Sukkah, ?] And I'll never forget it-- was a great man. But after Sukkot, meanwhile, they-- the [? Belzer ?] Rebbe and-- and the [NON-ENGLISH] had the [NON-ENGLISH]. We've got to do something to legalize the [NON-ENGLISH], as there's children in the ghetto, so they should be able to get bread rationing. They are starving. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] So they find a way. My father and my sister, they registered as their original name, Miriam Halpern and [NON-ENGLISH] Halpern. We-- the Halperns don't exist. Everything is Horowitz. Alexander Halpern, the-- the Gestapo is looking for. You know, I can't find him. He died somewhere, [? in the shop, ?] [? Schmuel Horowitz. ?] 
INT: We didn't mention-- sorry. We've never mentioned that you-- you have a first name before Samuel, right? That your name is Alexander Samuel. I don't think we made that clear. SH: Yeah. But that's right. I-- because I came as Alexander Halpern. Because in my Polish papers, originally, [INAUDIBLE]. Then later, we have [? Schmuel ?] Horowitz, Chaskel Horowitz, Lazar Horowitz, Naftali Horowitz, Mendel Horowitz. Finally, Spitz came up one day to-- in that time, there's no pictures, just-- [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] And I say it must have been their day, a big [INAUDIBLE]. And I'm not about the [NON-ENGLISH]. But he was a great man. Spitz said, he came up. All the-- they covered the name with the cards. And Kundi, the head of the Gestapo, says to him, Spitz, [NON-ENGLISH]. What do you want again here? He said that some of my relatives here, he said, I want to have them with-- with me. So Spitz said, the guy was [NON-ENGLISH]. But he wanted to get rid of him. He took out his stamping, went, boom, boom, boom, boom, and get out, the hell out of here. He said, I never-- he never gave it to me so easy. Because I was afraid. I said to the [? Belzer ?] Rebbe, [? Belzer ?] Rebbe told him, go up in-- in [INAUDIBLE]. He says, how is that-- [? Belzer ?] Rebbe said, [? gay, ?] [? gay, ?] [? gay, ?] [? gay. ?] He told them, if you [INAUDIBLE] Jews, you have [INAUDIBLE]. And he said, the rabbi's promises to me, yeah, yeah, yeah. [NON-ENGLISH]. And Spitz came, and we were legalized in ghetto as the Horowitzes. We got bread rationing. And the Judenrate gave us even a place-- you know, not [INAUDIBLE] say an apartment, a-- a room, with two others. First you had a bad [INAUDIBLE]. You didn't have to go to sleep in a attic, you know? And this was done. And we were registered as workers right away in the-- in the brush factory. The brush factory was organized by three brothers Zaltz, Hasidic Jews, very fine Jews. And they said they have-- the brush factory works for the German Army. And whoever was a pious Hasidic Jew, to be registered that he works. The-- the brush factory was the [NON-ENGLISH]. But as long as it was registered, we got our rationing. So-- and we worked in the-- in the brush factory. This was going on right from [INAUDIBLE], like about two, three weeks before Hanukkah. And we had continued there. But meanwhile-- this isn't no-- how we going to eat, what came. What are you going to have from the brush factory? I-- again, I am a young, husky guy, the able physical guy. And I have some friends. And I got very close friends with the Bagel family. The Bagel family had the bakery, and they were baking the bread. And they were all friends there, and the Greenbergs, the whole family. And I used to go to help out at night. And I worked-- I worked in the brush factory till about 4 o'clock in the afternoon. Then I went to help out, to help chop the wood, carry this, carry that. So I came home late at night, very late, working [INAUDIBLE], with a loaf or a loaf and a half of bread. I had some for-- for the rest of the family. And I slept from 2 o'clock in the morning till about 5:30. This was going on. Then one day, a friend tells me, you could do better than that for yourself. You work in the brush factory. The brush factory windows go out to the [NON-ENGLISH] marketplace, and the Poles sell flour that people can get in. If you will buy some flour and bring it into the bakery, if you will produce some rolls or bagel, there are Jews in ghetto who haven't got what to do with their money. They don't know what's going to happen to the money. And they want to eat good for their families. And you'll-- you'll make yourself, and you'll help them, you'll help yourself. One day, I listened to him, and I did it. As beside being a brush maker, that I learned to be make brushes, I learned in the ghetto how to buy bagels-- 
INT: We're going to stop now. SH: With the Bagels.  INT: --with Rabbi Samuel Halpern. SH: As I said, I had been doing work for the brush factory, making brushes at daytime, at nighttime, helping in the bakery by the Bagel and [? Levy ?] family. And I used to bake bagel for myself to sell on my own. Of course, this was not legal. And usually there were two Jewish policemen. I had to give them every day two big bagels, because I want to make sure they don't see everything. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] And this was going on, again, for a-- since, we say, Hanukkah time. But in between, somewhere in [NON-ENGLISH], some rumors were said. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] Some rumors were said that the ghetto is going to be split. There's going to be a Ghetto A and a Ghetto B. I think I mentioned already that they-- in the orphanage, in-- which was liquidated in [NON-ENGLISH], before Hanukkah, the 500 children, where my youngest brother, [NON-ENGLISH] was among them. But in [NON-ENGLISH] somewhere, they said there going to be a Ghetto A and a Ghetto B. Ghetto A is all the healthy, working people. Ghetto B is going to keep the elderly and the sick. Everybody knew what that meant, but nobody wanted to talk about it. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] And meanwhile, the [? Belzer ?] Rebbe and the [NON-ENGLISH] Rebbe of [NON-ENGLISH], who were in Cracow, in ghetto, were-- they had been smuggled out somewhere to the Bochnia ghetto. We didn't know when and how, but we heard afterwards that they have been transferred. 
INT: Now, can I ask you, was that seen as something positive by the people that-- by the average Jew there? SH: No. It only meant that for the time being, the Bochnia ghetto is more secure. We-- it meant that was a-- a sign that this ghetto is not going to last. Especially, at the same time, there was a group of people who would go out from the ghetto every day to work and come back in the evening. And that group used to be called [NON-ENGLISH]. They used to-- well, they told us that somewhere near the new cemetery in Plaszów at the [NON-ENGLISH] Street, they are building many big barracks. This is their job. Nobody knows for whom. There are rumors. Some say it might be for the army. Some say it might be for some other purposes. And some say that it may be for the ghetto, liquidation if the ghetto, Cracow. And we didn't know. Nobody, you know, nobody wanted to talk. The big [NON-ENGLISH] tried to play it down. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] Sure enough, about two weeks before Purim, about two weeks or three weeks, exactly I don't remember, before Purim, the [NON-ENGLISH] have not been let come-- coming home in the evening. They were kept there. They had to settle in the-- one of those barracks. And at the same time, the soup kitchen, the public kitchen, which was supplying bread and soup for the workers, for the needy in the ghetto, which was organized by the [NON-ENGLISH] Organization of the ghetto, the kitchen has been moved up to-- to Plaszów to that camp. That means the camp is already unofficially open. Among the people working in the soup kitchen was my oldest brother, Lazar, Lazar, and my sister, Miriam. She was working there also as a helper, as peeling potatoes, helping to cook. But that lager up there, that concentration camp up there was not anymore under the jurisdiction of the Gestapo of Cracow. It was under the command of a commander, Amon Goeth, who was later, at the end of the war, hanged in Cracow. And this was already a different-- a different ballgame. And it was Shabbos. Shabbos from Purim, that means it's supposed to be a Saturday night, the Megillah, and Saturday, at-- at noon time, the entire people of the ghetto. 
INT: And this is 1940-- SH: This was beginning of '43. That was already March '43. All the people of the area were assembled, lined up, five in a row, about, you know, 8,000, 10,000 people, 80-- in many thousands, lined up, surrounded with guards of SS and Ukrainians. And Goeth himself, with his helpers, going around, looking, picked out some old people and shot them. And one of them was the [? Dzykow ?] Rebbe. He was in the line. I saw with my own eyes. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] And then we were led-- brought up to Plaszów to that famous Plaszów camp, which was a branch of Auschwitz-- had nothing to do anymore with the Gestapo of Cracow.  INT: And who were you with at this time? Still with your brother? SH: We were starting to hold-- all together hold on. Because my brother Lazar was already up there, but my brother Chaskel, my father, myself, and the other two brothers, Mendel and Naftali, standing right next to each other, five in a row, up. We came up to that camp. There, they divided right away according to the factories. Let's say the people who were on the [NON-ENGLISH] shop, in the tailor factories, get these two-- two barracks or three barracks, whatever. There were 300 people in a barrack. The brush factory had two barracks. Of course, the women had separate barracks. Because there were also women workers by the brush factory and the-- the tailor factory. The women barracks were on the other side, divided with that path with the wire, barbed wire. And we were assigned that barrack. And I was-- he had-- my father was down in the bottom [NON-ENGLISH], the bottom bed. My brother and I upper. That's how we were together. And this is how it started with Plaszów and '43, March. Of course, the factories were not together with the living barracks. It was a-- the other side of the road. The road was going in between. And on the other side was the kitchen, and there there's a bakery. And then there were other barracks where it was the-- the paper factory, the fur factory, and the-- and the shoemakers, the-- the tailors, and the brush factory, all of them. I was working there in the brush factory. And of course, no bagels anymore. That's the end of the bagels. [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] Times got quite tough. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] Since there were some pious Jews yet who wouldn't want to eat from what this-- the treif. So they-- since they-- the big kitchen in the-- in the camp had 22 big kettles, big a-- a-- it's like that steam, steam kettles. Each kettle was 300 liter, so that by help and by protection, they were saving two kettles that they didn't put in no meat, to keep it-- keep it kosher, for those people who want only kosher. That's organized by some of the Jews from the ghetto. Meanwhile, we know already what happened. They start bringing up already trucks with the dead bodies from Ghetto B. Ghetto B was completely shot and killed, brought up. And I was one of the group who took out 50 people to dig and for burial. Hard for me to explain my feeling, but even till today's day, sometimes I get completely shaken up, because I remember there were some bodies that I knew I recognized, and which was terrible. I remember that we took big shots of whiskey in order to be a-- we wouldn't be able to withstand that. Physically and mentally, to go through this, today I-- I think, I don't understand how I went through it. And this was what's going on little-- by every day, shootings and killing. But still you are rationed with bread, with [INAUDIBLE]. In the evening, after-- after 7 o'clock, after the day's work, if you can, you sneak down near the kitchen, down there. And there, they give out some pots to clean. Maybe you-- you do some work, you'll get an extra plate of soup. I was among them always trying. I was trying to be fast and-- One day, the manager of the kitchen, Shevlinsky, which later-- later, he lived in Haifa. He says to me, I see you are a diligent worker. You work-- your work hard. If you want to work hard, and I see you're doing good work, you're making everything clean, like it's supposed to be, if you want, I'll get you into the kitchen. I said, yeah. I-- I'd be very glad to do it. But who is going to change my-- the-- my legality and that. He said, this, you don't worry. I can arrange that. So he says, you're going to be a [NON-ENGLISH]. You know what means a [NON-ENGLISH]? A coal feeder. You'll-- you'll be assigned to be feeding coal for kettles. And this is a lot of work. You'll have to bring with you a wheelbarrow. Go to my son, bring coal, feed. Clean out, feed. Bring. It'll be a lot of work. But if you want it-- yes, I want it. I took it. 
INT: And why was that an improvement? Because it was in the kitchen? SH: In the kitchen. And I-- I had more food. And I said-- I-- sometimes, I had to be able to go home and take along with them something [INAUDIBLE]. Sure enough, I got in, started working. After about four weeks working like this, hard as a-- as a coal feeder, [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] Shevlinsky comes over again. He says, I can, for a coal feeder, I can get somebody else. I think you'll do very well if I'll assign you on the cooking two kettles. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] I see you have an idea what is going on. I said, OK. This. But the other side-- and-- you see, there were two rows, one opposite the other, like this. And the other side, since the new kitchen for the-- for the [NON-ENGLISH], for the guards were not finished, meanwhile, there were two kettles that were cooked for the guards. And they have a special cook, a man, a Frenchman, a cook. He used to cook for them. He had a helper, a Ukrainian. He didn't like me. I hated his guts. He was always drunk. And then his name was [? Hans. ?] He says to me, Horowitz, one day, I'm going to kick out that drunk, and I'm going to take you as my helper. I said, [? Hans-- ?] I was on good terms with him-- I'm assigned to two kettles, [INAUDIBLE]. He said, you don't worry. I'll make sure you'll only be assigned to one kettle, which is next to mine, and you will help me. Yeah, OK. After a week's time, he kicked him out. He told the [NON-ENGLISH] he doesn't want him. He has a helper who's-- who is a professional. He had made up a story. And he took me. And I started working with him. Worked my-- one-- one kettle, and I was his helper. And he left a lot to me, like just go outside to get out. He said, just do this and [INAUDIBLE]. And I learned a lot by him, how to do cooking and how to roast there. I even know how to roast rabbits. I learned a lot by him. 
INT: Was he a prisoner as well, or-- SH: I don't know. He was a civilian. He was a cook. He was a Frenchman. Maybe he was-- for them, he was-- he knew his-- he knew his-- his stuff. In fact, this made me do a lot of good. Number one, I had a chance-- once I got a good beating. They caught me, that I handed out some people a-- a-- a little soup, which I'm not supposed to. And when they-- I was caught, I got a good beating. You know, and next time, you're going to be shot if they'll catch you. But you're know, in-- in-- in camp, you don't think about-- life isn't worth anyway. You don't know if you're going to be shot today or tomorrow. You figure, the-- the way life is worth now, you don't have to-- you have nothing to worry. He's hungry. You have it. You give him. That's all. But I could manage for-- for my father and for-- for the [NON-ENGLISH] and the [NON-ENGLISH] Rebbe's brother and for [NON-ENGLISH], that-- that they don't have enough. And they're not starving. From the kosher kitchen, they get only one portion. They don't have a lot. So I had an idea. There was a chimney cleaner, Yankel Felsinger. He had a right-- he was allowed to go wherever, because he has a special uniform. Otherwise, you can't go in-- roam around in a camp. What are you doing? Either you work night-- a night shift, or you're doing a day-- day shift. So why are you hanging around outside? But he could, because he had the assignment to go there and go cleaning. So I said, Yankel-- and I used to give him a piece of meat, some food. I want to order for you a big menaschka, you know, to carry food. It looked like you are carrying soup. In the bottom-- it will be a double layer. In the bottom, I will put in some potatoes, some [INAUDIBLE], the carrot. On top will be some soup. You'll be my messenger. You'll go up to the-- the brush factory, the paper factory, and give it to my brother or to [NON-ENGLISH]. In fact, Rabbi [NON-ENGLISH], who lives now in Hartford, Connecticut, remembers that very well. And his wife always told me that [? Itzhak ?] said that the soup that you used to send was much better. I'd say, of course. He was hungry at that time. And maybe one of the reasons I-- I-- that God saved me is maybe I did some favors for some Jews. But maybe, I don't know. Finally, even-- even my Kleiman, from the-- from the bakery, the head, the manager, he-- I had enough bread.
He used to come in and said, always, a-- a piece of meat. I'd say, Kleiman, I'd like a [? kosher ?] piece of horse meat I have for you. I used to give him. And he used to give me a loaf of bread. So my brothers and my father had enough bread for this. This I-- I-- that was going on for quite a while, [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] until they finished the [NON-ENGLISH]. They finished the-- the kitchen down there. He went down there. But I was assigned back to two kettles. And I was working. But there was a special SS man assigned to the kitchen who had to be there 12 hours a day, sometimes longer. And he would work that nobody goes in, nobody goes out. And of course, with him I was quite well-organized, and he needed me, and I needed him. And many times, he helped me, and other times. For example, there was a-- it came before Pesach. I knew there would be no-- nobody is going to have matzahs. I says to him, [? Hans, ?] I got to have a-- have a bag of flour. For what? I said, what do you care what I'm going to do with it? Get me a [NON-ENGLISH]. He says, Unterscharführer [NON-ENGLISH] will have to give his-- his OK. He is the one in charge of the magazine, of the [NON-ENGLISH]. The Unterscharführer came in one day. I gave him fried potatoes, a piece of meat, a sitting. Then I says to him, Unterscharführer, I need to have a bag of flour. However, it means 50 kilo. I said, for what purpose? Say we need-- have to be-- I am [INAUDIBLE] this. I give him all kinds of [? food. ?] First he was reluctant. Ah, [INAUDIBLE], OK. He gave me a bag flour. And I cooked at night. Several girls-- some of them live now still in Brooklyn-- from the-- after work, from the Schneider Factory, from the tailor factory, at night, I gave them food, and I told them, we're going to bake matzahs. I'll prepare a big bowl to make the dough, and I'll take the-- the [INAUDIBLE]. There was a big stove. We had a big, metal stove, three times as big as this table, all metal. [INAUDIBLE] I'll make it red. And on this, we'll bake on top. And I'll have bottles. I'll prepare bottles. We'll roll it on the other table, matzahs. And I have a few forks, to do that. And whatever, we'll be able to do it. So I baked-- at that time, about 60 or 70 matzahs. And if you have seven girls helping, you could only do it about an hour and a half, not more, because after that was [NON-ENGLISH]. Couldn't get a-- they couldn't be outside. I had 60 matzahs baked. I gave six matzahs to my father, to the [NON-ENGLISH], to the [NON-ENGLISH], whoever I [INAUDIBLE]. And for myself, this was the-- how I baked the matzahs. This was in the-- in the-- in the Pesach of 1944 already. That was April '44, the Pesach when I baked those matzahs. And this is how we were going on for the rest of the summer. In fact, a-- one day, after Pesach, I was walking to take-- in my white uniform, in my hat, as a [NON-ENGLISH]. I went down to take-- to walk now to the bath, to take a bath. And my wallet was taken out. And I was not allowed to have money in the camp. And one of the SS men passes by and calls me, Horowitz! He know-- He knew me. He knew me. What is that out? He gets up. He finds they money. First he calls, he takes me inside to give me a good beating with a [NON-ENGLISH]. And he's going to write me a report. He wrote a report to Berlin on me. Four weeks later, came back, I get [NON-ENGLISH], 24 hour [NON-ENGLISH]. 
INT: What's that? SH: Which means for 24 hours, they put you into a cubic, that you can only stand, like this. You can't turn. Stand 24 hours, only a little [INAUDIBLE] here for air, closed in for 24 hours. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] Everything you go through. Right? That's the end. After this, I'm back to my work in the kitchen, [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] till August the 6th. And every day, of course, I sent whatever I can up with Yankel Felsinger. Meanwhile, Yankel Felsinger, who was hanging around all the places, told me that there had been brought up there on that left side little hill many Poles, [INAUDIBLE], and there were all shot. There there is a pit, and they were shot into that pit and poured a gasoline and burned them. It seems that there were some-- some of them from the Polish underground. As for us, on August '44, around-- everybody, at 12 o'clock, at 12:00 noon, everybody have to appear on the appellplatz, on the big square. Goeth, with all the-- all the [NON-ENGLISH], all the [NON-ENGLISH], the big shots, organized 100 people to a wagon, because they had made the railroad lines close to the-- they continued. They extended them towards the camp, loaded up a whole load of us, and away. Where we go? Where we-- where we were not knowing. And we were traveling about two days.  INT: Was that again with your brothers and your father, or-- SH: Yes, yes, yes, yes, yes. All together it was done. Because once we were out on the appellplatz, we tried to stand together. And we-- they took us to Mauthausen. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] When we arrived to Mauthausen, they only opened the-- the cars once on the way, in order to get out dead bodies and the garbage, of course, because there was a-- a big bucket for-- for human needs. 
INT: How long was the trip? SH: Over two days, two, two and a half days, something like that. When we arrived, we found out later that they wanted to send to Auschwitz. It was already-- Auschwitz didn't accept. It was full. So they sent us to Mauthausen. Mauthausen, we-- we realized that Plaszów was a [NON-ENGLISH] in comparison to Mauthausen. Mauthausen was a-- hell is not the word. [INAUDIBLE] the rushing and the beatings, that's-- all what we had, we took along, what-- how much we have left, when we're already away from home. Tefillin, maybe a-- one or two sets of underwear and an extra shirt and a jacket and the-- the boots that we had on us. We have good shoes, yeah, because in Plaszów I could afford to have good shoes. If you gave one of the-- of the managers from the shoe factory a piece of meat or-- or-- or two pieces of meat, he made sure that next day, he's bringing you down a good pair of boots. We came to Mauthausen. First thing, they separate groups, groups. There's a huge barrack. We thought our barracks were big that we had there, big, huge-- a-- a huge, empty barrack, about a thousand people at a time, in-- 900 people. And after this, another barrack. Everybody had to undress. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] Undress, leave everything here. And you are let in, like, a barn to another barrack, again. There, there's a-- four lines, five lines, with people cut your hair on your entire body, all over. And you go into a big shower room. Long lines, shower, hot water, warm water, [INAUDIBLE]. As you come out-- you never go back to your-- that room. You go out the other side. You go into a-- another. They give you a pair of underwear, a striped zebra suit, a zebra cap, and a-- a pair of shoes from wood, schmattas, whatever they-- comes to their hand. Your size, not your size, like everything is good. Plus a little tin-- tin with a wire, with a number-- from now on, your number is 85-0-38, which means 85,038. Mauthausen had about 165,000 inhabitants in-- in the older branches. And because Mauthausen had five branches or six. Melk, Gusen I, Gusen II, Gunskirchen and Ebensee. 
INT: And which were you in? SH: After being in Mauthausen, the main camp, for about a week's time, they shipped us out. And we tried to be together again to Melk, [NON-ENGLISH]. Melk, you see, Mauthausen is about 180 kilometers west of Vienna, while Melk [NON-ENGLISH] is only about 140. And Melk [NON-ENGLISH] is a smaller camp, but a smaller camp in comparison to Mauthausen. But it's a branch of Mauthausen. And there we were assigned already to groups of working and to do work that the first time we went out, find out, digging tunnels in the mountains for purposes that later, he was making factory there to produce parts for the airplanes. In Melk [NON-ENGLISH], also, we had a very primitive barracks. But we-- the Polish people from the-- came from there. We had a barrack number six, about-- also about 500 or 600, a very large barrack. And we found there in Melk, we found already about 7,000, 8,000 Hungarian Jews who had been brought there before.  INT: OK. We have to stop now for a minute. SH: Yeah.  INT: Samuel Halpern. SH: So we came to Melk. Melk on the Danube was a-- by nature, it's a beautiful place.  INT: Just remind us of the time when you arrived there. SH: Yeah, we arrived in Melk on the Danube at the end of August. I would say about the 25th or the 23rd of August in Melk on the Danube. Melk on the Danube, by nature, is located a very beautiful place. But not for us. For us, it was hell, as usual. And we had to go and to work in two shifts. Every week, the shifts were changed. This week a day shift, then night shift. We used to get a piece of bread of 200 grams a day and a soup. And a black, black water in the morning. Of course, we were on a diet. We didn't get no sugar. So this was our daily life, hard work, hard labor, physical work, and beatings, of course. 
INT: How long-- I'm sorry-- how long was a shift? SH: A shift was from 7:00 to 7:00, so 12 hours a day. We used to get up at 5 o'clock, 5:30. And at 6 o'clock, we used to march out. There was a special shuttle train. We went down for 10 or 15 minutes. We walked down to that train. That train traveled about 10 minutes to the, the working place. And there, different groups to different assignments. Some of them were for the digging with the hammer, some of them are making-- mixing concrete. And I was assigned to the hammer, to the power drill. And I, I worked there at that time. This was going on in Melk. This was already-- the military came, I said, in August, the end of August. We were in Melk till April '45. A heavy year. And on the way we heard that Roosevelt died. How did we hear? We didn't hear. We found a [NON-ENGLISH] there. We didn't have any paper, any communication, any radios. We didn't even get any-- but some of the masters of the, the work site-- those who were the leaders in charge of the work, there were Austrians from the local, and the engineers. And they sometimes came along with a paper. Or they forget it and they left it, or the-- or they wrapped their bread in it. And we found a paper, it said the, the sign, the [NON-ENGLISH]. So we-- then we found out that Roosevelt died in the beginning of '45. And but for us it was very little comfort. And we continued. But we, we saw it's going to an end. Because the-- some of those in charge of the work were a little bit already negligent. They, they, they didn't care to rush us so much. But we were there and didn't have where to go. We couldn't go nowhere. And, and not only we couldn't go, we didn't go, we didn't have even the strength to go. These were already, already at our last, last, last stage. Till it came in April, Pesach time, '45. In fact, this is the only Pesach from all the war years that we had to eat chametz. All the other years, Pesach, somehow we managed not to eat chametz. But this was the last Pesach. We had no choice. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] Because if you could get potatoes or [INAUDIBLE], you don't need it. But there, in Melk, you couldn't get anything. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] So they came around, and they asked who is able to walk. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] It will be taken by train. Whoever is not able to walk-- who is able to walk, we walk. If they're not able, they're going by train. My father and my brother Chaskel and my brother Lazar [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] signed up. I forgot to mention, of course, before, that in, in March [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] '44, my two brothers, Mendel and Naftali, the two younger brothers who were working with us in the brush factory, were changed to a different factory, to a metal factory where-- and we thought it's better. But in May of that year, they took the entire metal factory and they transferred them to Czestochowa. For my father, it was, at that time, one of the worst days. He was praying. He should hope-- he should be able to see them yet. And from there, they were transferred to Buchenwald. But we were left here only our three brothers, Lazar, Chaskel, myself, and my father. I didn't want to register. I said, I can walk. My brother Chaskel says, why are you doing this? I says, I'll tell you. I don't believe them. Can you blame me? I don't trust them. I'll leave it, everything, to destiny. What God wants to do with me, he'll do with me. I am not giving them a-- an opportunity. It was wrong, I don't know. But I didn't. Sure enough, right a day or two days after Pesach, at that time, April '45, a whole group were taken and sent away-- I didn't know where-- by-- to the train station. We were there another week. After a week later, everybody had left. I'd been taken to the river bank of the Danube. There were the boats, you know, boat-- boats for, for pigs, for cattle. Put us in, and on the Danube. So I took a trip. I went with the ship first class. They, they-- for a good day, more than-- about 12, 13 hours. Finally, we came to Linz. Linz, which is west of Vienna. [? Not ?] [? yet. ?] We got out in, in Linz. They lined us up to march. And we marched two days. We got food once. Two and a half days, we marched. Two nights, we slept on the ground, outside on the red ground. Till we reached Ebensee. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] And Ebensee, Ebensee was the-- a branch of Mauthausen. 
INT: And this is still all within Austria? All these places? SH: It's still-- Ebensee is already in the area of Salzburg. It's called the [NON-ENGLISH]. It's a gorgeous area, but not for us. And there, if we thought Mauthausen is hell, [? Melk ?] was hell. If you say in Yiddish or in, in [NON-ENGLISH], something that seven Gehennas together, it was an Ebensee. And there you'll find all kinds of people, Russians, Greeks, [NON-ENGLISH], you know--  INT: Gypsy? SH: Gypsies. Czechs, Norwegians, from all over. There were all kind of a, a [NON-ENGLISH], a, a mixture of all kinds of nations. Lots of Russians, Ukrainians. Food, whose made such a-- who can think of such a thing? People are just starving. Some people are just falling. Some people are laying on the-- on the bridge, on the bed, just to, to pass out, because you can't even get off. It's getting close. It's already beginning of May. Nobody goes out. Meanwhile, I found out through others that my brother, Lazar and Chaskel, my father, are also-- they brought them all to Ebensee, but I couldn't get to see them. It's a-- to get from one side to a the other, first thing, you're in danger to get beaten up. But you weren't able to find it. It's like you come the first time to New York and you try to find a small street on the East Side. You don't know no English. And you don't know whether you are in the center of the city, north of the city, or in the Bronx. You don't know it. This is a, a huge Gehenna. And here they're working yet in the [NON-ENGLISH], how they call the [NON-ENGLISH] in English? 
INT: Storm-- SH: Where they dig out, they, they blast the, the-- it has a name. [? I knew ?] it.  INT: Quarry. SH: Yeah. In a quarry. That's right. That's the word. In, in the-- in the-- in the quarry. They're there. And, and I get a stone on my head. And I still have that bump. And blood is streaming in on the sides. Trying to find a [NON-ENGLISH] schmatta to hold it. Meanwhile, but somehow I picked up somewhere a, a half a cigarette [INAUDIBLE]. I gave it to a Russian. When he stole some food in the kitchen, he gave me also something for that half a cigarette. And this is how we were going on.  INT: And here you weren't given any work to do in this place? SH: No work, not. One-- the first day, they took us out to clean up a rowboat from [NON-ENGLISH] in [NON-ENGLISH]. And that was the only time out. Maybe twice. I don't remember exactly once or twice. Well, and that's it. After that, nobody went out to work. It was in disarray.  INT: And who was in charge there? SH: Everything was in disarray. Nobody knew what is in charge. The only thing I know-- we know is that the same camp commander from Melk is there. And he goes around, and I see he's not giving any orders. He's already afraid. Those Russian prisoners that they had, they were no-- before them, there was no monkey business. In fact, several of them ran away. They were not afraid. And one day, they came out with a sign. They knew the Americans are coming. We are greeting our-- [NON-ENGLISH]. We are greeting our liberators. And he, he did-- and he went around, he didn't say a word. He couldn't do. He was afraid he would do something that would kill him. And [? after ?] [? that, ?] and the one thing I didn't mention, that in Melk, or in any other of these camps, branches, there was no such a thing as burial of dead. They had a crematorium to cremate. The dead were cremated. In Melk, the same thing. But when they came, the Americans came into Ebensee, they find stockpiles of bodies, of corpses. And the first thing what they saw, they didn't believe. And this was May the 6th, when the Americans came in. After that, they-- 
INT: What was your first encounter with that? SH: Meanwhile, first I was trying to find my, my brother. And when the Americans came in, first day, dum, dum, dum, they came. They came back. And they looked around who is injured from there. So me, I showed them. They took me into a barrack. There there was a doctor. Cleaned and put something, a clamp, on it, with gauze, and made a bandage. And I was OK. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] A, a day-- two day-- a day later, they said, all Polish citizens, all those in camp Poles should get out. One kilometer after the camp, go out. Because it was already open, the Americans opening up. There there's a special camp and barracks for Polish citizens, an open camp. And they'll be treated under the auspices of the Polish government. So we all went down.  INT: So you had already found at that point your father, or [INAUDIBLE]? SH: Yeah, yeah, what-- with my father. And I, I had found already my brothers and left. We went down there. First those, those-- there were some Polish clerks sitting down. And what is your name. And I told him what's in your name. Your name. My number is Samuel Horowitz, but the-- so I told them, I'd change it. I want it back to Alexander Halpern. He said I cannot do it. You can only change one, either the first name or the second name, which is it. I said, then change it to Samuel Halpern. Because if-- so Alexander Halpern, that was something totally different. And, and he was right. Because it would hurt me later by the German government. So as soon as-- 
INT: So Samuel had been your middle name. It was part of your real name, though. SH: That's right.  INT: But it was a middle name you were now using for the first name. SH: So now I took my middle name. So from Samuel Horowitz became Samuel Halpern and gave everybody out a little [? feel ?] and took my name. And if you didn't have no pictures, but you're done. And that piece of paper I had for quite a, a while, as you'll hear later. From there on, we were on the Polish camp, the Polish people, meaning all Jews. All Polish Jews. What happened to the other Jews, the Hungarians and that, I was not concerned. I knew already they're in the-- they're in the same way as we were free. They were also free. What they will do is [? stay ?] [? with ?] [? us. ?] We, the Polish people, were now together. But every day, we used to go out somewhere [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] to bring home some eggs, some meat. It's called organize. We used to call it [NON-ENGLISH]. We went to [INAUDIBLE], but the, the people were afraid, the Austrians. And anyway, somebody else gave. And meanwhile, every day they came with them from the Americans with the truck. They brought bread, brought soup. One day, I said, what are we sitting here? What are we sitting here waiting for every day for the American truck so we can get bread and soup? We are free now. Why don't we go out? My father says, where are you going to go? Meshuganah! Where are you going to go? Right away! Where? I said, we can go either to Switzerland or to, to Italy. Tell me, he said, what do you think? The world is open? You don't have no passport. You have no paper. They wouldn't let you in. You're going to go, you, you jump right away? [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] I was there with a friend, Alter Frenkel, he's already [NON-ENGLISH]. Alter Frenkel, we used to go every day together. With us, in that building, in that camp, in our barrack, was my father, myself, Alter Frenkel, and Dr. Fishler and two other Jews. Dr. Fishler was a medical doctor from Tarnow. He was in ghetto, and he was in camp, and he was liberated together with us. I knew him yet from Plaszow. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] One day, I says to Alter, tomorrow when we go out, we are not coming back. We are going. I'm going to leave eggs and sugar there with Dr. Fishler for my father, and next barrack, the next room, Lazar and Chaskel are there. They're older than me. Up till now, I took care of Papa. Let them take, take care. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] Sure enough, I disappeared one day. And we went on the road. How did we go? We didn't have money. We didn't have-- just a piece of paper. But the train in Ebensee was stopping at the station. At that time it was still in such, in everything, a disorganized disarray. Nobody asked you for a ticket. The door opened, like at a subway, you go in, and a big package that I had to carry didn't even mean anything. We went. You know, one thing. I had a gun with me. Because when the things were disorganized, and the Americans came in. And at that time, many of the Russians, some had jumped on the-- on the-- what's called the magazine, the storage room and that. But I didn't have no ammunition for it. Because whatever it was, it wasn't there. I-- somebody didn't like it. I took it. I smuggled it. I didn't even know how to handle it, to be honest. All right. I had it. But it was small. Some people thought it's worth something. Later, I gave it away to the Jewish Brigade officer who told me, you're not going to bring it in anyway. Throw [? it in ?] the [? bridge. ?] We will get it in. We will gladly get it in as we come later. So meanwhile, we went on the road. We come first thing to [NON-ENGLISH]. We came to [NON-ENGLISH]. It's-- 
INT: Where is that? SH: All Austria and the area of [NON-ENGLISH], out of Ebensee. [NON-ENGLISH], first thing, I go and get an American commander of that army, that unit. His name was [? Fisher. ?] He was a Jewish captain. And I says to him-- and he spoke pretty well German, too. I, I didn't have any other language I speak to him. So I say to him in German, don't you think that we should get arms and go and take revenge? He said, this is not what we came for. We came here to show that you are human beings, and we have to behave like human beings. If you-- we let you behave wild, like they did, then we didn't have to come here for. We, we, we want a world of human beings, not wild animals. All right. He went away. And we went further. At that time, anybody would stop, a truck, or [? where. ?] You stopped him, he gave you a, a lift. We came to a place called [NON-ENGLISH]. Another little place outside of [NON-ENGLISH]. And but we have to eat. I go over to the-- to the mayor of the little town. And I said, look, we are two Jews from the concentration camp passing by here. We need food. I know you have rationings. You have to give us something up. Uh, talk-- I say, don't tell me this, because-- and I took out this little-- OK, OK. He get it. They were-- he goes, hear me out. A-- an assignment to go to a store. We got some bread, some cheese, and we [? went ?] [INAUDIBLE]. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] We came to another place-- 
INT: Sorry, did you have a destination in mind, or you were just traveling? SH: I got the [? notion ?] to first get somewhere, to a border, to Switzerland, to Italy. Sitting here in [NON-ENGLISH], in Austria, it gets you nowhere!  INT: Did you have any thoughts to return to Poland? SH: No, no, no. I want to get somewhere to be able to get to Eretz Israel. If the British will put me in jail, I'll be in a jail in Eretz Israel. Here on-- here on this ground, which is full with Jewish blood, there is no room for me. And we went. Again, we stopped somebody, and he picked us up till the Salzburg. We come to Salzburg, a huge city. It's late in the afternoon. Where do we go? I have nothing. I, I haven't got what to eat. I have no money. I don't know the place. So as we walk in, we see two Polish [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] soldiers, a sergeant and a second lieutenant. You're Polish. [INAUDIBLE]. [? See, ?] myself at home, I'm Polish and that. We are from the concentration camp. Is there any place for us, for Polish citizens, that we can stay overnight or get something to eat? He says, sure. Go there, two blocks further. There is a place special. They'll [INAUDIBLE] from the-- from the welfare department, from the Polish government. It's Polish citizens. He says, can you have [? any papers? ?] I showed him the-- good. You go there. They'll get you a place to stay overnight. They'll even give you a, a, a changing your clothes. You'll be able to take a shower. And there's food there. You'll be able to eat. So we went there, and sure enough, they gave us. They gave us even some clothes, which we didn't like altogether, but it had to do better than what we had. Amazing what a pair of shoes, because that what we wore were killing us. These were not shoes [INAUDIBLE]. We came to the-- there in, in Salzburg. And we got up in the morning. And we go further. Where we go? The road again. Whoever will stop will take you. Finally, we got a hold of a truck. Where are you going? We're going towards Innsbruck. Good. Go to Innsbruck. Innsbruck, I knew already that it's close to Italy. That much, I mean, I, I have been pretty good in geography. I said, [INAUDIBLE]. We come to Innsbruck. We come to Innsbruck, he says, well, he has to stop right after this city. They're not going to stop in the city. Innsbruck was bombed, the entire city like a pile of rubbles.
You don't see in the city practically a-- one house which is not destroyed. But we felt very good to see that, that he's letting-- at least they suffered too. We stopped after the city, and he went away. And where are we? About a kilometer after Innsbruck, we see a big farmhouse. There's an old man sitting on there, smoking in comfort, and we say in, in Dutch, [DUTCH], and smoking his pipe and sitting. And over. [INAUDIBLE]. And until that, our greeting, that the-- in, in Austria. [NON-ENGLISH]. Can we stay here? We are passing by overnight here, yeah. While we are talking, a woman comes out. She looked much younger than him, and we didn't know whether it's a wife or a daughter. And she tells us, all to hear, first she brings out bread, cheese, eggs, and [NON-ENGLISH]. You know what [NON-ENGLISH] is? [NON-ENGLISH] is something that they make from apple and grain as sort of a, a-- of a cider which consists-- contains alcohol. Not much, but it's a very good cold drink. And this is a sort of a national drink there. While-- and she's asking what to [INAUDIBLE]. She's got [? the ?] Polish people from a concentration camp. She wants to know for what sin, for what crime we were put to concentration camp. I said, just because we were Jewish. Get out. That she doesn't believe. For-- just for that? There the-- [? doesn't-- ?] so I, I told her, not only, but most of the people were killed for that. And she-- it didn't penetrate, because the people, oh so many of them, didn't know on the farm what was going on. Meanwhile, it gets dark, and we see in the evening, [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] pulling up, trucks with soldiers in, in Italian uniform, who's supposed to go home. And they're lining up on the-- on the side of the road, in a big field, near that farm. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] We find out that these were Italian soldiers that Hitler took captivity because they, they-- the army unit. Well, now they're going home. And I says to Alter, maybe we'll be able to go with them. We'll find a way. We go over to them. They didn't speak Italian. How do I know Italian? But one of them spoke a little bit German. He was already in German camp. We told him-- we had some [? seekers ?] with us. If we can go with them over the border. He says yes, but you'll have to lay down, because they're going to count the people, so they shouldn't see you. So we stayed with them overnight. We gave a couple of cigarettes. And in the morning, at 8 o'clock, they start out, and we pass the Brenner Pass. That's-- the Brenner Pass, that is the place where Hitler and [NON-ENGLISH] Mussolini used to meet at the border, Austria and Italy. And we passed the Brenner Pass, and we come to the first Italian city, called Bolzano. In German, it's called Bozen. Want to stop here? 
INT: Samuel Halpern. SH: We came to Bolzano. And-- and those trucks pulled into a big schoolyard. That was a big schoolyard. And all of them lined up. And they were greeted by, by Italian people, by priests. They brought out rolls, milk, cherries. I haven't seen cherries and rolls with milk for six years. And here-- or 5 and 1/2 years-- here are-- and of course, they give everybody. First time I had a white roll with a glass of milk and a bag of cherries, something. Now, after a half an hour, big tables are put out. And-- at each-- at end of each table, a clerk, a lady, with brushes, with-- with pencils and paper. And all those Italians line up and line up, everybody in a line. And they asked them where to which place he's doing, assigned a number bus here, and they're being taken home. And we stay in line, two Polish lousy Jews, who don't understand Italian, don't know what to do with themselves. We don't know where to go. Finally, we come, reach the line. And that later that girl asked, [NON-ENGLISH]. [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] I says to him, Alter, [NON-ENGLISH]?  INT: Mhm. SH: Of course, I don't understand. Meanwhile, I see a nurse for an International Red Cross. So I figured she must understand German. I went over, excuse myself. I said, look, we are two people here from concentration camp. We came along with them. We would like to, you know, like-- so-- so what shall I tell you? 'Where, where are you heading?' I said, we want to get to Palestine. We are two, we have. She goes over there and tells, Pole-- I have [NON-ENGLISH] and we show them that, that we are, you know, Jew, Polish Jews. [SPEAKING ITALIAN]. That we go to Palestine through Naples. So that means that she has to assign us to a bus that goes through Naples. Sure enough, we got the bus number seven, put us on that bus. Bus go to Naples. But from Bolzano to Naples, that distance, he's not going to make it, you know? It's already in the afternoon. Late in the afternoon. Travels out, comes into a little town called Modena. The name Modena was already, to me, ringing bells. Because Reb Aryeh di Modena, anybody who learned a little bit in, in our Talmudical research and in-- and in Kabbalah, knows what Modena, Aryeh di Modena, that's a town in Italy, once a big Jewish community. Now, in Modena again, the same story. All, everyone puts into a-- to a-- a schoolyard. Line up. We'll stay overnight. It is 6 o'clock in the afternoon, summertime.
I said, Alter, we're going to sit here till-- until tomorrow morning? Meshuggah. I want to get out, see let me at least make the [NON-ENGLISH] and see Modena. So the guard standing, he said they've got to count the people. You can't go out like that. You have to leave whatever, your-- your-- your bundle. I said, sure. I'll leave 'em. My-- my underwear was there. I can leave them there. Doesn't matter. We went out. As we go out to Modena, we look, we go to the city. We pass by a building with tall windows. You know, it looked like-- we thought it looked like a shul here. But it's closed. Admiring the architecture, the Italians are well known for this architecture. I see in the side a open door, a little bit. I goes in, dim light. But traps-- steps going up. I go up a few steps. And I hear singing. I go another step, I hear singing, Hebrew. I say, Alter, come over here, fast! He comes in, 'What is it?' I say, come with me. We go up and we hear singing [SINGING IN HEBREW] I said, what? [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] I went up, opened the door. We see a-- a group of people sitting, a small group of people, and a soldier in a uniform, with a Mogen Dovid. And we say, [NON-ENGLISH]? And we came. [NON-ENGLISH] [NON-ENGLISH] I sit-- sat. I, I was all emotional, tears in my eyes. It's impossible. And for who are you-- and he said, don't worry, sit down. Here's some crackers. Take a drink. And he runs to the telephone, right. 'Hey, I tell you--' [NON-ENGLISH] He was a-- he was a sort of a-- a Sephardic Jew, well, I don't know, [NON-ENGLISH] or what. And-- and then he comes to us, he tells us, within an hour's time, he said, they are coming. And they are taking you to our headquarters, to the Jewish Brigade. About the Jewish Brigade, I knew already. I-- I read in a German paper. Sure enough, an hour later, come two Jewish boys. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] When I remind myself today, I cry. I, I couldn't believe it. Two Jewish boys, carrying arms. A Jew is allowed to carry arms, in a uniform with the Mogen Dovid, speaking Hebrew. They're taking us, dealing with us like human beings. And they're taking us to-- to Florence. In Florence, we come in there, a camp. There are officers, Jewish officers, Jewish soldiers. And they give us food. They assign us a bed to sleep overnight. They give us to drink. And they're speaking to us nicely. And 'Don't worry, we'll take care of you.
We'll get you there. He says, don't worry. And we stayed overnight. In the morning, they take us to Rome. Put us on, on a jeep, two boys. We're going to Rome. We said, 'How the-- we're going to Rome?' And he says, him, 'Maybe we'll see the Pope,' in a joke. [LAUGHTER] I said, big deal. 'Cause he's a big antisemite. Well, we went to-- came into Rome. First thing you-- they took us in to a-- a club, [NON-ENGLISH]. That's the club for all the Jewish soldiers, American, English, in there, German. There, also, first thing, they gave us-- and everybody was so-- such-- two, two creatures, with-- with a very strange look, and they dressed like to-- like they say, [NON-ENGLISH]. And we get there, food. First thing I asked, I got must see the chief chaplain of the American Army. The Jewish chaplain, the Jewish, I must see him. It's something very private, I haven't-- we're going to find with-- they told me, call some [NON-ENGLISH] at the Allied Commission headquarters. Fine. I go. Because after all, I had already, a uniform in khaki, what the Jewish Brigade gave me. Different dressing. All my schmattas I've thrown away. And I go till I got there. Because a guard was sending a French guy and go-- he, he-- he get a conversation with the French soldier. Finally, I got in. Comes in, I come in. They-- Rabbi Hochman-- he was a Conservative rabbi from Lawrence, Massachusetts-- a wonderful person, a warm Jew . He saw me. And I told him, I said, two Jews from concentration camp. 'What can I do for you? I must do something. Tell me what you need.' I say, the first thing, what I need, is a pair of tefillin. Because for six months, I didn't have no tefillin. He took out right away, a pair of new tefillin that he got from the soldiers, the Israelis, from the Israeli soldier. I mean, it's not the a $600, $700 pair of tefillin. But a kosher pair of tefillin-- good for the tefillin. And then he took out cans of food from Manischewitz, and [NON-ENGLISH], and et cetera. And all was good. He-- 'I'll assign a place right away, where you'll be able to sleep. It will-- we'll do that. First thing, tell me.' I said, before I'm telling you, I need a favor from you. I said, I have an uncle-- I didn't know my uncle that well then-- a uncle in New York. His name is Rabbi Teitelbaum. He lives at 69-- 619 'Onion' Avenue. I didn't even say it, you have to say Union. I said 'Onion' Avenue, Bronx. This I remember all the time, how I talk to him. And this. And I want you to send a message. Because there was no mail yet. Send a message right away that my father, the Beitsher Rov, and three of his sons, Lazar, Chaskel, and Schmuel, are saved. And we are alive. 
INT: Now, let me just ask, you already knew about the rest of the family? What had happened, at this point? SH: No, I didn't know nothing. Just about my father and Lazar, and Chaskel. The rest, I didn't know anything. I didn't know about [? Manya. ?] Didn't know by-- by [NON-ENGLISH] and Mendel. But just what I know this, I know they're alive. They're all right. My sister in London, I had no address. But I remember my father's friend, Rabbi Twersky, who lived in London, in 51 'Clapper' up-- Upper Clapton Road, in London. This I remember. Those two messages to my sister. Meanwhile, I found out my sister got, already, a message through another channel. And he made out the message. Then he took out cans of Manischewitz, and all that. And he gave me some money. And he asked me, are you maybe a Hazzan or a [NON-ENGLISH]? I say, yeah, both. He said, good. You can-- you're going to be our cantor and [NON-ENGLISH] this Shabbos. And we are now about 33. There the oldest soldiers daven. Now, I-- I was invited for Shabbos. It was Shabbos [NON-ENGLISH]. And I wanted to show my talents. And my voice was still not killed yet. It was still half a way good. And I was reading, yeah? After davening, comes over a tall man with a mustache, down. 'My name is Dr. [NON-ENGLISH]. I am the main [NON-ENGLISH] from Sochnut And under recommendation of Rabbi Hochman, I still have two [NON-ENGLISH], two, two visas, two entrances to Eretz Israel. It's being given to you and your friend. But you'll have to get passports. Because you cannot give a visa, only in a passport. Fine. That was very good news to me. And but at the same time, was there the rabbi Berman, from the British, yeah, Army. And Rabbi Potashnik from the South African Army davening in the same shul. And Rabbi Potashnik came over, a very fine Litvish Jew. And he greeted me finely. And he saw already that I'm a little bit-- I, I-- like they say, a yeshiva bocher. And he invite, he invited us. He'll-- 'I'll speak to you later about it.' All right. And finally, next, right after Shabbos, we went to the via Albania, the Polish Consulate. And we asked him for-- for, as Polish citizens, passports. First he start making a little bit difficult. He says, usually it's a Pole. Finally, he gave us two passports. Not the passport like we have, booklets. But a sheet of paper with some question, put on this. We have to bring him the photos. Finally, we gave it to Dr. [NON-ENGLISH]. And 10 days later, we-- a soldier, a-- a-- a sergeant from the South African Army, on the recommendations from Rabbi Potashnik, took us to Naples, where the ship, is passing by. And took us to Eretz Israel. So in July 3, 1945, we got off our boat. And we came to Eretz Israel. That-- this was the end of the-- of the story with the lager. We came through the-- there. They took everybody to Atlit. 
INT: How-- let me just ask you, had you been, any way, in contact with your father, after that? SH: Not yet.  INT: Still not. SH: So far, not yet. I didn't make no connection. I didn't know. When I came and we got out to Atlit, Alter and myself, anybody who had some-- all right, we came illegally. But you have to check where to go. Anybody who had relatives or somebody came to claim them, OK. But we were a stranger. Those people who came didn't have where to go. Usually the Jewish Agency takes care, send you to a moshav, to a kibbutz, to a place. I-- we-- those two guys like, Alter and me, he said-- I says, I-- first I wanted to get out of here. I don't care. I says to him, just get me in a place where there-- among Jews, to be able to work and live. That time, I didn't think about Mapai, Agudah. Because after that war, all those political ideas from before the war, they're all wiped out. To me, every Jew is a Jew. Hitler killed all the Jews the same. Doesn't matter if he's Chosid or a Misnagdim, or Ashkenazi, or a Sephardim, doesn't matter. You're a Jew, you got to be killed. So to me, now, I say, let [NON-ENGLISH] among Jews. So he says, OK. It's Wednesday. Get on that truck. Take them to [NON-ENGLISH]. [NON-ENGLISH] is a-- a [NON-ENGLISH], a small kibbutz near [NON-ENGLISH], near [NON-ENGLISH], a Mapai kibbutz on the [NON-ENGLISH]. We came there. People were very nice. They accepted us very warmly. And first thing that they put up, tea and dates. I haven't seen dates, I didn't remember when. Tea with dates-- they didn't have no sugar. It was still rationed, the sugar, after war. But dates, you understand? I remember, yeah, dates used to probably grow in Eretz Israel. Because we learned chumash. We know about that. But in reality, to see dates and have such a thrill, with tea. Finally, after resting a-- a half a day, a day, in the morning, I says to the-- wait, now still in kibbutz, no, I want to-- why didn't you put me to work? He said, what's your hurry? You just came. Stay another day. Don't worry. You'll be plenty of work. I said no, I don't like that there. What are we, going to eat for free? What am I, a schnuller? 'Oh, you want? I'll give you a choice. You can work in the barn. You can work by the horses. Or you can work in the vegetable garden. You can work in the vineyard. What do you choose?' I said, put me to the vineyard.
Of course, a guy like this goes into the vineyard. And at the time, well you know, we maybe could, I now remember at the time, like, the [NON-ENGLISH] came. And you see those big black grapes. I started working, and eating. Working and eating. Well, when did I ever have a chance to eat for free such beautiful good black large grapes? Each grape was like a plum-- juicy. Of course, next day I couldn't go to work anymore. Because my stomach had a little bit too much of it. Well, and this, how it is all. Finally, it came Shabbos. Meanwhile, Thursday, Alter picked himself up. And he went to Tel Aviv. He had a uncle. He had a uncle, his father's sister. He went. Friday, he's back, furious, mad. 'That uncle there, no good. You know?' 'What happened?' The uncle said that the kibbutz is a good place for me. They have plenty of money, why can't he keep me? Now, I listened to him. It came-- we went-- it came Friday night. I see they're putting a white tablecloth with a candlestick, with two candles. Well, so now, they're-- they are not such, such a-- look, they're keeping Shabbos. But after, after the supper, everybody went out with a cigarette. No, I say, I can't understand it. But I-- I-- I've said, I'm not the policeman for God. I went to my room. I have a Siddur. Because-- because Rabbi Hochman gave me a tefillin with a Siddur. Shabbos morning, at 6 o'clock, I get up. Alter is sleeping. I get up, 6 o'clock. Beautiful weather. Sun is shining. It's [NON-ENGLISH]. And I get out. I walk through. See nobody. I see the guy. He is get-- going into the-- to the stable to feed the horses. But he's a Sephardic. I says to him, Shabbat Shalom. I says to him, is there any, a-- a synagogue, a Beth Knesset, somewhere not far from here? He says, yeah, you, you go with this path for about 10, 15 minutes. You come to the main road to Pardes Hanna. In front of you, you'll see the big synagogue. Sure enough, I went. I come in there. There I come in, the whole [NON-ENGLISH]. I come, [NON-ENGLISH]. I take a seat. Don't go in in the side, sit down. I start davening. Meanwhile, right after kiddusha comes over a young man. And he says, Shabbat Shalom. Shalom Aleichem. You look like a [NON-ENGLISH]. But I wanted to talk to you. Come outside. We cannot talk inside. You're not allowed. The rabbi of Pardes Hanna at that time was Reb Zvi Yehuda Meltzer, the son of Reb Isser Zalman Meltzer.
And his name was Zvi Yehuda. I knew from Poland, I know he was a-- a-- in [NON-ENGLISH] yeshiva. But I went out with him. As he went outside, he introduces himself. He said, my name is [? Akiva ?] Cahn. I'm the son of doctor, Rabbi Dr. Cahn from Fulda. And oh Dr. Cahn from Fulda, I knew already, through, through my father. From the Agudah, he was one of the famous Frankfurt Talmidim. And you're invited to be Shabbos for the seudah in our house. And you've got to remember, you can't go back to your place. Your place is not kosher. These are freethinking people. And I see that you are a religious boy. You come with us. Well, good. After davening, he introduces me to Rabbi-- Reb Meltzer. Reb Meltzer invites me for kiddush. He said, I would invite you for-- for dinner, but he is ahead of me. I can't take it away. He wouldn't allow me. But a kiddush? I went, all right. He was sitting with me about an hour, talking. He see, the first time, a Jew comes from concentration camp. Anyway, he-- he came talking. Meanwhile, I picked up my Ivrit faster and faster and faster, as usually. I come to Dr. Cahn's house. Shabbos for the first time by a Yekke, who is counting his words, Shabbos. And he's not talking any [NON-ENGLISH] on Shabbos. And-- and it's-- I see his wife with a big sheitel. His daughter dressed like, like a Bais Yaakov girl, regularly. And they're giving food. Everything is cold. And first time in my life, I eat something which is called potato salad. Never have seen that in Biecz or in Cracow. And I see some cold, and like this. And she sees that I'm observing and wondering. So she asks me in German, [SPEAKING GERMAN]? 'How do you eat Shabbos, by you?' I say, we eat cholent. She looked at me, [SPEAKING GERMAN]? 'My,' she said, 'what is that?' I said, 'this is that something that you cook before. You put it away and reheat it.' [SPEAKING GERMAN]. 'They have-- they have a special name for that, [NON-ENGLISH],' I don't know. Finally, I was, Shabbos, then by them. Sunday, I go home, take my stuff. I thank very much, the girl. And I let myself go. I found out there, in Pardes Hanna that in Haifa is a friend from Biecz, a balabus that I remember. And he used to live in Germany. And he is a rich guy in Haifa. And I came down on Haifa on [NON-ENGLISH] 28. Moshe [NON-ENGLISH]? 'Oy, you're kidding me! [NON-ENGLISH]. He tucked me in. And his son tells me, [NON-ENGLISH], don't worry, quietly.
Sit and eat as much as you can. Papa has plenty money, he hasn't got what to do with it. He was mad at his father because at-- at the collection that they took, they needed for the Haganah, money. His father didn't want to give. Only it's about 1,000 pounds. And they wanted 3,000 pounds for him. And then usually-- I was in Haifa. Then I find out by him that there's a-- a one guy in-- two people from Biecz live in Ramat Gan. And I went to see. And my cousin, a-- a Lieberman, lives in Tel Aviv. He has a flower store now in Albany. So at least I found out where to go. I went to Ramat Gan to meet this, to meet that. I went to-- I went to Tel Aviv, I meet my cousin. All right, everything was fine. And meanwhile, I found out that near Jerusalem, there is a family, Weinfeld. My sister's friend, she got married. I remember their wedding. And they're living in Jerusalem. And besides this, I want to be in the [NON-ENGLISH] to see first time. So I says to my cousin, I-- now I'm going to Jerusalem. When I come back, I'll-- I'll spend some time with you. I come to Jerusalem. I come to go off, ask everybody, [NON-ENGLISH]? Finally, I come to the Weinfeld. He was not home for lunch. She was waiting for him to come for lunch. I, meanwhile, I went in across the street to the shul, sit down. What does the yeshiva bocher do, comes into a shul? Takes out first, a Gemara to see maybe if I can still read, if I didn't forget in my life. As there I was sitting, comes in a man. Not a-- quite tall. Not very tall man, you know? With a nice black beard, a gray hat, a gray [NON-ENGLISH], a long one. And he comes over again, shalom Aleichem, good seeing you, all that. Are you an immigrant? He could see right away, you know? I had to start questioning, we're talking. Meanwhile, I asked him, and what is your name? He said, my name is [NON-ENGLISH]. So I says, say, you, you're the-- the son of the Brisker Rov. He says, how do you know about the Brisker Rov? And he said, what do you think? That a son of the Beitsher Rov, A-- a [NON-ENGLISH], a yeshiva bocher wouldn't know about Brisk? Is there such a possibility? Do you know, in fact, I even remember, I saw the Brisker Rov when I was 11 years old. It was in Krinice. One summer, my father took me along. We went off to see it.
Sure enough, we find out that I have a cousin, a second cousin, living, a Zucsha Felski. He was later known the Chernobyl Rebbe. Zucsha Felski find out, he came. And of course, a-- a very-- a meeting, very emotional. And but [NON-ENGLISH] says, perhaps it would be not a bad idea, since he went all day through, you need some rest to come to yourself physically, spiritually-- you're completely destroyed-- to get reorganized. I suggest sit down, for a half a year, for a year in a yeshiva. You will have food. You'll have a place to sleep. You'll be able to come to your senses, back to your strength. I said, not a bad idea. And I went. So Reb Zucsha takes me for a-- a-- a-- a walk. We walk down to [NON-ENGLISH] yeshiva. And at the yeshiva he says, oh, we are poor. We haven't got our souls. We're downright after the war. We are rationing. And we haven't gotten any place. The dormitory is full. We just don't see a place. So let's go down to the [NON-ENGLISH]. Go down to the [NON-ENGLISH]. Reb [NON-ENGLISH]-- is that the [NON-ENGLISH]? He once was in the [INAUDIBLE]. Again, he said, we are just came. We arrived ourselves from Shanghai, we are poor. We are-- As we walked out, comes a-- from across the street, Rov Noson, the son-in-law of Rov Kook. The son-in-law of Kook, Rov Noson. He sees Rov Zucsha, my cousin, used to be a Talmid in Rov Kook's yeshiva. Because Rov Kook's, [NON-ENGLISH], took him out from Russia in that time, in 1928, with 13 other boys. In fact, the Russians, they were chasing him, wanted to shoot him. And Zucsha was in the [NON-ENGLISH], tells Rov Noson what's going on. This is my cousin. He just came from a concentration camp. And he-- they-- there's no place, [INAUDIBLE]. So he says, what you mean? We don't have place either. But we have to make place. A person comes? And even, this kind of [NON-ENGLISH] comes from a-- a concentration camp, it is no room, there's no place? We have to make place. We don't have place, we will make place. Let them come to us. So that, I went into the [NON-ENGLISH]. And I was there about eight, nine months, 10 months. Meanwhile, I went back first for a raid, to-- to-- to Tel Aviv. And at night, came back to the yeshiva. Came back to the yeshiva, sitting, everything's fine. And one Shabbos, I-- and one way, I went to Tel Aviv, to see my friends. So one of my friends, Alter, says, are you crazy? At your age? You're sitting down at yeshiva now? Don't you think you have to think a little bit about the future, about tomorrow? What are you going to become now, now? And you, again, a [NON-ENGLISH]? And at your age? 
INT: How old were you at that time? SH: At that time, I-- don't know. Figure it out. I have been already, I've been already in the year there, between 23, 24. He says, what are you doing? So I said, you might be all right. He said, come to Tel Aviv. Leave that now. You're not for Jerusalem. You'll find a job. You know, there's something. No. I come to Tel Aviv. And first thing I have to-- meanwhile, where you're going to stay? I don't know yet. Start looking around in Tel Aviv. I went to Ramat Gan. [NON-ENGLISH], which is from the-- the son of the [NON-ENGLISH], knew him. He says, you know what? Here there is a factory called [? Garef. ?] They make socks, stocking. Maybe I can get you a job. Because he was in the printing business, connection, business connection. Here he got me a job. They would teach me how to do this and that. I saw after, after a week's time that's not for me. My eyes, you need better eyes. And I-- no, never done it before. No good, not for me. Let me go somewhere else. I went to Tel Aviv again. But I know high-- Ramat Gan, Tel Aviv, it's, you know, nothing. It's one, like the other. Go in Tel Aviv, I was thinking to go somewhere, to see my cousin. As I went to see my cousin, from [NON-ENGLISH], I passed by a little street called [NON-ENGLISH]. I see a sign. And I-- the-- a store, brushes, brooms, that. I go and I ask, 'Shalom. Can you use a brushmaker?' 
INT: OK, We're going to stop now for a minute.  INT: --Samuel Halpern. SH: We-- I came to [NON-ENGLISH], and I went into the store and ask him if he needs a brushmaker. Meanwhile, I got in contact with my family because my father was already in Italy, my brothers in Italy. That where-- people who came from Italy told me they find them. And my sister from London made contact with me through a-- a Tel Aviv address, through my cousin. And this how we got connected with my brothers and my father, with-- and through my sister in London. And also I got connected directly to my cousin in New York, Rav Teitelbaum. Now back to the brush. I come to the brush factory, and I asked him could he use a brushmaker. He looked at me. He said, are you a brushmaker by, by trade? I says yes. He says let me see. Here is [NON-ENGLISH]. Let me see if you could make me a, a horse-- [NON-ENGLISH], a horsehair--  INT: Horsehair. SH: --from horsehair a, a broom. I say, yeah, give, give me, you know. He gave them to me. I sat down. I start making. He says, yes, you're a brushmaker. No question about it. I, I can use you. I'll give you a pound a day. You know, at that time a pound, it was three and a half dollars. A pound a day. So I start working for him. It goes on. Meanwhile, I said I can only start Sunday because I have to go to Jerusalem, get back my [YIDDISH], my, my belongings. Good. Came Sunday, I start working for him. But after three, four weeks I saw that's no use because he hasn't got steady work. He wants three days a week, four days a week. It's-- that's, that's not for me. I start looking around while I was-- spoke to my cousin in Tel Aviv in the flower shop. I like-- so he says to me, wait a minute. We have here a cousin, a Lazar [? Unger, ?] who is the head mashgiach from the Poland Mizrahi. He has connections. Go and see him, 108 [NON-ENGLISH]. And you'll see. He probably has-- can do something. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] Good. I went right away. He was here. Oh, he was-- oh, yeah, he knew me. I told him I remember by your father's-- I used to daven in your father's shul in Tarnow when I was learning at Tarnow. I knew him and all his brothers, [? Ruvem ?] and [? Yankel. ?] Oh, he said, but I know there are places. At the moment I don't think of an-- of a job. But I have-- while we are talking walks in one of the old [NON-ENGLISH] Poland Mizrahi [NON-ENGLISH]. His name was Nathan Gotti from [POLISH]. And he is introducing-- and, and another guy walks in. And he start introducing me-- Finally I got a job as a mailman in the post office in Tel Aviv, and I was very proud that a Jew in Poland couldn't be a mailman. To me I'm a mailman in my Tel Aviv as a Jew. I'm a, a, a letter carrier. I was very proud of myself. And I received already letters from my sister, from my father. My father meanwhile came to the United States. He was six months in London by my-- he-- they-- my sister was having a doctor taking care. And he was suffering from yellow jaundice. And this how I, I was working in the post office. 
INT: Could I ask when you found out about what had happened to the rest of the family, to those who didn't survive? SH: Oh. I found it out at that time, when my father and my sister made contact with me. I found out because I asked. So they told me that they found out that they were killed in Buchenwald. And, and people who came from Buchenwald told the stories about others. And I know he-- they were in that group.  INT: So how much longer did you live in Palestine, what was called at that time? SH: Where?  INT: How much longer did you live in, in Israel, in-- SH: In Israel-- and because I became-- in '47 I was a member in the Haganah till I was injured. And I left-- in the beginning of '48 I left Israel. It was still under the British because I went, like I say, to America for a, a month or two to recuperate after I was injured from the hospital. I came out from the hospital. And-- but when I came to America-- and my father was very happy I came, and he was trying to get me a job, to get me a job. First he was mad that the-- why-- how long can you keep in the house a, a-- an old bochur, an old buck that doesn't get married? And especially after he was remarried. And she was not the, the nicest-- I didn't know so much about her because my brothers and sisters in America and my cousin didn't like that shidduch altogether. Now-- but I didn't know that happened. I was in Israel, in Eretz Israel in that time. So-- 
INT: What was her name? SH: Her name was Shulamit. She was from a rebbe-- from the rebbishe also. She was a Halpern, from the Halpern family. But they-- all right, look, it was not. Finally, I, I came to America and I was looking for a job. My problem was I didn't know no English.  INT: Where were you living then? SH: In my father's house. My father had a little room for me. Yeah.  INT: Where in what-- SH: In the Bronx. In the Bronx my father were-- had a shtiebel already in the Bronx. Finally I looked for a job. I, I-- English I didn't know. And I landed on a job by a company, Sands Publishing, who produced greeting cards. Those are people from-- they spoke among themselves German. And for me they expected to know English, of course. But I managed, and I picked up English fast enough. And little by little, from a floor boy who helps load the truck and unload the truck, became a foreman. From the foreman became a manager. And I was managing Sands Publishing. And besides that is in '48 in July I got a job as a rabbi, a-- first as an assistant rabbi and then the rabbi in the Hebrew convalescent home in the Bronx. There's a shul and a kitchen and so on. And--  INT: Did you-- sorry. At this point you-- did you realize you weren't going back to Israel that quickly? SH: Of course not. At that time I saw already that my father and my sister were, were not-- my sister from London meanwhile gave up her business, moved to America, where she lost all her money. And in 1951 she went back to England. But this is a story for itself, and nothing to do with me. And, and I became the, the manager by Sands Publishing. And I had a small [NON-ENGLISH] as a rabbi in the, in the Bronx in a Hebrew convalescent home. Later my children start-- grew up. 
INT: Well, let's start with the wife. You met your wife? SH: Wait, wait, wait a minute. You-- I--  INT: We missed. SH: Did I, did I get married? Yeah. And then a year later I were-- had already a job. And all kind of shidduchim came up. And my father was mad this one is not, this one doesn't want me, as usually. At one point a rebbe came. He had a, a beautiful granddaughter. And he said to my father if you will-- if he'll-- if I will put on my Hasidic garb again, let-- grow my beard, a kingdom is waiting for me. I could see a tish for 200 people, in Williamsburg he'll give me his beis medrash. He had nobody to leave it for-- to. So I said to my father, Purim is one day a year. You don't expect me to play that, that role for 365 days. You know I don't fit for. I left from it. I don't want. Finally nobody wanted me. I didn't have no, no, no, no college. My English was very weak. Short I am. Money, I didn't have much, only something that I [YIDDISH] together from work. Finally my father had somebody living in his house, a tenant, a very fine lady. She was related to my wife. She brought her to America. She said to my father, he sees so many girls. Let him see I have a cousin, also a grine, 'Di Grine Kuzine,' like they say in the song. And maybe-- [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] I says to my father, don't make arrangement for me. And one day he did. He didn't listen to me. He made arrangement. Says you going up sometimes to watch television by them. I say you going-- they going to be on one Sunday they come-- she's coming with her aunt to visit. You go up and see them. I start giving. How do you know I'm free this Sunday? Maybe I'll have business. After all, I'm a-- have a-- I could probably with the, with a-- responsibilities. And my father got mad at me. Finally I agreed, OK. I went up to see. I went up to see. I didn't think much. The, the-- wasn't much to see. A-- at first moment I figured. And I, I saw the look she didn't like me either. But I figure-- 
INT: And what was her, what was her name? SH: Her name was in that time Mirla [? Sach. ?] I didn't even care about the name at that time. I didn't want to know-- I want to know. I, I look-- it's [YIDDISH]. Finally, we took a walk. After we took a walk, I say we cannot talk anything here. People around here. Let's go downtown. We went downtown. And I think we ate at the farm food. And we were talking. I realized it's, it's not as, as bad as I thought. It's much better than I was expecting. And I said, well, she, she does make sense. Now, today I knew about. In those years she did. And I said OK. Came back. And I said I like-- and, and that was Sunday the 25th of June, when the war broke out in Korea. That's where I was injured because I met her. [LAUGHS] That was-- I was the first victim of that [INAUDIBLE]. And we made a date Wednesday again. By Wednesday I knew already that we, we could build something together. And three weeks later, I believe-- how long did it take from we, we-- since we--  INT: Oh. SH: Four weeks? Yeah. Four weeks later we got married.  INT: Married. SH: Pray. Yeah, because we-- I-- we said we had-- I had no time. I was busy in a business. I cannot wait till I have other time. If you can't make it now in, in Elul, in August. August 16, 1950, we got married. And with all the tsoris, baruch HaShem, we are 48 years together. And I'm not sorry. Maybe she is, but she wouldn't admit it. 
INT: And you had how many children? SH: And we have three children [NON-ENGLISH].  INT: And how many grandchildren? SH: Now, I can't [INAUDIBLE]. 14 grandchildren. Yeah. Then I told you 13. I forgot Ari [INAUDIBLE]? Whom did I forget?  INT: Well, we'll see, we'll see their pictures in a little while. SH: And-- yeah, OK. 14 grandchildren and three great-grandchildren. I have wonderful two sons-in-law and one wonderful son and a wonderful daughter-in-law. And, [NON-ENGLISH], they're very good to me.  INT: Now-- SH: I hope I'll be good-- I'm good to them.  INT: Now, we skipped a little bit in your career after you first became a rabbi. SH: Yeah.  INT: Then you continued with that. SH: Yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah. Now I go back to that where we left off.  INT: Well, just-- SH: Yeah.  INT: --in short. In short. SH: In short. OK. First thing, when I was in, in the [NON-ENGLISH] rav in those nine months in between, the Satu Mare arrived from Bergen-Belsen, from Schweiz, from Switzerland, to Eretz Israel. And since he was an old friend of my father, he found out-- and he loved me, and I loved him. He was a very interesting person-- that I am in a Mizrahi yeshiva in a [NON-ENGLISH] rav. And he was [YIDDISH] a Zionist in yeshiva. He was trying to, he was trying to, to be [NON-ENGLISH] and back. He was not successful. All right, out. Then later when I came to America, when I picked up that job, I became the, the rabbi, and at the same time doing greeting cards. And we lived in the Bronx. And in Bronx at that time was very hard to get apartment. Was right after the war. Till finally we moved from one place to another. We got-- we bought a house in the Bronx. And our children start growing. We had-- I had to give up my job in the Bronx as a rabbi. And since the-- in the business by Sands Publishing I was already more comfortable in my living, and we moved down to Brooklyn, where my children went to school. And they had friends, because in the Bronx, the school-- we didn't have no good schools, and they didn't have no friends. And this is more important. And this how we continued, and till in-- till we had to make decisions. Because in '85 that girl had to go through-- MIRLA HALPERN: Sh. [INAUDIBLE] something else. 
INT: Your wife. MIRLA HALPERN: [INAUDIBLE].  INT: Sh. MIRLA HALPERN: --teacher. SH: There is only one tape left! MIRLA HALPERN: But the [INAUDIBLE], the [INAUDIBLE] that you [INAUDIBLE] you closed down.  INT: Sh. No. MIRLA HALPERN: And you became a teacher and a rabbi.  INT: Rabbi Halpern. Let's keep going. OK. You also had teaching jobs, correct, before-- SH: This is, this is later. Because Sands Publishing had to be liquidated, and I had to rely on-- and I took-- about four months I took unemployment because I didn't have no rabbinical job anymore at that time in the Bronx. And I was in Brooklyn. And that time I took a job, a position, that Rabbi Henken from the [NON-ENGLISH]. And it was also a short period of time. When I moved to Borough Park, then I met one of my old friends that he once needed something from me. And he found out that I'm in [NON-ENGLISH]. And he starts screaming, education needs people like you! You go to [NON-ENGLISH]. And somehow I went into Yeshiva High School of Queens to teach. And I was teaching Yeshiva High School of Queens for about 10 and 1/2 years till '76. And in '76-- but I also-- the Yeshiva High School of Queens, I had two jobs during the day. Meanwhile, Mirla start going back to work and to make life a little bit easier, because we had to pay for tuition for the children. And from there went Yeshiva High School of Queens. In 1976 I had to leave Yeshiva High School of Queens for reasons. And then Rabbi Arshi got a hold of me, and I was teaching in the Bronx. But at the same time a position in Canarsie as a-- as a rabbi in that shul opened up. I got that position in Canarsie, and I was teaching in the Bronx. And this how I finished off till about '85. I was still in Canarsie. I had my own house. And she had to go through a, a bypass, a triple bypass, in '85. And thank God she went it through nicely. And then I-- we decided that when I reach '80-- in 1987, my Social Security, and I'll be 65, I am quitting and going to Eretz Israel. In 1986 we were here with-- visiting with a group in summer. And this [INAUDIBLE] was building these buildings, bought an apartment, and a year later I retired. And since then we live in Eretz Israel. 
INT: And how was-- that decision, was that hard to make, to leave the children in the States, all of the children, the grandchildren, and come here? SH: Not, not for me. I think, well, since the children are established and they're old enough, we-- they don't have to rely too much upon us. And thank God we don't have to rely upon them. And especially that since then we made up that at least twice a year we go and see them. In fact, the first Pesach my son was here. I paid his ticket to come with the family. And my other-- my son-in-law bought an apartment later here. We are constantly coming and going, and we are not disconnected. And we are very close with our children, even though-- and I think the children are happy that if they come to visit Eretz Israel, they have where to sleep and where to eat. Mama's food is still the best.  INT: And, and who survives till today from, from the rest of your family, from your generation, from your-- SH: From my family, only my sister, the youngest sister, Miriam, and Chaskel and Lazar.  INT: And your father, when did he-- SH: My father--  INT: --pass away? SH: --survived, and he died in America. He died in 19-- in 1968-- '68. In fact, the Erev [NON-ENGLISH] was the yahrzeit. I went to the States for that, for the yahrzeit. But he spent his last years in America, were quite good. Except he had a little bit problems because, you know, a second wife is, is like, is like a-- like they say, you have-- you, you put on your spare tire with, with-- who is already flat. 
INT: Well, I don't want to end the, end the interview on that note. We are up-- we've come up to date, to today. I'm sorry I had to rush you through a little bit of the last as time. I'm sure there was a lot more to say, but it's-- SH: No.  INT: --it's late. SH: We have a--  INT: But I would-- SH: --a nice interview.  INT: But I would like to give you one last opportunity if there's some kind of a message you'd like to leave us with, whoever listens to this testimony. SH: I can see-- say that my message is, and I said it to your friend, to the photographer, since he asked me about encouragement and emunah and belief and religiously, I says since I went through the [NON-ENGLISH] maybe because I was brought up in a house with strong belief and emunah, but I'll never tell anyone who is turning away from religion, I will never, like, ridicule him, because I could understand the pain. And you have to understand pain from another person. If not, you're not what you're supposed to be. You have to feel the other person's pain also. And this is the message. And the only reason I can say I don't know, I'm not better the, the-- because I survived, be better than the ones than who have not survived. They were holier and better people than I am. But this was the hand and the will of God, and I cannot-- nobody can question. 
INT: Thank you very much. SH: You're welcome. Now, are you going-- Has been taken at the end of 1938 when my sister, the older sister who lives now in London, came to visit us. She was living in Milano at that time. Her picture is here for-- in, in-- next to my brother. First my brother in the left side is Chaskel Halpern, who lives in Brooklyn now. As-- he was a Talmud from yeshiva [NON-ENGLISH] Lublin. Next to him is my sister in the [YIDDISH], in the white kerchief on her head. She was a Chaya Thumin, Chaya Tilly Thumin. She was living in Milano at that time. She came to visit us, and we-- she took that-- my brother took the picture at that time. Next to her is my little sister Miriam, and-- Miriam Scheinfeld, who lives now in Brooklyn. Next is my brother Naftali, now my brother Naftali, who was killed in Buchenwald, Naftali Halpern. And he is, he is between my sister Chaya Tilly, Chaya Thumin, and between myself. I am in the extreme right side of the picture. That's me as a yeshiva bochur. And beneath is my mother Leah [? Shulim ?] Dvora Halpern.  INT: And where was this taken? SH: And this was taken in our house in Beicz, in our house in Poland, in Beicz. And this is in the room where there used to be the [NON-ENGLISH] there, my father's [NON-ENGLISH]. He was the rabbi-- HaShem. You could see yet the oven made from the, from the tire-- tires. OK. The first one in the left is Raisa Halpern, the-- my brother's wife. Next to her is her mother, Dvora Teitelbaum, the [NON-ENGLISH] Rebbetzin, my father's sister. Next to her is our grandmother, Leah Halpern, my father's mother. Next to her to the right is the rebbetzin Chaya Weissblum, my father's sister. And next to her is her granddaughter-- [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] [BACKGROUND NOISE] Next to her is her granddaughter in-- with her mother [? Kreindel. ?] And the granddaughter Shaida Gitel Horowitz. And the little boy in between is Lazar Horowitz. And the little girl in between is Beila Horowitz. And those three in the bottom picture-- 
INT: No. We're not seeing that-- SH: Picture was taken in Poland in 1938 when my aunt, my father's sister, the [NON-ENGLISH] Rebbetzin, was in Poland visiting--  INT: And where? SH: --with them. And it, it was taken in Rzeszow, in Rzeszow, Poland. This picture is the-- our engagement picture in August, 1950, in Bronx, New York, my wife and myself when we were engaged-- Mirla Halpern and Samuel Halpern. This is the picture from my father's [NON-ENGLISH], the Baytsher ruv or rav, Yisochor Halpern. Was taken in-- I would say in 1967 in Brooklyn.  INT: And what they-- and relationship. SH: OK. That is the-- my daughter Dvora Leshkowitz and her husband and their family and their children. Their names are Yisochor-- in the left side it is Yisochor Dov Leshkowitz, Ari Leshkowitz, and Moishe Kaplowitz, the son-in-law of my daughter, and my son-in-law. My son-in-law Yosi Leshkowitz. And Ari, Ari Leshkowitz, and Debbie Leshkowitz, my daughter. And Naftuli Leshkowitz. And Mote Eli Leshkowitz. And my-- this is Chaya-- [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] the-- is that-- that is-- no, this is Pessi Kaplowitz, my, my granddaughter, with her little boy Chaim, Chaim Leibe, and myself. And next to it is--  INT: No, you-- you're blocking the camera. We can't see. SH: It's Chaim Yoni; [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] and Chani, my granddaughter; my wife; and Chavi Leshkowitz, my daughter's daughter-in-law. OK. This here, the left side is my daughter-in-law Esther Halpern. And next to it is her son Yisochor Dov Halpern. Next to him is his father, [? Tzvi ?] [? Lazar ?] [? Leibe ?] Halpern, and their two daughters. This is Toba Leah and Dvora Gitel Halpern. 
INT: [INAUDIBLE]. SH: This is my son-in-law Chainock Munzeles. His son, [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] he is-- UNIDENTIFIED SPEAKER: Moishe. SH: --Moishe. UNIDENTIFIED SPEAKER: Tzvi. SH: Moishe Munzeles; [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] Chaim Munzeles; [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] Dvora Leah Munzeles; and Miriam Irene Munzeles; myself. [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] This is Moishe Tzvi Munzeles and my wife. And the little boy here in the left the-- I am holding, this is Chaim Ari Munzeles. The boy in between my son-in-law and my daughter is the bar mitzvah Yisochor Dov Halpern.  INT: This one. SH: This is myself with my great-grandson Shayale. Shayale Leshkowitz. UNIDENTIFIED SPEAKER: [INAUDIBLE]. SH: Yeah. This is my wife, Mirla Halpern. We are married for 48 years, [NON-ENGLISH]. And she made me very happy--  INT: Yeah. SH: --even though angry. [LAUGHS] MIRLA HALPERN: With the help of God we built a very beautiful family-- 14 children-- grandchildren and three great-grandchildren, a son and, and two daughters. And we can only say that Hitler couldn't-- could destroy millions of Jews but not the Yiddish spirit. SH: [LAUGHS]