INT: Today is June the 9th, 1998. The survivor being interviewed is Kitty Hart-Moxon. The interviewer is Corinne Oppenheimer. We're in Birmingham, England. And the language will be English. [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] Today's date is the 9th of June, 1998. My name is Corinne Oppenheimer. And I'm interviewing Kitty Hart in Birmingham, England. [PAUSES FOR 13 SECONDS] All right, good morning. Can you introduce yourself, please? KHM: My name is Kitty Hart-Moxon. I live in Birmingham, England. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] I was born on the 1st of December, 1926 in a town bordering Germany, Czechoslovakia, but the country of origin was Poland. But the name of the town has a dual name. It's Bielsko in Polish. But it was also known as Bielitz in-- in German. And the-- the county was Silesia.  INT: Thank you And how old are you today? KHM: Well, I am going on for 72.  INT: Did you have a middle name at home when you were born? KHM: No, I never had a middle name.  INT: No. Can you tell me about your grandparents? What were their names, your maternal grandparents? KHM: Well, my maternal grandmother's name was Anna. And she was born not all that far away in a holiday resort called Ustron. My grandfather's name was Joseph Werber. He was a farmer. And originally my mother's side of the family actually came from Slovakia. I don't remember my grandfather. I very, very vaguely remember his farm. But apart from that, I don't remember my-- my maternal grandfather. Because he died when I was very young. 
INT: What was your mother's name? KHM: My mother's name was [? Lola ?] Rosa Felix.  INT: And where was she born? KHM: And she was born on this farm outside the town of Bielsko, a little place called Czechowice, which housed a very small Jewish community at the time.  INT: When was she born? KHM: My mother was born on the 18th of February, 1890.  INT: Do you know what her origins-- the origins of the family name came from? KHM: No. I-- I don't know the origins of my maternal grandparents' name apart from the fact that my grandfather came somewhere from Slovakia.  INT: What was the family like? What occupation did they have? KHM: Well, they were farmers.  INT: What type of education did your mother receive? KHM: Well, my-- my-- my mother was brought up on the farm. And she had to walk in those days all the way to Bielsko to-- to the school. And eventually she was lodged with relatives in the town-- in the town of Bielsko. She had a sister. And both the girls attended school in the town. Eventually my-- my grandfather wasn't very happy about having two girls. And he tried to bring them up as two boys. In those days, girls didn't have professions. But my-- my aunt, that's my mother's sister, eventually studied medicine in Vienna. And my mother studied English in England. And she came to England in 1911 and studied the language at Bedford College in London and eventually became a teacher of English, teaching students, preparing them for state examinations, not just primary or secondary school, but quite advanced English teaching. 
INT: What's your strongest memory of your mother? KHM: Well, my mother died post-war in 1974. And she lived with me since liberation.  INT: Right. KHM: So we've had a very close relationship.  INT: Right. What about your paternal grandparents' names? KHM: I remember very little of my paternal grandparents. They both lived in the-- in the city of Bielsko right in the middle of the town. And I do recall the place where they lived. My grandfather, my father's father, had a business of agriculture products. And he had warehouses in many parts of the country. My grandfather died when I was very young. And I don't recall my paternal grandmother at all. But my father was born in the town of Andrychów. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] And of course, his name was Felix. And there were many, many Felix's in that little town of Andrychów. And it was best known for a brewery. They had a very large brewery in that town of Andrychów. Originally, the family, my paternal family going back to perhaps 300 years, came from Italy. And it had been said that one of my ancestors was called to the King of Poland, because he was a sort of doctor. And this is how the family originated in that town of Andrychów.  INT: What was your father's name? KHM: Well, my father's name was Karl Felix, which in English is Charles. He studied law. But on the death of my grandpa-- grandfather, he took over the business, the running of the business. And he ran it together with his sister in the-- in the town of Bielsko until the outbreak of the war. 
INT: And when was he born? KHM: I think my father was born in 1888. And at that time, of course, this wasn't Poland at all. It was part of the Austrian-Hungarian Empire. And both my parents were Austrian. And so were my grandparents in fact. This part of the country only became Poland after the Second-- First World War, 1918. But, of course, it had changed hands many times over the centuries. And therefore, you had people of Polish extraction, German, and Czech extraction in the town. But my father's main education was German. And he went to university in Vienna and studied law.  INT: What's the strongest memory of your father at that time? KHM: My father was a very busy business man. And I didn't see all that much of my father. I didn't see all that much from my mother, because she was teaching. So both of my parents were very busy people. And I was very much looked after by nannies and housekeeping staff. But I did have a very close relationship with my father. And in fact, my father would run behind my bicycle, because he would never let me go on my own. And so he-- he was very close to me. And of course, during the war, he didn't want to leave us. Which he had the opportunity to go away, but he wouldn't go. The last relationship that-- the last contact or my lasting impression of my father is the when I actually parted with him for good. 
INT: We'll hear more of that later. Do you know how your parents met? KHM: Well, of course, my father had connections with farming communities. Because he was dealing in flour, and agricultural products, and seeds. He was like a seed merchant. And my grandfather was a farmer. So I take it they met, because of-- of business connections. And my father had a mill in the city where he used my father's products. And of course, this is, I think, how they actually met. But they didn't marry until after my father returned from the war. He fought in the Austrian army. And he was a-- a captain in the-- in the army. He wasn't actually, I think, not on the fighting front. He was in charge of one of the cities that was occupied at the time.  INT: Did you have any other children in the family? KHM: I had a brother who was five years older than myself. So my brother and I didn't have all that much in common, because five years was a rather long gap. When he was 15, I was only 10. So I didn't see an awful lot of my brother as such. And he still went to a German school. And of course, when I went to school, this part was already Poland. And all the children of my age had to attend a Polish school at the time or Polish language, whereas his language was still very much predominantly German. 
INT: What language did you speak at home? KHM: Well, I was brought up on German, obviously because my parents' mother tongue was German. So I mostly spoke German in town and with my friends. And I didn't actually learn the language, Polish language, until I went to school.  INT: What age? KHM: In fact, I learned-- sorry?  INT: Sorry, what age was that? KHM: Well, I don't know what age I started school. I started nursery school at the age of two, which my mother ran actually, a nursery school in English. And I heard and learned all the English nursery rhymes when I was two years old. But I didn't actually learn the language as such. But I could understand and speak-- at that time as much as you can speak when you're two years old-- quite a lot of English. And it wasn't, as I say, until I went to school at probably at the age of five or so, or six, that I actually came across Polish as a language.  INT: Can you describe your home you had at the time at all? KHM: Well, I was born in a very large house, which was built by my grandfather. And he also built this mill. And in fact, the street was called Mill Street, [NON-ENGLISH] in Polish. And the house was enormous. It had about 12 flats. And most of them were occupied by members of my grandfather's-- on my maternal grandfather's-- maternal father's side. The Werber family had many, many apartments in there. And I don't recall the burning down of the mill, which was burnt down across the road. But I do recall living in this enormous house with different flats and all these members of the family. And I think we moved when I was about five or six years old. And we moved to another apartment house. And eventually, just 1937 or 1938, my father built another apartment house, my father, with my uncle. And they-- and then we moved again. So I think I remember three locations pre-war. 
INT: What was the place called that you moved to? KHM: Well, the last address that I remember was a place called [NON-ENGLISH] I think. I-- I-- I don't know. I think the last place was called [NON-ENGLISH]. But I-- names have changed so much every time the occupation had changed. When the Russians took over the town, they changed the names. When the Poles came back, they changed the names. Under communism, it was different. Now, it's reverted to a pre-war name. So names have changed very much. Names of the streets have changed in the town.  INT: Can you say what your family's economic status was at that time? KHM: I can say very little about my parents' economic state except that it was a very comfortable living. And we did quite a lot of traveling. I remember traveling with my father when I was very small to Vienna, to different exhibitions and fairs. And we had marvelous holidays, mostly in Czechoslovakia and-- and abroad and mostly in Czechoslovakia actually. Very little travel was actually done in Poland. Although I remember I recall one holiday on the Baltic. And we had quite a lot of domestic staff. And I had nannies. So I concluded or I conclude today that it was a very comfortable existence.  INT: Was that typical of the Jews at that time in your area? KHM: The-- the-- the town itself was a very small and compact little town. And as I've said before, it had a German population, a Polish population, Czech population, and the Jewish population. And it was a twin town divided by a river. On the one side of the river were pretty well Orthodox an Orthodox, small Orthodox community or known as Biala. On the Bielsko side was a more progressive and liberal Jewish community. It was a very wealthy little town because it had a textile industry, which was originally established by the Jews, who came from many parts of the world and set up textile factories in the town. And we had many industrialists, very wealthy industrialists. It was also in German hands. Not so much in Polish hands-- in Jewish hands and in German hands. It was a very prosperous little town. And it had wonderful location. Because it was at the foot of the mountains. And people came for the holidays, to the outskirts of the town. 
INT: What sort of religious education did you have? KHM: Well, I went to a primary school which was a Jewish school. And my Jewish education really stems from that because we had already modern Hebrew classes and religious classes. And it was a Jewish environment. We didn't have a secondary Jewish school in the town. And most of the Jewish children didn't go to the state secondary school, but-- I'm talking about girls. The older girls went to a girls school. Well, most of the Jewish girls went to this particular girls school known as The Convent School of Notre-- de Notre Dame. And it was actually a convent-- convent boarding school, a private-- as you would call here in England, public school actually, but not a state school. And this-- this school, people came from all over the county and boarded at the school. In fact, we had two girls, two twin girls, descendants of the emperor of Vienna, of Austria, of the Hapsburgs that were in my class. And they had very large estates outside the town. And they came every day to the school. So it was a very well renowned school.  INT: Did you board at school? KHM: No, I didn't board. I-- I was a day pupil. And I only had one year at that school. It was my secondary school. And it was just the last year, 1938, 1939.  INT: And did you-- were there other Jewish girls in the school? KHM: Yes. Well, as I said, most of the-- 
INT: Oh, OK. KHM: --German-- most of the Jewish girls attended this convent school rather than any of the other state schools.  INT: Would you know why that was? KHM: I presume it may have had something to do with the underlying antisemitism in some of the state schools. And this was a purely religious sort of enclosure.  INT: Did you experience any antisemitism yourself? KHM: Well, I didn't experience any antisemitism in the-- in the school at all. In fact, I had no idea about antisemitism whatsoever at my age. If you recall, I was only 12 years old going on for 13 when the war broke out. I do recall some-- an event, shall we say, an-- an occasion, an incident that occurred in 1938. I must explain that our city was very sports orientated. And we had the largest swimming pool in the country, Olympic pool. And all the championships took place in-- in the city. On that particular occasion, there was I think it was the international championships. I was trying to-- I think it was Poland or Hungary. And we had the president of Poland there and all the dignitaries. And all the different teams were marching just as you'd have at the Olympic games. And my team, which was the either the Maccabi or the Hakoah swim team-- swimming team, we were marching. And just as we were marching past the enclosure, we were stoned. And they were screaming and shouting, Jews out. And this rather startled me personally. I suppose some of the people already knew what it was all about. But that was my very first encounter with antisemitism pre-war. 
INT: Was it-- who was stoning you? KHM: I think part of the audience that came to watch the championships. Because what they did resent very much-- that the previous year, my club produced the Polish champion, a Jewish girl called Trauda Dawidowicz. She became the Polish champion. And it was very much resented. Although to be fair, she was honored even to-- up to today. Because outside that swimming pool, today there is a statue of the girl in bronze, which is still there to this present day.  INT: And what did-- what did she excel in, which sport? KHM: She-- she got the Polish championship in crawl. I'm not sure if it wasn't actually international. She was the Polish champion. Yes.  INT: In swimming? KHM: In swimming, yes. I-- I was in a junior team at that time. Because, you know, you had to be-- I think it was under 15s or something. She was just 15 when she won this. But I was just-- I was younger. I was in the junior team. But I won the-- I had the third place. I won the bronze in the junior team on that occasion. Yeah.  INT: Did you have many non-Jewish friends at the time? KHM: Most of my non-Jewish friends were in school itself. But most of my outside school were within the Jewish community.  INT: Did your friends go to your home too? KHM: Yes. I had many, many friends coming to my home, yes. 
INT: What about your home? Did you keep-- did your parents keep a kosher home? KHM: No. No, my parents were very liberal. They certainly belonged to the Jewish community and had Jewish friends. But they were not strictly religious. And they didn't keep a kosher home. In fact, I-- I didn't know about a kosher home until I came to Lublin during the war and met the Orthodox Jews. I-- I didn't know anything about kosher home, kosher meals.  INT: How did you celebrate your birthday? KHM: Oh, we had a great big birthday parties every year, and fancy dress parties, and fancy dress parties on ice-- on ice, some very exciting birthdays indeed.  INT: Where did your family do their shopping? KHM: Well-- what-- what I recall and because we were so very close to the Czech frontier, very much all the shopping was actually done in Czechoslovakia. Although I do recall going with my mother to local markets and doing local shopping. But as I say, my mother was very busy teaching. She had pupils coming to the house as well, preparing, as I said, people for the English state examinations. Much of the shopping was done by the woman who-- we had like a sort of living in maid. And she used to do a lot of shopping and most of the cooking. So I do recall that.  INT: At meal times, did you all sit down to meals together? KHM: Yes, we always had meals together. Yes. As far as I recall, yes. 
INT: Can you describe a typical meal in your house? KHM: No.  INT: Who sat where? KHM: I don't think I could do that. I just recall my-- my father being extremely fussy about his coffee. He-- he insisted on making his own coffee and grinding his own coffee beans. That's about all I can recall.  INT: Do you remember any particular foods? KHM: Yes, my mother's cooking was very much oddly Austrian orientated. And the cooking is-- what she cooked after the war was what she sort of used to cook pre-war. So I still continue with the tradition very much so. And I-- I do still use many, many of her own recipes.  INT: What literature did you have in the house? Do you know? KHM: I don't think I can recall very much. You must remember I was 12 years old. And my interests were very much sport orientated. And everything else I wasn't particularly interested in.  INT: What about your parents? Did they have newspapers? KHM: Oh, yes. They had a huge circle of friends. And they used to belong to a dancing club. And so they used to go out with their friends to different dances. There was-- it was great big emphasis on ballroom dancing. The same with my brother, he used to go to these ballroom classes. And of course, I wasn't allowed anywhere near. Because I was too-- told I wasn't old enough to participate in any of these activities. 
INT: How often did your parents go to synagogue? KHM: Well, I recall going to synagogue on Yom Kippur and Rosh Ha-Shana new year. And I do recall a Seder. Well, these are the two events that I can recall going to synagogue.  INT: What observances did you do in the home, your parents? KHM: None at all. None at all.  INT: How was the Jewish life in the community organized? Were there specific clubs? KHM: Oh, we had many, many Jewish clubs, social clubs. And we had to a-- next to the synagogue we had a very large building known as the Bialik House, which contained a theater, a stage. And to me the most important was that it had the gymnastic club, which I belonged to, and this marvelous gym. And we'd-- and different performances were staged in this particular building. So it was-- it was, in effect, a cultural center with many, many activities.  INT: What did your family do in the evenings? KHM: Well, I was put to bed. So I really don't know, except that my parents used to go out socializing quite a lot. But I was, as I say, looked after by nannies and the maids. And I didn't see much of my parents in the evenings.  INT: Can you recall if you had any goals at that age? You're just coming up to the-- KHM: My own? My own personal goals?  INT: Mmm. KHM: All my personal goals were directed at certain sports. That-- that was my-- I had a one-track mind. Because I belonged to the gymnastic club from about the age of two, and to the swimming club, and to the athletic club, and to the ski club. And I really wanted a career in physical training. So all my activities were directed that way. I had no-- I-- I did have vague ideas of maybe studying dentistry, because my aunt was a dentist. But I didn't have any serious thoughts about that. I really wanted to pursue a physical training career at some stage. 
INT: Do you-- can you recall whether you had a Jewish theater in your town? KHM: Well, I said, a Jewish theater was within the Bialik cultural building, which actually had a theater. It had a stage. And it had an auditorium. And it-- it-- there were Jewish plays. But we had a-- a-- a-- a marvelous little theater in the town, which-- and they used to call it the sort of small Vienna. They had all the Viennese operas and operettas staged in that theater. I don't recall cinemas. But I do recall the-- the main theater in-- in-- in the town. But we did have plays. [BACKGROUND NOISE]  INT: Anyway, I-- we're coming to the end of the tape. Did you ever go to the plays or theaters? KHM: Yes, I did. I remember seeing [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] a few Jewish plays. I-- I remember a-- I don't know if it called [NON-ENGLISH]. There are one or two Jewish plays that tend to sort of stick in my mind. I'm not sure if it was not based on at that-- at that-- at that time. And that was performed in-- in-- in the Jewish theater, yes, and [NON-ENGLISH]. Yes. That-- Those were the only Jewish plays that I can recall.  INT: What about the politics in the town and circles? Were you aware of what was happening? KHM: I was totally unaware of any politics whatsoever. I don't recall ever reading a single newspaper or being told anything about what's happening outside the town and especially in politics. 
INT: Right, we'll take a break now, please.  INT: Tape two, Kitty Hart-Moxon, on the 9th of June. We finished off the last tape about-- you were saying you didn't know anything about politics. Do you recall if your parents ever talked about things that you didn't quite understand? KHM: No, I never recall taking any-- any notice whatsoever of what was being discussed. And if anything was discussed, it certainly was never discussed in my presence.  INT: Did you have a radio in your home? KHM: Oh, yes.  INT: Mm-hmm. Did you listen-- KHM: No.  INT: --to the radio? KHM: No.  INT: What did you know about the situation of Europe-- of Europe at that time? KHM: Nothing at all. I didn't even know anything about Hitler having come to power in 1933. I think I recall just one-- one single event. And that is, I recall a-- a girl that was brought to Bielsko and attended my class. And she was a-- a-- a girl that I had never met before. And she came from Germany. And she couldn't speak Polish. And she, I remember, said, we had to leave Germany. We were thrown out of our home. And this is how I come to be in Bielsko. But that-- that now, looking back on it, of course, all Polish-born Jews that lived in Germany were expelled between 1933 and 1939. And this-- this was the-- the very first time that I heard someone say she'd been expelled from her home. 
INT: How old were-- were you when you felt the effects of the war or of any anti-Jewish-- KHM: Well--  INT: --measures? KHM: --I experienced the effects of the war before the outbreak of the war. I experienced it on about the 26th or the 28th of August. The war broke out on the 1st of September.  INT: Tell me about it. KHM: My mother and I were on holiday in the mountains-- a place called Krynica. That was the place where I took out a canoe on this very dangerous river and disappeared down the river. And police came searching for me because I hadn't got back. But in fact, I carried the canoe on my back and came back by train, [LAUGHTER] much to the everybody's [INAUDIBLE], I turned up. But my mother was absolutely frantic-- not only because I was missing, but because she had a-- a telephone call from my father to-- to say, we've got to return home at once. I don't know if he didn't say why. But we packed up and came home. And as we came into the house, I suddenly realized everything had been crated up. My father had practically emptied the whole of the contents of the flat. Everything was packed up, and my father saying, we've got to leave the town. We've got to go. And that was four days or three days before the outbreak of the war. And we were bundled. My mother and I were bundled into a train. By that time there was already a stampede out of the town. However, my father had arranged for my mother and-- and-- and myself to get onto this train to Lublin. And that is where I first experienced the effects of the war, before the actual outbreak of hostilities. Now the reason for this was, apparently-- which of course, I didn't know-- that already, machine guns were on different rooftops. And the German population already begun shooting down onto the Polish population of the town. And in fact, the invasion came very close to the city when it happened on the 1st of September, 1939. 
INT: When you got home from this holiday, where was your brother during this time? KHM: Well, he was on holiday as well. He was away with his friends. And he was summoned home. And he-- and eventually, he-- he-- he and my father arrived in Lublin, some two days after us, so that they all left.  INT: How did you travel to Lublin? KHM: Well, we actually boarded a train, and on one of the-- one of the very last trains. And my father still boarded a train. But most of the people who fled the town could no longer board the train. My uncles and my aunts, and they all had to set off on foot, because all mode of transport was requisitioned by the Polish Army. If people had cars or bicycles or whatever means of transport, it just wasn't available. The people had to move on foot. And many of the people from the town that set off on foot were eventually machine gunned by the invading forces. Because the planes came down very low, and they were machine gunning people as they were fleeing the town. But my father and my brother arrived safely in Lublin, still prior to the outbreak of-- of-- of the hostilities.  INT: Where do you go to in Lublin? KHM: Well, of course, I didn't know any of these arrangements whatsoever, but my father had it all organized. He's-- he packed up all our luggage and sent it off by train, which never arrived. It was eventually transpired that it had all been-- the train had been bombed. And all the-- everything was destroyed. And our-- none of our luggage arrived. We simply had what we carried. And my father had arranged accommodation in a very nice part of the city, in Lublin itself. And this is where we landed up, probably about the 28th or the 29th of August, 1939. My father decided that must be a safe place to be, because it was in the center of Poland. Because little did he know what that meant at that stage. 
INT: What was your accommodation? KHM: I don't recall it very much. It was a very pleasant apartment that-- we were with-- quite a lot of our friends had arrived as well. And there was quite a lot of community-- Jewish community that was already there in-- in-- that was the good part of the town. It wasn't the ghetto part of the town.  INT: How did your daily life change at that time? KHM: Well, my daily life changed radically. I mean, I thought that, well, it was almost the end of the school holiday. Soon I shall be going back to school. I kept on asking questions as, what's going on? I mean, who is fighting whom? And what's it got to do with us?  INT: What was the answer? KHM: Or what's it got to do with me?  INT: Can you recall what you were told? KHM: No. I don't recall any answers.  INT: Do you recall what effect it had upon you? KHM: All I wanted to do was to get back home to all my activities. And I didn't know that that was actually the end of-- of an era.  INT: Who lived with you in that accommodation in Lublin? KHM: Well, I think there were quite a lot of families from Bielsko that lived there, and families from Czechoslovakia. We became friendly with-- with the-- a family who-- the husband was a-- a very well-known pediatrician who had his own children's sanatorium. And we knew these people from before the war, and we met up with them there. And we were with this family for some time. And I became friendly with the son of this family, who I eventually saw killed in the street, when he walked with me in the ghetto. 
INT: How did you-- your mother cope with the food situation? KHM: Well, at that stage, there wasn't a problem. We-- we lived quite comfortably. And shopping was still pretty normal. It was pre-invasion. Because the Germans didn't occupy the city until, perhaps, two or three weeks after the outbreak of hostilities.  INT: Did you go to school? KHM: No. There were-- there was absolutely no way of attending any school whatsoever. There was total disruption of education already at that stage.  INT: What did you do, yourself, during the day, during that time? KHM: I don't recall doing very much. I-- my father wouldn't let me out of-- out of-- onto the town at that stage.  INT: How old were you then? KHM: Well, I wasn't 13. I wasn't 13 until the December. So I was still 12. Hmm.  INT: Tell me about this friend of yours who was shot. KHM: Well, this, of course, happened much later, in 1940.  INT: Right. All right. So how did things change in Lublin? KHM: What changed-- things changed absolutely radically once the city was occupied the-- by the German forces.  INT: All right. KHM: I was determined to-- to see these forces. You see, I was very curious. And my father tore his hair out, because I used to disappear and look at these forces. And they were marching through the town triumphantly, having conquered the city. And there were bands playing, and you know, there were the jackboots marching. And I used to peep from corners and just watch them. And at that time, I didn't realize the danger. Well, very soon, of course, all-- all manner of things happened. Decrees went up. 
INT: Like what? KHM: Like all-- the whole population had to register. That also applied to the Poles. So they knew exactly where people lived. And of course, the Jews also had to-- Jews had to register. And nobody, really, at that stage, understood what it meant to register. But you had to, because if you didn't register, you didn't get a ration card. You could only obtain food by having a ration card. You had to get special documents that you lived in a certain place. And if you moved from place to place, you had to get what was known as a [NON-ENGLISH] meldeschein That is a-- like a exit permit, from one address to another. So there-- there was really no option but to register. And of course, as soon as you were registered, they knew exactly where you were. And gradually, gradually things became more strict. And what we didn't know-- they were setting up a Jewish quarter with-- Lublin actually had a-- a Jewish quarter. But it wasn't a ghetto as such. But it did have a-- a-- a place where a lot of the Jews lived, and a lot of the Orthodox Jews. It was a very Orthodox community. And all these Jews, the Orthodox Jews, lived in a different part of the-- of the town. And of course, eventually-- not eventually. Actually, in 1940 already, all the Jews that were living outside the perimeter of this Jewish section of the town had to move into the Jewish section of the town. 
INT: What was that like for your family? KHM: And that was absolutely horrendous. Because it was almost like stepping back into the Middle Ages. There were sort of [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] tenement houses with courtyards and balcony-- sort of inside balconies, with little tiny apartments running off these balconies. And it became overcrowded almost within the first week of this decree.  INT: What was your family's accommodation? KHM: Well, our accommodation wasn't as what you would call an apartment. We had to share an apartment with other families. There were two families to an apartment, at that stage. But this was just the beginning.  INT: So how many people was that? KHM: Well, it could have been as many as 15 people to a small apartment. It could have been even more. Eventually, of course, when they started bringing people into the Lublin ghetto from outlying-- not just outlying villages and outlying towns-- but Lublin became the main center of deportation, in the first instance, just like Warsaw-- from countries like Holland, France, Belgium, Germany-- just about everywhere from Europe. And these people were just dumped in this small part of the town and let loose in the streets. And they had to find accommodation somewhere.  INT: Did you recognize these people as being those nationalities? KHM: Yes, of course. They all spoke different languages, and they could not speak the Polish language. Many of the indigenous population of this Lublin ghetto still spoke Yiddish. So maybe if some of the Jews, the foreign Jews, spoke Yiddish, they could communicate. But apart from that, there was a total language barrier. People were speaking French and German, and they were speaking Dutch and all kind of languages which, of course, the local population couldn't understand. And they couldn't communicate. And immediately there was complete chaos in-- in the ghetto. And there certainly wasn't enough accommodation. 
INT: Did your parents ever instruct you in-- to behave in a certain way during this time? KHM: No. My parents didn't instruct me as such. I learned very quickly. As I picked up the situation very quickly, indeed, of what was going on and what had to be done. And the first thing was the struggle for food and accommodation. Because by that time, of course, we had lost most of our possessions. My father's banks, of course, were non-existent. You couldn't just draw money anywhere. My father still probably had some jewelry or-- in fact, jewelry was the only currency that was negotiable in-- at that time. Or if you had any clothes that you could barter, but that-- that was about all your currency that you had. And people who came into the ghetto with their own currencies couldn't negotiate anything at all because it wasn't valid. Eventually, of course, the ghetto had its own currency. And unless you had ghetto currency, you couldn't exist anyway. You couldn't buy food. And your ghetto currency was invalid on the Aryan side.  INT: Describe the ghetto currency. KHM: I don't think I know what it looked like. It just was a currency printed by the Germans. I don't think I remember ever remember seeing it.  INT: What was-- KHM: But the only--  INT: --do you know what it was called? KHM: No, I don't know. I-- I think the only currency that my father used, or what I used, to get food was clothes and jewelry. Anything was negotiable. 
INT: Right. KHM: And the food, of course.  INT: What were the sleeping arrangements? KHM: The sleeping range was absolutely horrendous. You were lucky if there were two to a bed. And mostly, people slept on the floor. Well, eventually--  INT: Where did you sleep? KHM: Of course, the-- I beg your pardon?  INT: Where did you sleep? KHM: Well, I remember sleeping in-- in about, I would say, 50 to 60 different places in my time in the Lublin ghetto-- in cellars, in sewers, in lofts, in cupboards--  INT: Why? KHM: --under beds, on top of beds, on-- with other people. You name it.  INT: Why were-- why was-- why was this? KHM: Well, firstly, of course, because of overcrowding. There was just an indescribable overcrowding in the ghetto. Thousands of people were dumped, as I said, every day. Thousands of people disappeared every day as well, as deportation continued.  INT: Did you know where they went to? KHM: No. People supposedly were taken to work. It was said they were taken to build fortifications in the East. Because if you think about what happened-- which we didn't know at the time-- the Germans were eventually fighting the Russians in 1941. So rumors were that they were building these fortifications. Well, we didn't understand the situation at the time, because you couldn't listen to the radio. There were no newspapers. There were simply rumors, rumors from people who were brought into the ghetto. 
INT: Who actually got food for your family? KHM: Well, most of the food I bought for the family, because--  INT: How did you do that? KHM: What-- what was so very difficult in the ghetto was men couldn't venture out into the streets too well. Because if they did, they were picked up by patrolling German, Ukrainian, or Jewish police. So for a-- a-- men had to hide pretty well. Now, my mother did manage to obtain food, strangely enough, by her own skill of teaching English. There were still people that wanted to learn English, always in return for food. Of course, eventually-- eventually, when the ghetto was sealed, she actually managed to smuggle herself out of the ghetto. Well, first of all, she did it while the ghetto was still open. She went onto the Aryan side of the ghetto There was a period when the ghetto was open.  INT: What separated it? Was it a fence or-- KHM: Well, initially, no. Eventually, there was a wall. Initially, there was barbed wire. You could still go backwards, and you could still move out of the ghetto. In 1940 you could still move out. And in those days, she would go onto the Aryan side of the ghetto. And she taught English to a priest in a vicarage, that was housed opposite the Gestapo headquarters. And she did this two or three times a week, always in return for food. Now, this was in the early, early stages before-- before the ghetto was closed. She also managed to do it at the later stages by going down into the sewers and then up a manhole on-- on the Aryan side. Now as far-- as far as I was concerned, I used to go down. My father used to send me onto the Aryan side, also when it was no longer permitted to leave the ghetto. And I used to go down into the sewer, because I was small, and it was easier for a small person to go into the sewers and-- and get out onto the Aryan-- and it was easier for a child or a you know, a small person to do that or a young person to do that, than-- than for an adult. It was always believed that children would get away with it. Rather, adults probably wouldn't. And I used to go on to the Aryan side, barter whatever there was, whatever my father gave me, in return for food. Sometimes I was caught. Sometimes I was beaten up by the Poles. And sometimes it was taken off me. Sometimes I was caught by the Germans. But I always managed to get back to the ghetto, mostly with something. 
INT: How did you know about sewer-- KHM: Everybody knew about--  INT: And that? KHM: --all the hiding places by that time. We-- we knew all the hiding places that there were in the ghetto. Hiding--  INT: Who told you? KHM: Well, I saw people actually making these hiding places behind bookshelves, behind-- it was in lofts, in cellars, and digging tunnels. And as I said, I saw people crawling out from the manholes and down into the sewers. So yes, you got to know this. But I'm talking about the year 1940, 1941. Because my father decided there was only one way, and that was to escape from the ghetto.  INT: What did you do to do that? KHM: Well, I think it was the winter of-- it might have been winter, 1941-- might have been-- it might have been the winter '40, '41. I couldn't give you the exact date. It was winter. It might have been the first winter. Yes, it was. Yes, it was. Because 1941, the Germans were already fighting the Russians. My father decided that we've got to escape. Now, my brother had already escaped. A lot of young boys, young people, started leaving the ghetto, making their way to the East. And my brother went with a group of friends. And they actually reached the-- the Russian side on the town of Lwów, which was not occupied by the Germans at that time. My father didn't want to leave. He decided he wasn't going to leave my mother and myself. Although, a lot of men did leave. But he wasn't going to leave. So my father decided-- and we've still had my grandmother with us as well. My father decided-- he hired a horse and cart. Now, where he got it from, how he got the money, I don't know. And we piled onto this horse and cart-- my mother, my father, and myself, and a few bundle of clothes. And we traveled by horse and cart for about a week, because we couldn't go onto main roads. And most of the travel, I believe, was done at night. The mud was absolutely horrendous. And the horse couldn't pull a cart. And we had to dismount and push the cart. And we eventually reached a very small settlement on the River Bug. Now the River Bug is-- is-- is-- was actually the frontier between Poland and Russia, in-- in 1940. Poland extended much further than that. But of course, the Russians came in at outbreak of the war and occupied this part of Poland. So the-- the-- the frontier was the River Bug. And this is where we were heading for.
And we reached that place called Dorohusk, on the River Bug, in the winter. And it-- it was a horrendous journey. Because there were patrols on the road, and we couldn't, as I explained, we had to go through fields. But nonetheless, we-- we reached that place. And we-- we reached the house. And to our amazement, the-- the-- the-- where my father took us in-- it was occupied by probably about six or seven families, all trying to cross this river onto the Russian side. And some people got across. And my cousins-- my father's cousins, actually-- they managed to get across. And they had to leave all their luggage behind. But they got across. And we-- we had all their luggage. But my father decided, well, we must take their luggage, because there was things that we-- we'd probably need. And so we stayed in that village, and we were there probably two or three weeks. The reason for-- for this was that we were going to cross by horse and sleigh. A lot of people rode across this river. But my father decided we couldn't-- we were not going to do that. We were going to wait till the-- the river froze. Because they-- this river always froze in the winter. And so we did wait, and eventually this freezer-- this river froze. And in the meantime, we were all learning Russian. This is how I came to know that smattering of Russian. Everybody was learning the language. And we also learned to look out for patrols-- the German patrol, the Russian patrol, what time they patrol, what time one can cross the river. There was all-- we were taking it in turns to, you know, man this riverbank. And eventually, the time came for us to cross. And the river froze. And we were all piled up in that sleigh. And we started to cross the river. And we'd almost reached the other bank of the river, when shots rang out. And the shots came from all sides. And this chap, who-- the guide-- we all ducked in the sleigh, and we were not hit. But this chap wasn't going to take any more chances, and he-- we were almost on the Russian side when he decided to swing the sleigh around and brought us back to the German side. And so we didn't actually get across. Well, what transpired is that we were some 24 hours too late crossing this river. People who crossed 24 hours before were actually-- quite happily got across. But they already closed the frontier, because there were already skirmishes there between the-- the Russians and-- and-- and the Germans. And so we-- we were back on the German side. 
INT: Could we just go back to the Lublin ghetto when your father-- were there any-- how did you manage to get out? Did you have to have-- to have-- KHM: No, the ghetto-- the-- the ghetto was still open. Well, it-- it was still possible. Although, it wasn't permitted, you could still get out. It wasn't completely enclosed that you actually couldn't get out. I think they closed the ghetto not till 1942, when it was sealed. But at that stage, you could still get out.  INT: How was it sealed? KHM: I don't know--  INT: Oh. KHM: --because I wasn't there.  INT: Oh, right. KHM: Yeah. By the time, we'd got out. We-- we-- we had several attempts at getting out. And several times we had to turn back. But the-- the last time we got out, we didn't get back. And then it was sealed.  INT: Were there guards around, or was it barbed wire? KHM: It was always guarded. Yes.  INT: Always. KHM: There was barbed-- barbed wire. It was-- there was always guards everywhere. There were-- there were Ukrainian guards in-- in German uniforms. There were German Einsatzgruppen. There were armored vehicles all round. And there was Jewish police as well.  INT: Did you recognize the status of all these people? KHM: Yes, we knew who they were. Yes. Because the Jewish Council was set up, you see, in the town.  INT: Yes. KHM: Oh, yes.  INT: Yeah. What contact did you have with the Jewish Council? KHM: Well, we didn't have any contact with them whatsoever. No. At least I didn't. I don't know if my father did. 
INT: You mentioned your brother. How early did your brother go off to Russia? KHM: I think he-- he went a bit before we left. So it must have been late '39. Oh, yes.  INT: When you left the Lublin ghetto, you mentioned a grandmother. What happened to her? KHM: Well, she was with us.  INT: In-- KHM: She was still with us in Lublin.  INT: With us in-- KHM: Yes.  INT: --Lublin. KHM: Yes.  INT: And when you got out of Lublin? KHM: Yes, she was with us all the way there--  INT: Yes. KHM: --and all the way back. Yes.  INT: So you go back to the German border. KHM: That's right. We went back to the German border, and we still waited to see if we could get across. However, German patrols started coming into this place where all these refugees were waiting to cross. And they-- they took a lot of people away. Well, my father, have-- still had all these medals that he'd won in the first world war. And so he put up these medals up. And when the patrol came, he said, I'm an Austrian officer. I served in the Austrian Army. And I'm stranded here in this place. And this patrol saluted and promised to repatriate him. And of course, at that stage, we realized that we've got to get out, because if they come back and find out that wasn't quite so, they're taking all the other people away. They're-- they're going to take us away. So the-- the next thing is, my father got another horse and cart. And we had to go back to the ghetto. 
INT: Right. KHM: That was the first escape from the ghetto.  INT: Right. We're coming to the end of this tape, so we'll take a break now. KHM: Yeah, we can take a break.  INT: Tape three. Kitty Hart-Moxon, the ninth of June, 1998. You were telling me that you had to go back to the German border. What happened then? KHM: Well, we-- we realized we've got to leave this place, because the patrol was going to come back, and they were going to arrest us. So we made back-- we had to make our way back to the ghetto. At that time, we had all the possessions of my cousins, which was a godsend at the time. So we got back into the ghetto. We found conditions were absolutely horrendous. We'd only been away some time, but things became worse and worse and worse. And thousands of people were being brought in, and deportations were-- people were leaving the ghetto every-- every day. There were constant raids. The Einsatzgruppen, that's the action-- German action group, they-- they'd surround the ghetto. They'd burst into the ghetto at day and night, into the different accommodation. They'd-- they'd throw people down the stairs, out of windows. Lorries would pick people up and deport them away, and you wouldn't find them again. We never heard of them again. And these roundups continued day in, day out, all-- all the time on our return to the ghetto. Food became even more scarce. There were bodies lying in the street. People were starving by that time. There was very little food in the ghetto. Very few supplies were being allowed into the ghetto. 
INT: How did this affect your family? KHM: Well, it affected us immediately, because we couldn't find anywhere to-- to live. We came back into the ghetto and found that there simply wasn't any accommodation. We were lucky to find a-- a room with perhaps 15 more people in it. But of course there were constant deportations, so the ghetto began to empty, and then you found other accommodation when people were being deported. The point is you had to hide so you yourself weren't being deported.  INT: How did-- where did you hide? KHM: Well, there-- there were-- there were different ways of hiding. People, as I say, were hiding in the cellars. And when action troops moved into the flat or into the apartments, they'd smash everything up, dig people from underneath the beds or-- or-- looked into cupboards. But once-- once they'd left, and they didn't find you, you moved into a place that had already been emptied. And we've--  INT: What time of day would this be? KHM: It could have been any time of day. It could have been-- it-- it-- it was totally unpredictable. So there was always somebody on the lookout to see when the next raid was going to take place. And very often, we've-- two or three times-- we found ourselves already in the street being on-- on the verge of deportation. And we managed to get into a-- a-- an empty building. Once or twice, my father once again put on all his medals and said he served in the Austrian Army. And-- and there was some fluke of a-- a-- of an occasion where a-- a man actually, again, saluted my father and took him into an empty building. 
INT: Would you been standing with your father, with your mother and grandparents? KHM: Sometimes yes, sometimes no. I remember a time when I was actually hidden under a bed with-- with somebody else. And my father was probably in a different sort of building. And we didn't even know whether they found him or whether they didn't, not until after the raid. And of-- at-- at that time, there were a lot of sick people around as well, because there was already typhus, you know, in-- in-- in the town. So there was very little respite from these roundups. And this continued. And my father decided we-- we've got to make further attempts to leave the ghetto. And we had one or two attempts which failed, but eventually there was one attempt that actually succeeded, and we did get out of the ghetto. And that was-- I think it was about March, April, 1941. Something like that.  INT: The failed attempts, how-- how did you attempt to escape in-- on those occasions? KHM: Oh, by-- on foot.  INT: On foot. KHM: On foot. But we-- we realized we had to get back into the ghetto. There were patrols. There were Poles who were collaborating at that time. They were denouncing people. We-- we-- we were bedraggled by that time. We were very conspicuous, don't forget. We tried through sewers and on-- onto the Aryan side, and that, we realized, wasn't a proposition. Eventually, we were disguised as peasants and totally disguised. So we didn't actually look as though we were refugees or Jews or anything. 
INT: How did you do that? KHM: Oh, I don't-- I don't know where my father got all these different clothes from, but we wore handkerchiefs, just like the peasant people wear, and clothes just exactly how the peasant people look. And we didn't carry any suitcases. We each just had a bundle on our back, very small, inconspicuous. And we moved out at night. Now, there was a curfew at night, and you were not allowed to do that. If you were caught-- and we-- we disposed of our documents, as well. So we had no documents. We took off our Jewish star. Don't forget, everybody wore the yellow star or Jewish armbands. We took all this off, and we-- the-- incredibly disguised, so people didn't know we were Jews at that time. And we simply walked out one night, out of the ghetto, with my grandmother. And that was-- I reckon it was about 1941. Spring '41, anyway.  INT: Did you have any other extended family around at that time apart from your grandmother? KHM: No. No, there was nobody-- no, nobody-- nobody from our family. A lot of them got killed fleeing from Bielsko. They say my uncle and my aunt, that my-- my father's sister and her husband and-- and I think one of my cousins, they were killed on-- on the way by the-- by the-- by the planes that were flying low and machine gunning all the refugees as they were fleeing. 
INT: And in the guards, did they wear any particular color uniform? KHM: Well, the guards were the-- the SS Panzer divisions. You know, the-- the usual green uniforms with helmets, all with helmets and all with guns and with rifles and bayonets. But I would like to go back to one occasion in the ghetto where I walked with my friend's son in the ghetto. That was prior to our escape, the second escape. We were walking in the ghetto with this-- I was walking in the ghetto with a boy. Now, the rule was that you had to get off the pavement when you saw a-- a guard or-- guard or a green uniform patrolling. They were patrolling the pavements. And as you saw an approaching person, you were supposed to step off the pavement and go into the road. There wasn't any traffic at the time in any case, in the ghetto. And I stepped off the pavement, but my friend didn't step off. You see? And this particular guard came towards him, the patrol. He simply pulled out the gun and shot him through the head. And he killed him instantly. Now, oh, of course, by that time, I was already conditioned that I didn't actually see a actual murder. Now, this was the first murder that I had witnessed, although I've seen a lot of people beaten up, some thrown out through the windows. But this was the first time I actually saw somebody killed right outright. 
INT: How old was the boy? KHM: He was about a year older than I was. So he might have been 14, 15, 14, something like that.  INT: What did you do then? KHM: Well, I ran home, wherever that was at the time. I don't know.  INT: Did you know his parents? KHM: Yes, well, we were friendly with his parents, you see? His mother was a very good friend of my mother. She actually survived the war. And she-- she was here in Birmingham--  INT: Did-- KHM: --with us for a long time.  INT: Did she-- did you have to tell her that her son-- KHM: Yes, I had to tell her, yes. She-- he was the only son. Yes.  INT: Can you remember how you did it? KHM: No, I can't remember-- I-- I don't think I told her. I think my parents told her. By that time, she'd already lost her husband, because almost at-- at the beginning, like I explained, everybody had to register. They asked all doctors to register, particularly doctors, for some unknown reason. And he was a pediatrician. So of course, he registered, thinking that he might be needed for some sort of work. But what in fact happened, they imprisoned all the doctors, and he actually died in prison. We never knew what he died of, but they-- they killed him. So she lost her husband quite early on. And then she was really with us most of the time. But she wasn't with us when we escaped from the ghetto. 
INT: All right. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] Is there anything more you'd like to tell me about the ghetto? KHM: Well, I think we've pretty well covered the ghetto and the shortage of food and the starvation and the-- the deportations. And the total chaos because of bringing in all these people from all over Europe.  INT: Could you give us an approximate size of the ghetto? How many roads did it include? KHM: No. I-- I went back to the ghetto last year. I went to visit the Lublin ghetto last year, because I wanted to know whether it is as I remembered it in my mind. And it was just like stepping back 50 years. It hadn't changed. In fact, it looked worse. Because the Poles had moved into the-- into the-- all these Jewish homes, have took over all the Jewish homes, anyway. But during communism, nothing was restored. And so things are just deteriorated from bad to worse and crumbling. And all these tenement houses are exactly as they were in those days. It's-- it's quite small. There was a-- a main street called the Lubartowska Street. And from that, there were perhaps half a dozen other streets, but the-- the Jews, apparently, were located even in a smaller section than that. So it-- it was very small. Comparing it with the Warsaw ghetto, it must have been a lot smaller. And conditions were totally different to the Warsaw ghetto. You see, in the Warsaw ghetto, children were actually allowed to go to school, when in Lublin, they were not. There was not-- you were not permitted to cook. You were not permitted to shop. You were not permitted to eat. If-- if a patrol came into a house, they'd-- they'd smash up all the food. Sometimes they'd set fire to-- to-- to a house, to the interior. And they'd certainly smash everything up. Smash all the books up, all the kitchens, everything, including the people. So conditions were different. And you had no contact with the other ghettos. You didn't quite know the situation in other ghettos. 
INT: Did you encounter any Gypsies in your ghetto? KHM: No. None whatsoever. No. I did not see any Gypsies. No.  INT: All right. Did they have any sort of underground or resistance in the ghetto? KHM: Well, there was, of course, a resistance, but it wasn't officially talked about. And so everybody knew, yes, there are people fighting who-- nobody knew who they were. I certainly didn't know who they were. No, not-- not when we've been talking about, in 1941. People were disorganized in the Lublin ghetto, because there was a continually shifting population.  INT: Did your parents ever talk about it, do you know? KHM: No, I don't remember.  INT: No. Right. So did you have any personal belongings while you were in the ghetto? KHM: None whatsoever. We-- the-- the belongings we had were my cousins'. They left all these things behind. And they became quite useful in bartering for food, of course. My father still had some jewelry, I think, as a-- you know, as a measure, drastic measure, in case something was needed. So-- and my mother, of course, still continued with her English lessons in the vicarage, and that was her main contact. And of course, this priest said, if ever you are in mortal danger, I will see what I can do for you. You must come. And so my father knew that somehow or other, if we ever needed false documents, because that was really the ultimate. The only way to survive was to get authentic false documents. Then they would have to be paid for. And at that stage, my father had arranged for some diamonds to be put into my back teeth. And these were my only possessions. And they were very much needed at some stage of the war. 
INT: All right. Were you or your family ever sick during this time? KHM: Oh, I think so. I think we had quite-- quite a lot of-- there-- there was a lot of sickness. But I do recall, at that stage, there-- there was the outbreak of typhus. And amazingly enough, my father managed to get some kind of immunizations or vaccinations, and we all vaccinated against typhus. And in effect, that, later on, saved both my mother's and my life. Because we both had typhus. And people who had some sort of immunization didn't quite have the fatal typhus, as-- as most people died of typhus, you see, in the camp. And we just managed-- just about managed to survive it. So it was thanks to this sort of immunization that we had early on in the ghetto.  INT: You've described some very bad periods in the ghetto. Can you recall any nice periods? KHM: No. I do not recall any nice periods in the ghetto. It was all horrendous time, trying to hide and trying to feed ourselves and trying to find somewhere to live. It was a-- a most awful time, in the ghetto. And we were terribly relieved when we actually walked out. Although we didn't know where we were going. My father had no idea. He had no map. All he knew, that he had to head south. Because east, the border was closed. North was the sea. West was Germany. And it was only south that you could run. And he thought if-- if we could walk far enough, we could get into Czechoslovakia, possibly Romania, and somehow or other reach a neutral territory. 
INT: Did you ever receive or did you ever observe any acts of kindness? KHM: Not at that stage.  INT: No. Right. [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] Can we move on to what happened when you eventually escaped with your mother and father and grandmother from Lublin? KHM: Yes. Well, we-- we escaped from Lublin, and we walked and walked, and I didn't quite understand where my father was going, because he had to head south, and yet we could only walk during the night. And you walked through fields. And-- and we couldn't walk along main roads. Most of the main roads were patrolled, and there was a danger that we were going to be stopped. So he walked sort of from-- and they didn't want to go too close to farms either, in case somebody gave us away, although we were pretty well disguised. But anyway, we-- cutting a long story short, we did walk. I don't know how far, but we had stumbled on a small village. And it transpired it actually had a small Jewish farming community. And we were, by that time, exhausted. And I don't know how long we were walking. And it wasn't all that far, because we, you know, there were limited times when we could walk. But we decided to stay in that village, at least to recuperate. Well, it transpired that we actually stayed there 12 months in that village.  INT: Do you know what it was called? KHM: Now, the village was called Zabia Wola, the two words, Zabia Wola. The-- the village no longer exists, although part of-- part of the village has been renamed these days. I went to visit it last year. It was surrounded by quite large estates, Polish, aristocracy, who farmed this area. It was farm-- farming country. And the few Jews that lived there were also farmers. And there were not many refugees from the towns at that time. So it was pretty well a hideout. The Germans hadn't actually organized, shall we say, that particular community. They hadn't stumbled on it. It was quite hidden. So we lodged in-- in-- in a shop. That was the only accommodation we got there. They were very small, tiny, little houses with shopfronts, one or two little tiny shops. And we had a room at the back of the shop. Of course, we had to eat. We had to pay the rent. And that was the main problem. But my-- my-- my mother immediately set out to visit these estates. And she made contact on-- all on foot, again, disguised as a peasant woman. And at that stage, they were all peasants. And she walked into this estate owned by a Count Breza.
And he-- he was a-- he was a farmer, but he also had a lot of other refugees in his place. And those were Poles running away from the Russians again, Polish aristocracy. Now, my mother presented herself there, and she didn't at that time say she was Jewish. But she said she's a teacher of English. And she was welcomed with open arms. All these Poles wanted to learn English. And so immediately, my mother set upon teaching English to these Poles in return for food, mostly for flour, because we baked our own bread, flour and butter and milk, just the basics. When the count got to know my mother better, she introduced my father, and he employed my father in his library. He had a very important collection of ancient books, and he wanted this sorted out and also some translations, I think. And my father spoke several languages. So my father was employed there, all in return for food. And gradually, I came to the-- to-- to be there as well. And there were quite a lot of-- a number of small children there. And I taught them just the basics of reading and writing. So we were all employed there, and we were out of the village most of the-- out from the Jewish-- out of the-- all day. I also worked in the fields on the estate, harvesting, I think it was sugar beet at that time. Well, gradually, my mother walked to the other estates. There were about three large estates. And another one was on the other side of the village. It was all a long way away, and she had to do it all on foot. But she walked to another estate, and that was-- made contact. And that was a Baron von Thurnau. And he had-- actually had a German name, but he wasn't. He was a-- a Pole owner of this big estate. And the same situation prevailed there. They had refugees, housing refugees from the east, Poles. And she was teaching English. And none of the others knew she was Jewish, only the-- the count knew, and so these two owners. The other people didn't know. Because of course, we didn't know if they would have denounced us. So nobody knew that they were Jewish. We were just saying we were refugees. And we stayed there between 1941, say '40-- summer '41 to the summer of 1942. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] Probably that was a mistake, because my father should have gone on. He was going to head south, and he should have carried on. But we found there was a community, and we were relatively safe at that time. Because what we didn't know and nobody knew, that we were surrounded already at that time by all the extermination centers that had been set up. And now that whole area became the extermination area for the whole of Europe. Because not far away was Belzec, and Sobibor, and Treblinka, and Majdanek. And we didn't know. We were so close, and no one had any idea. 
INT: During the period in Zabia-- KHM: Zabia Wola.  INT: --were you-- were you well-fed? Did you-- KHM: Yes. We were very well-fed, because my parents and-- and myself, we all earned food, that's all. Just the basics, and we could pay the rent, which we had to pay to the farming family. And there were quite a lot of youngsters. And we used to congregate at the edge of the forest with the youngsters, and we used to make music, play games, and mostly discuss resistance at that time. And all the youngsters were saying, well, if there's going to be a round up, which of course we didn't know, but we did, of course, it filtered out from the ghettos what was going on, if they were going to deport people to the ghettos. The youngsters were all going to go into the forest. And they were going-- and there were rumors that in the nearby forest were groups of partisans, which there were, of course, fighting, partisans, you know, Poles and Jews and Russians all fighting, guerrilla warfare. And the talk mostly was of joining these partisan groups in-- in the forest.  INT: Did you ever meet any of those partisans? KHM: No, we-- no, we never, never saw them. No.  INT: No. Did you know any names of leaders or anything? KHM: No, no, no, no. Some of--  INT: Right. KHM: Some-- some of the youngsters eventually joined the partisans. I know that. And one or two survived the war, in-- in the forests, fighting. 
INT: Were you considering that? KHM: I was considering it, yes. I-- this is what I wanted to do.  INT: What age-- what age were you now? KHM: I was-- by then I was-- what was I? Going on for 15. Yes. Yeah.  INT: Yes. When you were teaching the young children writing and arithmetic, what were you-- what language were you using? KHM: Oh, just Polish.  INT: Polish. KHM: Yes. Just Polish. They were all Poles. Yes, yes.  INT: All right. You mentioned the extermination camps. When did you become aware or fearful of what was going on around you? KHM: Well, we were fearful all the time, because we've witnessed what was going on in the ghetto, and we saw people being killed. And we didn't actually believe that people were being deported to work at fortifications, although there were groups of people working in factories, working making uniforms and on war work. So there were some people that were taken to factories, mostly young people.  INT: How did-- how did you know this? KHM: Well, because groups of people were-- from the ghetto were conscripted to work in certain factories that were set up by the Germans.  INT: And know that-- KHM: But-- but we didn't believe that they were working on fortifications. A lot of people were taken to dig trenches, and they were shoveling snow in the winter. But many people were never seen again. And of course my father didn't believe that there-- that there was such a thing as working in factories and working-- he just didn't believe it. But of course, he didn't know at that stage that people were actually being killed off. It was simply a hunch, a gut feeling that you had, by the behavior of-- the general behavior of-- of the action groups when they raided the ghetto. They were out to kill people. It was very obvious. 
INT: Yes. How did you come to leave Zabia Wola? KHM: Well, what happened there was that we were left in relative peace for possibly about six to eight months. And gradually they started to register people, just like we've seen previously in the ghetto. And-- and not only that, but they gradually-- gradually made demands on this small Jewish community, kind of ransom demands, blackmail. In other words, they used to come and say by noon tomorrow, we want a-- a dozen fur coats. [LAUGHS] Well, this small community probably didn't even own fur coats, although maybe the farmers did. And they had to run around and find goods to hand over to the Germans. Then they'd come with demands like we want a dozen wedding rings in-- at 5 o'clock this afternoon, or something like this. And so gradually, they came with all these different demands. And then they progressed and said, tomorrow we want 100 chickens or 10 cows. And now they started raiding the farms. So many pounds of butter-- every day, different demands, or five dozen eggs or things like that. And that went on. And gradually, this community realized they couldn't-- no longer provide. And always, there was the threat that if you don't, you're going to be deported. You're going-- you're-- you're-- the whole village will be emptied. And in fact, this is what we thought was going to happen one night. Because there came a ransom demand which could not be met, and that was, I think, July, August, 1942. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] And that night, when we knew that the elders of the village could no longer provide anything, there just was nothing left, we realized that we've got to get out that night. Because it was quite obvious that they-- they said, if you don't provide what we want, the whole village will be liquidated. They didn't say tomorrow, but they said they'd be liquidated. Well, there was no time to lose. All the young people ran into the forests. And I wanted to go to the forests, but in the end, my decision was to stay with my parents. And at dawn, we crept out. Oh, and my grandmother wouldn't go. She refused to move. And of course, there was this struggle. What are we going to do with my grandmother? She didn't want to go, we couldn't stay. And eventually, we had to leave her. 
INT: How old was she, do you know? KHM: I think she was 72 by that time, which was pretty well my age that I am now. But she decided she wasn't going to go anywhere, and we had to leave her.  INT: And the-- the elders of the village, were they the decision-makers that-- at that time? KHM: No. It wasn't discussed with anyone. My-- my father decided we've got to go. We're not going to take any notice what anybody else does, we're getting out of the village. And-- and we knew. We had contacts with these different estates, and we knew where the forest was. See, my mother knew the-- the-- the area pretty well by that time, because she'd been around, walking everything on foot. And so we went, and we got out at dawn in August 1942. And we got into the forest, just the three of us. And there was a clearing high up in the forest, a sort of a clearing. We could see the village nestling down below. And we actually watched the round up the morning of the liquidation.  INT: All right. We're coming to the end of the tape, so we'll take a break. KHM: Yeah. We'll take a break.  INT: Tape four, Kitty Hart-Moxon, the ninth of June, 1998. Kitty, we were-- you'd left with your mother and father the Zabia Wola. What happened then? KHM: Well, we got into the forest, and we watched the liquidation of the entire community. They surrounded the whole village with armored cars, but they brought in carts, small carts, and also lorries. And we watched people being beaten up and thrown onto the lorries and thrown onto the carts and driven away, and including my grandmother. Of course I didn't recognize my grandmother. We were quite a distance away. We heard a lot of screams and shooting. Shots were fired. And after about a couple of hours, the whole place was deserted. What we later learned, they were all taken immediately to Belzec, which was down the road, and that was where they were disposed of. The same day, they were killed, that-- that very day. 
INT: Approximately how many people, do you know? KHM: I don't know. I couldn't tell you. It was a-- a small Jewish farming communities. There were a few refugees there from-- that had escaped, like us. I don't know. The whole community was liquidated that particular day.  INT: And who were they who did it? KHM: And they-- and they-- they were not taken into a ghetto, they went straight to Belzec.  INT: Who were the people who destroyed the village? KHM: They were all the action groups. Might have been some Ukrainian units, I don't know. But-- because I didn't hear them speak. But they were all green uniforms and helmets.  INT: Right. So what happened then? KHM: Well, we were in this very-- the-- the forests around that area are extremely dense. And the Germans didn't really like going into the forest, because they didn't quite know what they were going to find. As I say, there might have been a lot of Partisans around. Now, my mother made her way to one of the estates through the forest, to Baron von Thurnau. Well, in the first instance, we were in-- in the forest for some days. And unfortunately, I got sick just at that point. And my father had to carry me. And of course, we didn't quite know what was the matter with me. I had-- I had a high fever. The-- the-- my mother made her way to the estate, and the-- the-- the count, Baron von Thurnau, sent his forester. He had a hunting lodge in that forest. Sent the-- sent the Forester and asked him to put us up in his hunting lodge, which this Forester came, collected us, and took us to this little hut. And he put us into a loft, a straw loft, with a ladder. We had to get up on-- on a ladder. And then he took the ladder away, so we were hidden right up on the top there. But at first, of course, we were in the forest for some days. We heard howling wolves, and we ate berries. You know, it was some time before we actually-- my mother actually managed to get to-- to this estate. You know, we had to wait for everything to quiet down in the village. I don't-- I can't recall, because I was sick. Well, eventually we were in that hunting lodge, and patrols came with dogs sniffing around this lodge. But they didn't find us, because we were up in the loft, and there wasn't a access to that. But nonetheless, the dogs were barking and fighting all around-- all around us. And the patrol went away.
Well, eventually the-- the forester came back and said we would have to leave, because they'll be coming back, because the dogs were making such a noise. And obviously, there was something in that lodge, because he wasn't there. It was like deserted. So my mother and I-- they explained that I was sick. So the forester said the baron said that my mother and I could come to the estate, and he'll lock us into a room and hide us until I recovered. But he couldn't-- he wouldn't, on no account, take my father, because it was too dangerous to keep a man, you see? It was just much more dangerous for men. So my father had already by that time had a contingency plan. He was going to go back to Lublin. And because it was a desperate situation, he was going to make his way to the priest who was opposite the Gestapo headquarters. So we split up at that point. And my mother and I went to the baron's estate, and we were locked in a room. And it transpired that I had jaundice, hepatitis, just at the most inopportune time. But the baron decided to keep me there. And in fact, there he got a doctor to diagnose it, and I had some treatment. I can't remember. I was put on a diet or something. And I-- I was locked in this room until I recovered. My father made his way to Lublin, and he-- he got there safely taking office his-- his uniform-- his armband or whatever. He didn't wear it anyway anymore. And he threw up all-- he threw away all his documents. He boarded a train and reached Lublin quite safely. And he was taken in by the priest, Father Krosofsky, in-- in the-- in the Catholic Church. And unknown to us, they had arranged for us to have false documents. And I was still on the estate with my mother. And then word came through from this vicarage, would my mother and I make our way back to Lublin to meet my father. And this is what happened. My mother and I, we-- we-- we-- they cleaned us up at-- in this estate, and we were put into proper clothes. And we boarded the train, and he gave us some money to board the train. And we actually reached the church and the vicarage in relative safety. When we got there, my father was hiding in the coal house, because the priest was afraid to have him anywhere else. So there was a huge amount of coal in that coal house, and my father was at the back of this, of this lump, of this great big mountain of coal.
And he was hiding at the back, sort of a dugout, a little dugout, and he was there. And that's where we met up with my father. Now, we stayed in this vicarage for a few days. We were also hidden there somewhere, I can't remember where. Because the-- the-- the-- we had to be told of the plan that my father had sort of arranged. First of all, he-- the-- the priest got authentic birth certificates for all three of us. I had the birth certificate of a person that actually died but was registered in the church. And therefore, there was this birth certificate. My mother was not-- no longer be related to me. And my father's identity, we never knew. We-- we were not supposed to know. And so we each had these birth certificates. And the priest managed to obtain all the other documentation on the strengths of these birth certificates. So we had all Aryan documents, and we had new identities, new names. And my name was Leokadia Dobrzynska. My mother's name was Mrs. [NON-ENGLISH]. I can't remember her Christian name. My father's name, we were not to be told. We had to be told our new [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] background, of course, where we were born and where we went to school. I had a different birth date, birth year. I think it was 1927. So there-- there were lots and lots of things to learn. And all this took place in the church and with-- with this priest who-- and my father, who gave us the whole breakdown. And we had to learn this. And that took a few days to get it into your head. Because you-- you were not allowed to make a mistake. And of course, we had different accents, don't forget, to the local population. So there were all kind of difficulties there, but we had to learn all this. And the plan was as follows. In those days, the Germans rounded up the Polish population. Not just the Jewish population, but also the Poles. They rounded them up in churches, in cinemas, or simply caught them in the streets. And those were people that were taken as forced laborers to work in German factories in Germany. Now, these raids took place at random. Nobody knew when and where, but quite often. And the plan was that my mother and I, when there was wind that there was going to be a-- a raid, we would try and make our way to the assembly center, where they were collecting all these people and transporting them to forced labor. In other words, we were going to be Polish forced laborers taken away, forcibly. My father-- of course, that wasn't feasible for my father. Because all these people had to-- eventually to undergo a medical examination. And as we know, all Jewish men were circumcised, but non-Jewish men, at that stage, were not circumcised. So Jews were identified-- Jewish men were identified instantly. So my father couldn't-- that was not a proposition for him. So the-- the priest found a farmer, a-- a peasant somewhere in Tarnów, and my father eventually lodged there and had some sort of occupation there. But my mother and I, we were to go and make our way to a-- an assembly center as soon as there was a roundup. While we were in that, also we hid in the coal house there with my father behind the coals during the night, because nothing was safe in the church. Eventually, the priest came and said there's a roundup. All the people from, I don't know, a cinema somewhere, had been caught and taken to a street called Krochmalna Street in Lublin, which was a-- a kind of railway siding. There were a lot of trains standing at the siding. And there was this great big platform. And the plan was my mother and I were going to smuggle ourselves in with these people. Now, it wasn't difficult to get in, because people are fighting to get-- get out of there. They were fighting their way out. And while a lot of people were fighting their way out, my mother and I fought our way in. And it wasn't difficult. And before we knew where we were, we were pushed into trains. Those were just ordinary passenger trains. And before we knew where we were, we were on our way to Germany with a-- with a-- with a transport of Poles being taken for forced labor in Germany, with our new identities. 
INT: Right. So at that stage, [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] when did you last see your father? KHM: I-- I said goodbye to my father in this coal house at the back of the vicarage. That was the last that I saw my father. We never saw him again after that, although he did survive for some months, and he was working somewhere in a small town outside Tarnów. Because we did actually have communication with him for several months. But of course, after we were picked up, we don't know if he wasn't picked up as well. But well, obviously, he was picked up at some stage soon after that.  INT: Can you recall anything he said to you on that occasion? KHM: No, he-- the-- the only thing I recall is just remember your new identity. All these things have to be remembered, every single detail. You must forget your old name. You must forget where you were born, your schools. You've got a total new identity, and this is all you've got to remember. And remember, your papers are in order. You just remember your new identity.  INT: Can you remember anything that you said to him? KHM: No. I cannot remember. Nope.  INT: Was your mother able to say goodbye to him? KHM: I don't know. I can't-- I-- I really don't know. I don't know.  INT: So what happened-- KHM: I don't recall very much.  INT: Yes. So what happened then? KHM: Well, it-- it was-- there-- there was so much tension there, you can imagine. You know, we were in hiding. We were-- had these new identities. We had to find a way of getting in-- in-- in with these forced laborers. There wasn't all that much time for any emotional goodbyes. We were very much alert to what was going on around you. There were roundups everywhere. They were rounding up Jews, they were rounding up Poles. So it was a very tense situation. We were in a carriage with a lot of Poles. And both my mother and I decided we must keep quiet as much as possible, must not speak, because our accents were different. We-- we didn't want any-- anyone to be suspicious. And we were incredibly tired anyway from all the events that had happened in the previous week, and we were just content to sleep. We were taken to-- of course, we were taken at first to a transit place called Dessau, where they were dividing people. Because this was a long train full of forced laborers, men, women, and they were sorting people out. Different factory people came and took groups of people. 
INT: How were you selected and sorted out? KHM: I don't-- I-- it was totally random. 50 people were counted and taken this way, 50 the other way, completely at random. 50 women were taken onto one side. And we found ourselves in a group of 50 women. We were taken to a place called Bitterfeld into a factory, the IG Farben Chemical Works, Aluminum Works, in Bitterfeld, which was a huge, huge concern, complex, industrial complex. And it had laborers from all over Europe, forced laborers, volunteers, all different nationalities.  INT: What country was this? KHM: Now, that was in Germany. It is a-- a town between Leipzig and Halle an der Saale, the small town of Bitterfeld, which was then in East Germany, until reunification.  INT: How long were you traveling? KHM: I-- I really don't know. Perhaps two days, something like this. I-- I don't recall very much of the journey.  INT: Were you traveling all the time, or did it stop? KHM: Well, it-- it stopped in a place where we were disinfected or-- or-- and sorted out. And then, of course, people were distributed to all these different-- different places. Incidentally, the-- the-- the mother of the boy that was killed was also on this transport, and she-- she was selected to a different factory. And she survived the war in that factory, hidden. But there were unfortunate circumstances in the-- the group of 50 that we found ourselves in. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] Now when we came to be interviewed-- everybody was interviewed, all the papers were being checked, [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] it turns out my mother was one of the eldest. There were mostly young people. They-- they selected young girls. But my mother and I stuck together all the time, because we didn't want to be parted. So they allowed her to come with my group. Most of the girls were taken to work in the factories. The first thing you were interviewed is if you could speak a language. Well, I came forward and said I could speak German, so did my mother. So immediately, my mother was pulled out, because she could speak German, and she was told that she would be in charge of this group, and she wouldn't have to actually work in the factory. She would just keep the accommodation clean. And we-- we had a special hut for these 50-- 50 people. And she wouldn't have to actually do any physical work. All the other people were taken to work in the aluminum factory themselves, which was very nasty sort of work. They were shaking out sacks of aluminum dust, and it-- it wasn't very nice. Many of them contracted all kinds of lung diseases after that. Well, of course I could speak German, and I was pulled out because I could speak German. And I was told that I will be-- I was selected to work in an office. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] Well, I was very up-- there was terrible apprehension at that stage for me to work in an office. I-- I couldn't actually write German as such, although I could speak it. My written German wasn't particularly good, but probably sufficient to what I had to do. And I was selected to register-- first of all, register people. Because as I explained, there were all different nationalities. There were Italians that were volunteers, the Yugoslavs or Croatians that were volunteers, and there were Poles that were forced laborers. And-- and there were some some other nationalities there. And all had different camps. They were all segregated. And I-- I was eventually given the task of sorting out and being in charge of issuing meal vouchers to all these different nationalities. And they all had different color meal vouchers, because they all had different food. The German-- the-- the-- the Poles had worse food than the Italians, and-- and the-- the Italians had better food than the Yugoslavs. And this is how they were distributing Russians and-- and food canteens. But because I was distributing these vouchers, I was actually given the voucher to eat in the German canteen. So I was the only person that had direct contact with the German civilian population working in-- in-- in that plant. And they were mostly women, because most of the men had been taken to-- to-- to-- into the forces, although my boss was a-- was a man, Mr. [? Meyer. ?] And he was extremely good to me. He actually taught me to type German in shorthand. And he, you know, he-- he was a marvelous person to work for. Because he didn't know at the time I was Jewish. 
INT: And was he Jewish? KHM: No, he was a German. He was a German-- a German manager of this administrative department within the IG Farben factory.  INT: Right. KHM: Yes, he was a German.  INT: What did you-- what did you wear? Did you wear your normal clothing? KHM: Well, I had very little clothes at that time, of course. Well, most of the people did, because they were all caught. They were all actually caught wherever they happen to be. So from that point of view, everything was safe. Nobody had any clothes, so we were not particularly conspicuous. The worst came when it was the girls were allowed to write home to say where they were. And that is where the stumbling blocks started, of course, because we didn't have anywhere to write to. At that stage, we didn't know where my father was. But we wrote to the priest to tell him where we were, and he had contact with my father. And eventually, we did establish contact with my father, which, with hindsight, was probably a big mistake. Because my father started writing, and we don't know some of the things that he wrote. It may have been censored. We don't know. Some things reached us, some things may not have reached us. He also started to send parcels, which was totally unnecessary, because we were very well provided for. And I think we were actually paid some nominal sum of money. And I-- I remember actually buying some clothes. So we were not short of anything at all. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] Now, we were there, I explained it must have been September by that time. Probably September '42. What we didn't realize for a long time is that among the 50 of us was a Ukrainian woman. Now, we didn't quite know what she was doing there, because the Ukrainians were actually volunteers. And this-- these were all forced laborers, so what was the volunteer doing within our group? So we became slightly suspicious. Well, it turned out that she was actually planted there as a spy. Of course, we didn't know that at the time. What else we didn't know but suspected that there were-- we were not the only Jews within this group, that there were others. Of course, we didn't know whether they had documents or-- we-- our documents were authentic, so we didn't worry too much. 
INT: Where did you keep your documents? KHM: Well, it was all kept in this hut. We-- we had one hut for 50 women, and I-- I can't remember whether we had lockers or whatever. But-- but it was pretty reasonable accommodation for-- as forced labors go. I mean, yes, the labor for the women was most unpleasant, but they-- they were treated reasonably-- reasonably well. I was treated very well indeed, working in-- in the-- in the office. And what's more is every morning, coming into the office, I had to say heil Hitler, with big, lots of Polish swear words in my, you know, under breath. But also in-- in the canteen, everybody had to come in and say heil Hitler. So my-- I worked my identity pretty well. I also learned to pray in the same way as the Catholic girls prayed, which I was taught by the priest. So I wasn't all that conspicuous. We didn't look particularly Jewish. But of course, things did happen soon after, when we realized that there were too many Jews within a small group of 50 of us.  INT: How did that come about? KHM: Well, how exactly it came about, we shall never know. We do know that there was this Ukrainian woman that was planted there. We do think that all our documents-- they-- everybody had to hand in their documents, and they were scrutinized. And they wanted to know who was who. I-- I don't think it could have been all that difficult to sort out people's documents, you see? If they sorted out a birth certificate, they soon found out that this particular person had actually died. Possibly they could have found that out. So of course, immediately, they became suspicious. Possibly some of these documents had false stamps. We don't know. But I know all the documents were scrutinized. And we don't know if the other Jewish girls in our group actually had documents. Maybe they had no documents. Because after all, people were caught in the midst of walking the street. They may not have had documents on them. We don't know. It transpired that one day my mother was called in, Mrs. [NON-ENGLISH]. She was called in to the chief of the Bitterfeld works, the IG Farben. And he said to her, I have rumors that there are some Jewish women among your group. Would you keep your eyes and ears open and let me know of your suspicions. Well, we knew that, you know, it can't be far before something drastic was going to happen. And then one day, again, my mother was called in-- and then one day, one person went missing. And we couldn't understand this. One of the girls went missing. And it was one of the Jewish girls that went missing. Funny enough, she was the least conspicuous of the girls. And she was blond and blue-eyed, and nobody'd have known. Maybe there was something wrong with her documents. We can't-- don't know. Anyway, the-- the-- the next thing that happened is my mother was called in once more to the chief. And when she got into the office, the first thing that struck her was the skull and crossbones on the table, s hat from the Gestapo. And that is how the Gestapo was called in. Or maybe they had already had their suspicions, but that's the first time she saw them, because all these were civilian people. And the next thing was about 15 of us were called out and brought into this office. And when we looked back into the door, there were guards on the door, and with rifles and bayonets, and the doors were shut. And we knew then that obviously, they suspected all of us, and they had all our documents laid out on the table, all the-- all these people's documents. And before we knew where we were, were bundled into a Black Maria and driven off to the Gestapo headquarters in Bitterfeld. And there began all the interrogations. We were put inside. 
INT: When you say we, who was that? KHM: Well, the whole group, the whole group. I think there were about 15 they took in, but about two or three they released. I mean, obviously, they-- they were not Jewish. One girl that was missing, she, later transpired, was already on the Gestapo headquarters. She-- she had already been interrogated. So there were 13 of us. So with that-- within that group of 50, there were 13 Jewish girls. And it was just too many to survive. If it had perhaps been two or three, it-- we might have got away with it. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] The interrogations began. But first of all, we were segregated and put into solitary confinement, and you know, the usual thing. You were deprived of sleep and deprived of food. And you were interviewed, interrogated individually. And there was always the same questions. Where-- where did your documents come from? What is your name? What is your real name? We know your documents are false. Where did you have-- where did they come-- we must know where these documents came from. And that's one thing we were not going to divulge, no matter what.  INT: How did your mother cope under this? KHM: Well, my mother coped very well. And we were interrogated on and off for days. And one day, I was interrogated. And again, I said, look, I can't-- I don't know. This is my name. This is where I live. This is where I was born. These are my documents. I can't tell you any more. My name is Leokadia Dobrzynska. I kept on repeating the same thing over and over again. Once or twice, I was slapped in the face. Once or twice, I was given chocolate as an enticement, you know, inducement to say more. Eventually, after, oh, I think we were-- I think they transferred us. Then they transferred us to Halle, to the prison, the actual prison. And there was a whole commission of interrogators again. And one day, I was interrogated, and I was told, [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] well, you know, your mother's confessed. I said, well, she's confessed to what? I-- I don't know what you're talking about. I-- I don't know anything different. And then they came to my mother and said, well, your daughter has-- no. They didn't say that, your daughter said. We know that your-- I think she was supposed to be my aunt at that time. We know your niece has already said, confessed. We know that her documents are false. Give us your real name. And she did. She did. She actually fell into the trap, you see? She fell into the trap. And they-- the next thing is they came back to me and said, we-- they just called me by-- by my-- my name. He-- he-- he-- somebody burst into the room and said, we know your name, Kitty Felix. And I just passed out. That's all I-- that's all-- that's all I remember of that occasion. 
INT: Right. We'll take a break there, because we've come to the end of the tape. KHM: Yeah.  INT: Tape five, Kitty Hart-Moxon, ninth of June, 1998. You had just passed out, having been told that your cover was blown. Right. After regaining consciousness, [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] what is the first sense you experienced? KHM: Well, what happened is I was-- I was apparently dragged out of that room. Because everybody was interrogated individually. And I was thrown into a cell. And when I came to, there were all the other people there. There was my mother. There were all these Jewish girls. They were all there, all in one cell. And we all found ourselves together in the cell.  INT: What did you think had happened? KHM: Well, we-- we didn't know how they discovered it. We did know that-- that the Ukrainian woman was there, planted as a spy. And she, possibly with some other collaborators, found out who was Jewish, who was suspected of being Jewish. And they scrutinized all the documents, and somehow or other, they-- they happened to find out. We don't know-- actually, if we didn't have a contact with my father, whether that in some way also gave-- blow-- blew the cover. We don't know. This is something we-- we really don't know. What we-- what we-- what we did, my mother and I, decided, that on no account, because we didn't know at that stage whether my father was safe or not. He-- he might-- he might well have still been alive, you see? We might have even blown his cover, or the priest, for that matter, of course. Something might have happened to him if they found out where the documents came from. So we decided on no account, at no stage, were we going to stay where these documents came from. We just-- it had been handed to us, and that's it. We were not going to divulge how we obtained these documents. We also realized soon after that they're going to keep us alive until we keep-- until we blow the secret. So as long as we keep the secret, there was a chance for us to be alive. That we began to realize sooner or later. Now, the next thing was there was a kind of-- and we were-- we were in Halle in prison. And there was-- 
INT: Where was that-- where was that situated? KHM: Not all that far from Bitterfeld. We were taken in a Black Maria. And as we were taken away from the Gestapo headquarters, there were some of the people from the IG Farben Works outside the Gestapo headquarters. And the man who looked after me, who was the boss of the-- the manager, he had tears running down his face. And he tried to say goodbye to me, but he was pushed to one side. And these people actually saw us being loaded into the Black Maria and taken off to-- to Halle to-- to the prison. In-- there in prison, we were-- well, there were further interrogations, but primarily there were sort of statements and a kind of court, a semi-court, with interpreters. And they set out our charge-- the charges against us, big documents, which we eventually had to sign. Well, the charges were that we-- not-- not only were we Jewish, not only were-- did we possess false documents, but we entered Germany illegally. So there was three charges, all carrying the death penalty, all these charges. And so we had to actually sign these were the three. These were three things that we did, criminal offenses we did. And it-- it carried the death penalty. We were told it carried the death penalty. And they were sort of laughing and joking and saying, well, tomorrow we're going to have fun here. Tomorrow there's going to be dancing lessons here. Ha, ha, ha. That was all tomorrow it was going to happen. And we realized that tomorrow, in fact, they were going to kill us. Because we're told-- told us this carried the death penalty. So on-- the next morning came. We were-- we were all in that one cell together. And we were all-- some people were crying. Some people were very quiet. Some were praying. And my mother-- I was sitting on my mother's lap, and she was comforting me and telling me, don't worry, you know, we must die in dignity, and you know, and talking about the childhood. And-- and I didn't want to die. At that stage, I realized I was going to die. And I ran to the window, and I looked out at the sky, and I realized that was the last time I was going to see stars, you know. That sort of thing came-- came to me. Anyway, at dawn, we were all led out into the courtyard. It was quite-- still quite dark outside. And there-- there was a brick wall. And what else we had noticed, that they had put sawdust all along the brick wall. And of course, immediately, we thought that was to mop up our blood, you see? And-- and there were also guns lined up. And sure enough, we-- we were led out. And we were told to face the brick wall. And guards were at the side with-- with the-- with the rifles, ready to shoot. And somebody gave a command. And I tried to run to my mother to say goodbye, but I was sort of pulled by the collar and pulled back. And then there were shots. And some girls fell to the ground, but nobody was actually hit. What in fact they did, they shot into the air. And there was great big roar of laughter. And then came one of the commandants or whoever they were, a prison-- prison officers, also in uniform, and said, heh, you really thought we were going to shoot you? This is much too good a death for you. No. We're not going to shoot you. You're going to die slowly. You have-- your sentence has been commuted to hard labor for life. And we were led back into-- into-- into the-- to the prison. Well, we didn't know where we were going at that stage. 
INT: And who told you this? KHM: That was the-- one of the-- the prison-- one-- one of the guards. But he was in a flat cap, so he was an officer. Yes.  INT: Did you know his name? KHM: No, no, no. Of course not. No. No.  INT: So what happened next? KHM: Well, they-- they took us back in, into the prison. And then we-- they-- they started transferring us from one prison to another, from Halle to Leipzig. And from-- we were not there very long, a few days. Well, in Halle, in Halle, we were some time, because there were all these interrogations going on, and we were taken out walking around the courtyard, you know, and sort of around. The prison officer-- prison warder, actually, in the center, and all the prisoners had to walk around so many times a day for exercise. Eventually we landed up in Dresden, in a prison, in a huge, huge cell, which was right up on the-- on the-- on the top floor, and it had a glass dome. And you could actually see the whole city from there. And it was a-- it really was a huge cell. And gradually, that cell began to fill up. And there, I met the first Gypsies. They brought in some some-- some Gypsy women. There was all women, of course. They brought in Gypsy women. They brought in Russian women. And they brought in German prisoners, murderers, who had actually committed murder, also some German political prisoners, all the-- all the prisoners. It was a collecting cell, which we didn't know at the time. Well, we realized it was a collecting cell because there were all different inscriptions on the wall of-- of the cell. And some of the walls, some of the inscriptions said, see you in Auschwitz. So we already had an inkling that maybe this is where we're going. 
INT: Did you know what Auschwitz was? KHM: Well, this-- this is what I'm coming to. We-- we sort of-- my mother looked at me, and I looked at her, and I said, well, what did she mean, see you in Auschwitz? What is in Auschwitz? Now, my mother remembered Auschwitz, the Polish name, Oswiecim, as a small fishing village. It was kind of lowland, whereas Bielsko was high land. Auschwitz, which was some 30 miles or kilometers north, was pretty well lowland. It was bog land. And it had a lot of lakes and quite a fishing industry. People used to go fishing there. My mother said, I remember going fishing. People used to go fishing there. Well, what can be there? What we did-- what she did remember was that there was quite a elaborate siding. It was a kind of railway junction. That's the only thing she remembered, the-- she said, it was also a railway junction. I remember, if you-- if you had to go to a certain place, you usually passed Auschwitz junction. It was a large junction. But she says, she can't understand what there was. We had no idea what there was. And then there were other inscriptions on the wall, such as, we're on the way to hell. You-- you-- nobody has ever come back. And those were inscriptions on the wall of this cell. And we didn't realize this was a transit cell. They were collecting prisoners, you know, and sending them to Auschwitz. And then one day, a warder came back, called out our group, and said officially, well, your sentence has been commuted to hard labor for life in Auschwitz. And this is how we realized that we were actually being transported to Auschwitz, with-- with this whole collecting cell. There were-- there were so many people in that cell. It just had one-- it had a lavatory, actually, a-- a toilet in the cell. But it no longer had any beds or anything. People were just sitting on the floor. It was completely full, this-- this whole cell. And one night, the whole cell was emptied, and we were taken to a train in the town. 
INT: How were you taken to a train? KHM: Pardon?  INT: How were you transported to the train? KHM: I think in Black Marias. Yes. Because everything went in Black Marias. You never-- never saw-- looked-- could see out where you were. You were taken to a siding. And this train was a passenger train. And it was a fairly new train, designed specially to carry prisoners, not cattle trucks. They were-- they were-- they were coaches that were divided up into small cells. Now, that I know-- can describe to you absolutely distinctly, because it-- it was such a unique thing to see. There was a-- a-- a-- like a corridor, just like you have a-- a-- a coach that has a corridor, and then it has small compartments. Well, all the compartments had been taken out, and there were little cages. Now, some were bigger, some were smaller. Some were cages for two people. Some were cages for four people. And then there was just a gangway where the guard was moving backwards and forwards. And the cages-- and all the-- the windows were painted up white, so you couldn't see where you were. So you-- and before we-- we knew where we were, all the women were put in-- in these coaches. There were-- there were men as well. The whole prison, apparently, it was a whole transport taken to Auschwitz from different prisons, I take it. But we-- we were put into these little cells. And the cells were so that you couldn't sit down. There were little cells. I think the cells that we were in were actually cells for two, but we were four in one of these cells. And you could only stand. You couldn't sit. And well, my mother and I found ourselves with two big Russian women in one-- squeezed into one of these little cells. And it was padlocked. And so that's-- 
INT: Did you have any food? KHM: No. We have no food whatsoever. No food was issued at all as-- as we were loaded onto the trains. And none of the-- neither were there any lavatories. Sooner or later, of course, the two Russian women, everybody, needed to go to the lavatory. And they were still loading the trains. And no one could go to the lavatory. Eventually, they-- the-- the guards came in, and they saw a mess on the floor, and they started screaming and shouting and-- and beating people up and then taking people to the lavatories to-- to-- end-- the end of the coach. And this is how I was actually transported from Dresden into Auschwitz.  INT: Right. How long did it take? KHM: Well, I wouldn't know how long it took. We-- we were standing. I-- I really don't know. It might-- it certainly-- certainly a good many hours. And I thought the date was the 12th of April, 1943. Incidentally, the-- I was [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] at the Gestapo headquarters on the Friday the 13th of March, 1943. Now this transport to-- to Auschwitz, we arrived in Auschwitz on the 6th of April, 1943. This I actually discovered from the archives, that it wasn't the 12th, but it was the 6th of April. I was always under the impression that it was the 12th. But you-- you did lose the count of days and time and day of the week. You-- you had no idea. 
INT: Did you sleep on that journey? KHM: I don't think so. I think we could only stand. We took it in turns to sit, because as I said, it was a cell really intended for two, but there were four of us in a cell. And we were just-- there was just enough room to stand. And one person crouched down, the other had to stand. So we took it in turns. And there were the huge-- two huge Russian women, who started fighting. And-- you know, it wasn't-- it was a horrendous journey in-- into Auschwitz.  INT: Did-- did you talk? KHM: No.  INT: No KHM: I don't think so. Because there were Russian women. No, we didn't have much of a-- I don't think anybody had any conversation whatsoever at that stage.  INT: Right. Were you aware that anyone was sick on that journey? KHM: Well, we didn't see anybody else, because everybody was caged up. The whole-- the whole-- the-- the whole coach was all in coaches-- in-- in-- in little cages. And we don't know what the other coaches were like, of course. But certainly, the coach I was in was all little cages. So you had no contact with anybody else--  INT: Right. KHM: --until you actually-- until-- well, I don't know how many hours or when it was. I don't know how long the journey took. I don't know how far it is from Dresden to Auschwitz. It's-- it could be 500 miles. I really don't know. 
INT: Did you get out of the train at all on the journey? KHM: No, no, no.  INT: No. KHM: They didn't-- just as far as the toilets, that's-- that's all. After the-- there was a mess everywhere on the floor. Mm.  INT: So the-- this train arrived at a place-- KHM: The--  INT: --which was called Auschwitz. KHM: The train arrived, actually, at Auschwitz Station. Because the-- the-- the railway siding that was built into the camp wasn't built at that stage. That-- that railway was built in late 1943. In fact, I-- I even worked on the railway. But at that stage, prisoners were still disembarked somewhere in the siding, Auschwitz-- Auschwitz Station, which was a huge-- like I say, it was a huge junction, and they had lots of sidings there. And we-- we were thrown out of the-- out of the cages, the whole lot of the train.  INT: Who-- who took you out of the cages? KHM: Well, by that time, there were guards, all guards in green uniforms and dogs, mostly men with dogs on leashes.  INT: Right. KHM: And--  INT: What exactly happened? KHM: Well, the whole transport was emptied. Because don't forget, we came from prison. We didn't come from any ghetto.  INT: Right. KHM: We came from prison with probably the whole of the train, which might have contained 1,000 people. We don't know. There were only 13 Jews in my group.  INT: Right. KHM: So it was a-- like a non-Jewish transport, men and women jumbled up. And they began to segregate all the men from the women. And then-- 
INT: When you got out of the cage, did you have to then get out of the coach? KHM: Yes. Because you got out of the cage onto the corridor, and from the corridor on-- onto a platform.  INT: How did you get onto the platform? KHM: Well, I think you just went down as you normally do from a train onto a platform.  INT: Did you have to jump down, or-- KHM: I-- I don't know.  INT: --step down? KHM: I couldn't tell you. I couldn't tell you. Everybody was just glad get out of the train.  INT: What was the first thing you saw when you got out of the coach? KHM: We-- we saw absolutely nothing, because it was just a pure siding. And it-- it was-- I would say it was about 3 o'clock in the morning. It was still dark.  INT: Still dark. KHM: Yes, it was still dark.  INT: Were there any-- was there any other person on the platform? KHM: No. There were only guards on the platform. And they were dividing people up into men and women, and all of us were marched towards a camp. The first thing we saw were lit-up enclosures with great big searchlights. And there was a gate which said, 'Arbeit Macht Frei,' which I didn't know at the time, this was the base camp, Auschwitz 1. And this is not where I was taken to, but we went past there. Because a lot of our men that were on the train, and-- and also some of the women, were taken into there, in-- into Auschwitz 1. 
INT: Who decided who walked on? KHM: I couldn't tell you. I-- well, I didn't-- I don't know.  INT: How did you know to walk on? KHM: Well, you were--  INT: Were you told? KHM: You were-- you were driven to be-- to walk on. You were segregated, and so many people went there. But I think they were already sorted out on the platform, who was to go where.  INT: Right. There were 13 of you altogether? KHM: We were-- we-- well, we were-- yes. We were in the one-- on one part of the transport, yes. Yes. We were--  INT: Who was with you? KHM: Well, I was just with my mother and the two Russian women. But yes, there were the-- all the girls that were interrogated. They were all there. All 13 of us were in the group that were led on, also some of the Polish women, also some of the German women and-- and some of the criminal German prisoners. We were all walked on.  INT: Right. KHM: Some two kilometers we were walked on. We-- we didn't go through the gate, 'Arbeit Macht Frei,' which was Auschwitz 1. We were led further on through a field. I don't know, because it was dark. The very first thing that hit us was a big gateway with a tower and big searchlight. And it's just in the midst of nowhere. I'd say the railway line hadn't extended to-- to-- to that far. So it was almost through fields. When we got there, the whole place was lit up. It was still dark. It was still dark. It was dawn, I would say. And as we approached, there was a most peculiar red glow in the sky, in the distance. And I didn't see-- I didn't see any movement or anything, but what was very distinctive was the smell. There was a kind of sweet smell of roasting. And my mother turned to me, and she said, oh, what a funny place. Do you mean-- do you think they're roasting chickens here at this time of the morning? Because that was the sort of smell, that. And at the same time, it wasn't quite like that. It was kind of a sweet smell at the same time. And there was a glow in the background. We didn't quite know what it was. Of course, we knew later those were the glow from the crematorium. 
INT: What could you hear? KHM: Nothing. It was-- it was still early dawn when we got there. Absolutely nothing, until we actually reached nearer to the gates. As we came nearer, there-- there were a lot of shouts and screams and whips going, going, and prisoners--  INT: Who-- who was doing-- yeah. KHM: --running around and great commotion. We didn't know what it was all about. That was the very first thing that greeted us. Well, what we didn't know, that, of course, 4 o'clock was such a time. We-- oh, whistles. Yes, you could hear whistles, lots of whistles blowing in the distance. And that meant that it was getting up time in the-- in the camp, and prisoners had to run to-- to stand outside their block for roll calls. But we didn't know that at the time.  INT: No. So you-- you're getting towards the gate of this place. Did you-- was there any name given to it? KHM: There was nothing at all. We came through the gate. And normally, when you came near that gate, you were actually under-- undergoing a process of selection before you were allowed through the gate.  INT: What was happening? KHM: Well, the-- the normal procedure was that when people were brought in--  INT: What happened to you? KHM: To me? No.  INT: No. KHM: We did not go through a process of selection.  INT: Can-- KHM: Because if we had, my mother would not have been allowed into the camp. 
INT: No. Can we have your knowledge, what happened to you? KHM: Yes, my-- my knowledge of, we went straight through, into a-- a building called the sauna, which now, of course, we know it wasn't such a thing as a sauna. But it was-- it was called the sauna. It was like the bathhouse or whatever, disinfecting station, you could say.  INT: So what happened to you there? KHM: And there, they took all-- everything off you, just everything that you had off you, any of your possessions. You had to leave everything behind. And you had to go and be so-called disinfected. You went into a great big long [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] hall. In that hall were great big tubs of green fluid. And prisoner-- women prisoners-- were standing there with mops, I would say. And we were-- we were mopped down with this green fluid. And then you went further on, and you had to put your arms and your legs out, and they were-- there was a-- a kommando, or I should say a group of prisoners, working. And they-- they were called the [NON-ENGLISH]. Those were the hairdressers. And they were shaving hair of all the newcomers. So they were shaving you under the arm, pubic hair. And then, of course, they took-- cut your hair off. Sometimes they shaved your hair. Sometimes they just at randomly cut-- cut your hair with scissors, depending on who was cutting your hair.  INT: What happened to you? KHM: Well, I had my hair with scissors, actually. And it was the most holy mess, of course. In part, it was shaved, in part, it was short, in part, it was long. And so was my mother. We were both disinfected. And-- 
INT: Did anyone speak to you during this process? KHM: No. There was an awful lot of screaming and shouting and beating going on, and everybody was told to hurry up and urged on, and people with whips. There were prisoners--  INT: In what language? KHM: Well, the-- the-- the camp had its own language. And unless you could speak German and Polish and all the other languages mixed together, you couldn't understand. Anyway, it had its own vocabulary. So at first, you couldn't understand the commands anyway. That you progressed. As you progressed through the camp, you learned-- you learned the language.  INT: So you didn't understand what they were saying to you? KHM: A lot of it, I didn't understand, no. A lot of it, I didn't understand.  INT: Right. KHM: I mean, a lot of it was in German commands, which you didn't understand, you know. [GERMAN], and well, you know, we didn't quite know what he meant. You know, there were a lot of expressions which you-- you probably couldn't understand. You just had a gut feeling of what was required of you. And if you didn't do, you soon knew, because you were hit with whips or kicked or-- or whatever.  INT: Were you personally hit? KHM: Oh, yes. I was hit many times. Oh, yes. Yeah.  INT: Right. You are naked. You're being disinfected. KHM: Yes.  INT: What happened then? KHM: Well, the next thing was you were thrown-- well-- well, you-- you were taken to a heap of clothes. The clothes that we had been given were khaki uniforms, which were taken off Russian prisoners of war. 20,000 Russian prisoners of war were brought into Auschwitz prior to our arrival, and most of them were killed immediately. And-- and their uniforms were handed out. So I had a pair of breeches and-- and-- and a khaki shirt and a pair of clogs. That-- that was all. That-- that is all that was issued at that time. 
INT: Right. KHM: The same for my mother. We all looked alike. We all had the same clothes, the same clogs, and hair shaved. And believe you me, you could not recognize-- I couldn't recognize my mother. And when she looked at me, and I looked at her, we actually laughed. Because it was just too-- too funny, because we didn't recognize ourselves. Of course, there was no mirrors, but you pretty well knew what you looked like by looking at the next person.  INT: How long did this process take? KHM: Well, I don't think it took too long, because everything was done at full speed.  INT: Right. KHM: And I also think that not everybody was issued with the same clothes. I-- I also think that some of the German prisoners were issued with different clothes. Sooner or later, you were issued with the things like triangles and crosses on your back. And I think there was, like, a bit of a segregation.  INT: When did that happen? KHM: I think it happened after-- but after that, you were actually tattooed. What happened then is they were taken to another long hall, and there were women prisoners sitting behind long trestle tables. And there were-- everybody had-- was-- was numbered. So everybody was issued with a number, every single person, with a number.  INT: What was that like? KHM: Well, it was just like a pin prick on the forearm, on the left forearm. All tattoos were done on the left forearm. So my tattoo-- my mother was first, as a matter of fact. 39933. That was her number. Then there was a little triangle underneath, and this was-- denoted that-- that you were Jewish. I came next, 39934, again with a little triangle underneath. So we were-- we were tattooed at that stage. And then according to the tattoo, these were girls working what was known as the [NON-ENGLISH], sort of the office and the recording department. And I think that is where they began to sort of sort people out, which were the German prisoners, which were the Russian prisoners, and which were the Jewish prisoners. 
INT: What happened immediately after you were tattooed? KHM: Well, when everybody was tattooed, we were then allocated to a block. The next thing was you were actually in-- in what was known as on-- in quarantine for six weeks. It was nothing of the sort, of course. It was a slave labor market, as we know. But the-- the euphemism for this was quarantine. And you were sorted out. And the Jewish prisoners went on the Jewish blocks and the Russians on the Russian blocks. And the German immediately got privileged positions, and I think they got striped uniforms with their numbers written on and the triangles, red triangle for political and green and blue-- green and black triangle for criminal prisoners. So they-- they were sort of sorted out after being tattooed.  INT: Right. KHM: And of course, they didn't have a triangle. The non-Jews didn't have a triangle tattooed on their arms. But I was actually classed as political. At some stage there, in my record, it said political. Now, this-- this-- this became of-- of great importance. Because in most of the prisoners that came into Auschwitz were never really cataloged as such. But my transport, coming from prison, was actually cataloged and recorded.  INT: Right. We're coming to the end of the tape. We'll take a break now.  INT: Tape six, Kitty Hart-Moxon. The ninth of June, 1998. Kitty, you've arrived in Auschwitz. You've been through the delousing process, and you've now been tattooed. What happened immediately after that? KHM: Well, I was going to show you my tattoo. But of course I-- I can show you my scar on my left forearm, because I had my tattoo removed in the 1950s. But I have got it. It is intact. It is actually been mounted. And I've also got my mother's tattoo. And both of them are mounted together, which you can see later. 
INT: Right. KHM: Immediately after that, everybody was driven out and allocated to blocks. We were allocated to what were called the quarantine block. Now, you-- you-- you were-- you-- we arrived. Of course, we had no food. There was no food dish-- dished out after our tattoo. It was 24 hours, in fact, before we had anything at all, and then only, of course, the bread ration. We were taken to a-- a stone block, I think it was. Because Auschwitz had wooden blocks, and it also had stone blocks. And inside-- inside the blocks were sort of bunks, usually housing about eight people to one bunk. And the whole block housed around about 1,000 women. Now, you were not allowed to stay inside. You were supposed to be outside, what was known on the [NON-ENGLISH], the-- the-- the lawn. But of course, there wasn't a lawn. It was in-- it was in the mud. The whole place was bogged down with-- it was bog land, and it was muddy. It was always muddy. In the summer, when it was very hot, it was-- the mud had dried up and would get-- it cracks. You know, it was difficult to walk. But mostly, it was just pure mud. And we were-- we were just sitting around, literally, in that mud. That's where we had to stay all day. And we were what was known on the slave market. It was kind of initiation period to the camp. Presumably you sorted out the situation. It was such a bewildering place, people going backwards and forwards, the ruling prisoners running backwards and forwards in all different uniforms, in all different clothes, groups of prisoners working in-- in all different parts of the camp. And you were just sort of caught to-- to different work parties. And so if you could dodge these work parties-- that was the first thing you learned, is to dodge being caught for sort of heavy work. And that went on for about three or four weeks, before people were actually allocated to any proper work groups. Now, what-- 
INT: Had-- had any selection been made there? KHM: No, no. There was no-- no. There was no selection whatsoever. We-- we-- we went through without selection. We-- we were-- during that period, several things did happen. The girl who tattooed my mother said, gosh, you are really much older than most of the people in this camp. It's-- it's just a miracle that you were allowed through the gate. When-- when we explained that we were-- didn't pass through a-- a process of selection, she said, well, something's got to be done, because you cannot possibly go on and-- and survive, not one day, working outside. Leave it to me. We will try and see if we can get you to work in the hospital compound. So that-- but, she said, there's nothing we can do for the six weeks that's the quarantine. There's absolutely no access to quarantine. But people are sort of going to be sorted out. And at-- at-- as days passed, they were coming in and wanting to know could anyone sing, could anyone-- [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] were there some nurses, were there any doctors, were there somebody-- could-- is-- is somebody a carpenter? So women could do carpentry work. This is why it was so much easier for men, because many of the men had professions, and they could actually-- or they had trades, and they could-- or skills. They could actually work in some decent sort of work groups. But you see, most of these were teenage girls, and we didn't-- we didn't have any skills whatsoever. Now, then there was with us, for instance, two sisters. One was a very small girl, young girl, and she was-- she was only 12. But she was very small for her age, and she could pass for about eight. And of course, immediately, you know, there was this business, how did she manage to get into the camp? Because we came without selection. And some of the prisoners arranged for her to be taken away, and they sort of tried to protect her. So she was given a job as a-- a [NON-ENGLISH], a messenger girl. And she became one of the messenger girls one-- almost from the start. And as she got this job, she managed to get her sister out of this group as well, and her sister got a better job. And so one or two people managed to wrangle better sort of occupations. But I realized from the beginning that the best thing is to stay invisible, so when no one gets to know your face too well. Because I soon realized that if people get to know your face, that wasn't a very good idea. You'd be caught for certain duties, certain jobs that you probably will not survive. And my mother and I soon realized that people progressed in this place if they were prepared to take on some privileged positions. And my mother's instilled this on me from the start. There's one thing we were not going to do. We were not going to emulate the Germans, and we were not going to help them to carry out their dirty work. Because the-- the-- the-- the camp was run, it was quite obvious from the start, by prisoners themselves, who were much more brutal, because they wanted favors from their superiors. And my-- my mother said, that's one thing we must never do. Anyway, I think I ought to go back to our first night. 
INT: Yes. KHM: Yes, my first night.  INT: I'd like your reaction to the events of your first few hours. KHM: That's right. The first night sticks in my mind. Of course, the-- the next six weeks is a blur, because I was dodging, hiding, trying to find ways of getting food the first six weeks and trying to assess the place. And everybody said most prisoners die the first six weeks here. You know? This is-- this is when people die. The-- the-- the life span's three weeks. If you survive six weeks, you've got a better chance of surviving longer. The longer you stay alive, the better your prospects are. So I did realize I've got to weigh up the situation. And I had to weigh up situations before. You know, this-- I didn't come from home. I didn't come from the comfort of my home. I had-- I'd been accustomed to weighing up situations. So I knew there are certain things I have to learn very quickly.  INT: How old-- KHM: Anyway, going back to the first night--  INT: Yes. How old were you at this stage? KHM: Well, I was going on for 16, wasn't I?  INT: Yes. And what age was your mother, [INAUDIBLE]? KHM: Oh, dear. No, she was born 1890, so she was in her 50s. Yes. She was considered-- considered old--  INT: Yeah, yes. KHM: --to be in the camp. Someone over 30 was considered old, you see? So there were very, very few people of her age, women. There were one two political male prisoners that were older, but certainly not women. 
INT: So your first night. KHM: Yeah, my first night. The first night, we-- I say, we spent just like sardines, eight people on a bunk. And I was lying next to a-- it transpired, a Gypsy, who had been there a few days before. And she was a German Gypsy, actually true German Gypsy. And she'd-- she asked me if I speak German. Yes, yes. And I-- I spoke to her. And she-- she said to me, give me your hand. She said, give me your hand. She said, I can tell-- I can-- I can foretell the future. Give me your hand. And she said-- she looked at mine. She looked at my lifeline. And she said, well, I don't know, but you are going to come out of here. It's written here on your wrist. I know it. Never give up. Because this is what's going to happen. And-- and, you know, I laughed at that, really. It's-- it was a big joke, I think. Anyway, she-- and we settled down for the night. We-- we didn't have any food or anything. We settled down for the night. And then whistles blew the next morning, 4 o'clock, and I had no idea where I was, you know, woken up there.  INT: Did you know the time? KHM: No, no, no, no, we had no idea, you know. It was still dark when the whistles blew. But it was known that getting up time sometimes was 3:00, sometimes was 4:00 in the morning. The whistles blew, everybody was thrown out, thrown off. And I shook this woman I was sleeping next to, and I couldn't wake her. And then I-- I-- I kept on saying, come on, wake up. You've gotta get up. And she was cold. And I was terribly cold right through that night, because you only had one layer of clothes, don't forget, and there was nothing to cover yourself up with. And she was cold. And she'd died during the night. And I was lying next to her dead body. And she-- she was dead. And my mother was very close by. And I said to my mother, she's dead, you know. And oh, and I said, I know what we've got to do. Immediately, we've got to do something. And that is we've got to have everything that she's got, everything. If she's got any bread, because we've hadn't eaten. If she's got any clothes, we must take it, because it's not good to her. It will never do any good to her at all. She is dead. And my mother agreed. And we stripped her, took everything off her. And immediately, I gave my mother a second layer of clothes. And she had a few bread rations, which you had to keep on your body, because if you didn't, you didn't have it by the morning. And so eventually, it came to me that day, first night, this is the way to survive in this place. If anybody dies, you have everything off them. But you must never touch anything of anyone of a living prisoner. But when they're dead, that's fine. That's yours. And you must, to preserve life, this is what you must do. You must try and live off the dead. And I used this principle over the last-- the next 20 months of existence in-- in Auschwitz. 
INT: Right. Were you able after that to get the physical layout of the camp? Did you realize how big it was? KHM: Well, I-- yes. Well, no single prisoner had access to any part of the camp, only the one where you were taken. But I-- I do know that my camp I was taken to in the first instance was B1b, which was a sort of a quarantine part. And this was divided by a gate-- which was patrolled-- to the second section of the camp, which was B2b. Now, on one part of B1b was the hospital enclosure, which was-- which was also enclosed, which housed, possibly, about 12 or 15 huts. And almost next to the-- to-- to these huts was the electrified fence and the ramp. And this is where the railway lines came right into the camp, where all the people came into the camp, and where selections were carried out on the main ramp. This actually adjoined-- the hospital compound, directly adjoined the-- the-- the railway and the ramp where people were being sorted out, where people were brought in. So we had a direct view of all the people that were actually being brought into the camp. So this-- this was the women's enclosure, and it was-- the-- the women's enclosure was a lot smaller than the men's enclosure. The other side of the ramp was, again, the men's-- the men's camps. But camps stretched as far as the eye could see, and much of it I didn't see for a long, long time, until 1944, when I actually worked in the Kanada kommando, when I went around the perimeters of the camp, when I actually saw the-- the vastness of the place. And of course, there were so many sub-camps. There was Auschwitz 1, which was separated from Auschwitz 2, Birkenau, by some two kilometers. And-- and of course then there were outlying camps, [NON-ENGLISH], there were loads of them. There were about 40 different sub-camps which-- which I'd never been to. 
INT: So the-- the railway line went-- actually went into the camp? KHM: The-- the railway line--  INT: Even when you were there, first. KHM: Not when I was there first.  INT: No. KHM: We-- we actually-- I actually worked on this railway at one stage--  INT: So-- KHM: --carrying the cement, carrying stones. Yes.  INT: So that wasn't there from the beginning? KHM: No, it wasn't there on my arrival, no.  INT: Right. Was there anyone in charge of your barrack? KHM: Oh, there-- there was always a person in charge of the barrack. There was always one-- well, they're called a blockalteste.  INT: And who was that in yours? KHM: I couldn't tell you who-- that's on-- on-- in that particular block, I don't know. I can tell you one later on, in a late date. Because it was a very confusing time, the first six weeks--  INT: Right. KHM: --where you had to find your feet and dodge all-- all the people that were hunting you for work. So it was a very, very confusing time. And as I say, most prisoners died. Most people brought in died these first few weeks.  INT: Did any of your group die? KHM: Well, we were-- I-- yeah, a lot of them, died, yes. Quite-- yes, quite a lot of our own prisoners died, our own group that came, yes. Well, I don't know how many eventually survived when you talk about 1945. One or two died in-- of typhus. One or two died during-- were taken during selection. Some died, yes. 
INT: Right. KHM: During the period of quarantine as well.  INT: Yes. So what happened after the six weeks of quarantine? KHM: Well, after six weeks of quarantine, my mother was taken by the prisoners from the-- from the-- the girl prisoner, a-- a-- a Slovakian girl who worked on tattooing. She collected my mother, and she got her a-- a work place working in-- in the hospital compound. And most of the time, she was there. There was a period when she was back in the camp, because nothing was secure. One minute, you were working one place, next minute, you were thrown out, and you were working elsewhere. But most of the time, she was working in the hospital block. At first she was a-- as a helper, then she was working as a nurse. Then she was working as a-- a-- just sitting at the-- at-- at-- at the-- what they call [NON-ENGLISH]. That means that somebody had to sit at the entrance to make sure nobody got in and out. So she-- she had various duties.  INT: Did she come back to your barrack to sleep, or-- KHM: No, no, no, no. She was-- she was isolated there. There was no contact. In fact, it was out of bounds. And I was separated from my mother at that stage. And for me to-- to go there was a most incredibly difficult operation to actually get there. You had to bribe people, you had to dodge people, you had to make sure nobody sees you going in. You had to make sure nobody sees you coming out. It was very difficult to actually go and see her. 
INT: Did you see her? KHM: Oh, I did. Yes. I did manage to see her quite often. And there was a period where I actually hid there. [LAUGHS] I actually hid there during the day, and I went back for roll call outside my-- my block. Because you always had to appear at the roll call outside your block, where, you know, there was a roll call every morning. And sometimes the roll call lasted one hour, sometimes three hours, sometimes four hours. And I had a roll call that once that lasted 24 hours, where people just stood and-- and died on-- and were trodden into the mud.  INT: Did the barrack elder have to do a count at all? KHM: Yes, she did. Yes, she did. She-- in fact, she had a list, a so-called list of numbers. She just simply had a list of numbers. She didn't know the faces. And this is why it was so good to be invisible. Although she had a list of numbers, you see, she couldn't put a face to the number. She had 1,000 people on her block. And the-- the least people know-- knew you, the better, of the whole [INAUDIBLE].  INT: Did she have any sub people in charge? KHM: Yes, she did. She did. She had people that are cleaners and all various hangers on, yes. And distributing meals and fetching soap. Yes, she did. She had about three people working for her. And of course, all the commanders had kapos and under kapos. And then there was quite a hierarchy sprung up of all the ruling prisoners. 
INT: Right. Were you ever part of that regime? KHM: No, I was never part of it. I never, ever had any such duty whatsoever. I never allowed myself to be in that kind of category of prisoner. Never. I worked in probably about 20 different groups. Some were worse, some were better, some were absolutely terrible. I worked outside digging potatoes, carrying stones, digging trenches, carrying cement, being beaten, being-- dogs set-- set upon me. I-- very often, I managed to hide and just do nothing. As I say, go into my mother's block and hide under some sick person. But it was so dangerous to hide there, because they had constant selections, and you were always prone to be selected. So from that point, it was dangerous. But there were days that I hid there. I had realized the best thing to do is to do nothing if you can. There was a-- there was a time when a group of women were working in the Siemens factory, for instance. The-- that problem was that they all wear-- wore striped dresses and had red scarves, I think. And the problem was, if you didn't have these clothes, you couldn't actually belong to this group. But I decided I wasn't going to work in their factory and be beaten up, but what I needed was their uniform. So with bartering, you know, with-- at that-- at one stage, I was working at what was called a [NON-ENGLISH] as well, carrying bodies. So when you carried bodies, you stripped them of whatever they had. And with the stuff, you bartered and managed to obtain food and clothes. And sooner or later, I managed to obtain such a-- a uniform that these people from Siemens wore. And so-- but there was a night shift and a-- and a day shift. And I-- I had had a-- a plan that I was going to go to sleep with the day shift-- with-- with the night shift. So when the night shift came in, there was a role call, and I had to stand roll call in my block. As soon as the roll call was finished and whistles blew, I ran over to the Siemen's block. I walked in with the night shift, and they slept all day. So I stayed on their block all day. And then at night, when the-- when the night shift went out, again, there was a roll call. I went back on my roll call, and I slept in-- in my hut. So I didn't go on night shift, and I didn't go on day shift. But I-- I sort of belonged to them, but nobody knew. And I-- I did this for some months. There were occasions when I couldn't do it, of course. And-- and I sort of wore my-- my striped clothes and my other clothes underneath, and I changed over and put the others on top to go to roll call. There were all kind of chicanery that you had to indulge to-- to-- to be able to do that. The-- the same applied if you-- you see, when the whistles blew, there was a great commotion. All prisoners came in from work, from outside, and they came into the camp. And whistles blew. That meant they had to go and stand roll call. But during-- there was a commotion for-- it lasted for about half an hour. And during that half hour, you-- or perhaps even longer, I don't know. You could do all sorts of things. You could barter, go and see your friends, go and see your mother, if you could get in. Go and see if you could get into a lavatory. At one stage, there weren't any lavatories when I first came, so that didn't apply. But later on, when they built these lavatories, it was difficult to get into the lavatories. That's when you did it. That's when you tried to barter and do or perhaps try and wash or whatever. You did-- when the whistles blew, in between, while there was a commotion, the best time to do anything was while there was a commotion. As soon as things began to-- there was a curfew, and everything was orderly, you couldn't step out of line. So there were certain things you had to obey, and this is what you had to learn. And if you didn't obey certain rules, you were doomed. And if you obey other-- if you did obey the rules, you were also doomed. So you had to knew what-- you had to get to know what was the best thing to do and how to-- how to maneuver. And you couldn't live on food that was issued. You had to somehow organize-- organize was the universal word in Auschwitz. It meant to buy, to sell, to steal, to-- to barter. And that was just a universal word, and you had to learn it. And you had to learn it quickly. 
INT: Tell me about meal times and food. KHM: Whew, well, there was no such thing as meal times, of course. Very often bread rations-- bread ration, a bread ration was issued as you were walking in after roll call. As you were walking in, you got your bread ration. This was your evening meal.  INT: What time? KHM: Oh, well, this was after roll call. Whatever time roll call finished. That was your evening meal, and this was your breakfast. In the morning, they dished out sort of blue fluid, and that was your drink. That was dished out, actually, inside the hut-- sometimes inside, sometimes outside. Things varied.  INT: Who dished it out? KHM: Well, the-- the people who worked for the block leader. That-- that was all you had, your evening bread. Sometimes, what they used to call it [NON-ENGLISH]. It was a small piece of margarine or a small piece of sausage that was added to it-- [NON-ENGLISH] means addition-- to your bread ration, which was just a small crust of bread. But that was your meal for the evening and for morning, issued food. And-- and your soup midday, now, that dependent of where you were working. If you were working outside, they actually brought it to the out-- outside kommandos. They-- they used to bring-- bring the food out. If you worked in the camp, again, you-- sometimes some of the prisoners had to go and collect the great big drums of soup, and then they were dishing out ladles of soup. Everybody-- that was your whole food that you had. And believe you me, you couldn't live on it longer than perhaps three weeks. This is why so many people died the first three or six weeks in Auschwitz. Because it was a starvation diet, and your body couldn't sustain life. And therefore, you had to organize. But there were means of organizing. But you had to know how to go about it. And that is what you had to learn. And you had to learn quickly. 
INT: So what did you learn to do? KHM: Well, I learned to barter, first of all. First of all, I learned you had to take things off dead bodies if you possibly could. And you had to learn to barter. If you could get hold of-- didn't matter what. Everything was currency. A-- a-- a handkerchief was worth two bread rations. A-- a-- a-- I-- I don't know. I cannot give you examples. Just anything was a currency, except currency itself. Money didn't count. Jewelry, not really. Only to privileged prisoners. Ordinary prisoners needed a-- a pair of shoes. A pair of shoes, you couldn't buy. You would have had to find mountains of food to pay for a pair of shoes. If you had a pair of shoes to trade in, well, yes, you could buy other sort of food. Now, people that worked in a place like the sauna, where people came in, you see, they organized clothes. And from these clothes, they would buy food from people that worked where they were distributing food. This is why one single person couldn't very well survive on her own. You did need to live in a little tiny family of three or four. Because one person worked in one place, one in another, and so you smuggled stuff in, and you changed, and you bartered. I worked digging potatoes at one time, so I smuggled in a few potatoes. With a potato, I could buy something else from somebody else that worked elsewhere. This is how-- this is-- this is how the black market-- it was the biggest black market. But of course, the biggest black market was the Kanada market, which we'll come to later. But goods from the Kanada did filter into the camp. And this is how you could trade and eventually find ways of supplementing your diet. But prisoners who didn't simply died of starvation. 
INT: What about your health, sickness? Were you ever sick yourself? KHM: Small sicknesses or whatever, you didn't even notice. If you had a cold, if you had a cut or whatever, you wouldn't even know. You-- you'd totally disregard it, as your skin was black anyway, because, you know, you weren't-- you-- you couldn't go and wash. You couldn't take your clothes off. The-- the clothes that I wore, I wore for 12 months before there was a next delousing. So for 12 months, I never actually took my clothes off. And when I did, my skin was just gray. And it was covered in huge-- well, we used to call it [NON-ENGLISH], which is like red rashes and boils. Some of it went into boils, and some of it never healed, and you would just squeeze out the pus. You sort of rotted alive, in fact. You know, you-- there were no dressings or anything. You couldn't clean it up. Some people swore by washing in urine, because they said it was a good disinfectant. At-- at one stage, you-- you-- you actually use your bowl for your food, for your toilet, for your drink, all the same bowl, and you couldn't wash it out. So you know, conditions improved, shall we say, as time went on. Because they built one or two wash places, and they built one or two lavatories. But when I first came, there-- there was absolutely no access to water whatsoever. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] So that's more or less sums up-- oh, my health. Well, what happened next is I think it was-- let's think. I worked in-- I worked also in a place called the [NON-ENGLISH] kommando, which was just carrying shit. But it was within the enclosure of the camp, so it was better than working what they called [NON-ENGLISH], working far out in the fields, which you probably had to walk an hour or wherever to-- to-- to do this work. This was within the enclosure of the work. And it meant-- the-- now, I must just explain that the lavatories they built was like a long hut, and it had like an iron grid on the top and lots and lots of holes. I've actually got a picture of it if you ever-- we ever want to see it. And about, oh, 400 or 500 prisoners would go into there at one time and share a hole as a-- as a-- as a-- as a means of using a toilet. But of course, the stuff went into a pit. And eventually, this had to be emptied. And so there-- there was-- there formed a kommando called the [NON-ENGLISH] kommando. And you-- you carried, like, a yoke on the top here, with two buckets, one on each shoulder. And that-- and you-- you dug out the shit, put it in the buckets, and that was eventually emptied. So I-- I worked on the [NON-ENGLISH] kommando for some time. Well, it gave me access to lavatories, [LAUGHS] if nothing else. You know, that-- that-- that was a help. Because obviously, when you worked outside, and you had diarrhea, you-- you were just absolutely covered. And you-- there were no lavatories whatsoever. There was no means of going to any toilets. So that was a bonus, of course, to have access to at least-- There were three things you had to have access to, food, shit, and sleep, and everything else didn't really matter. If you could do these three things, you could live. And this you had to think of all day long and all night long as well. 
INT: I wanted to ask you about-- KHM: My health.  INT: --your bowl in [INAUDIBLE]. KHM: My what?  INT: Your-- the bowl that you used. KHM: The bowl, yes.  INT: You said you couldn't leave anything in the camp. Did you carry the bowl around? KHM: Yes, you carried the bowl. What you did is-- I had a red bowl. Most bowls were red, quite large red bowl. And you had it-- you had a-- a piece of string around your waist, and you had the bowl on your waist. Because if you didn't have your bowl, you can imagine. You couldn't get your soup. Nobody else would give you their bowl. If you didn't have a bowl, you didn't have your soup, and you didn't have your toilet.  INT: How big was the bowl? KHM: Well, quite large, quite a big bowl, yes. And you-- you were guarding your bowl very carefully.  INT: What was it made of? KHM: Oh, it was enamel. Just a red enamel, yes.  INT: Right. KHM: And you were lucky if you get a spoon. That you had to organize. You know, say, like everything else, you had to organize.  INT: Yes. KHM: Well, we were talking about my health. And I'll tell you what happened, one of the things that happened next. And I'm trying to recall when it happened. I would think my second year in Auschwitz.  INT: We're coming-- yes. We're coming to the end of this tape, so we'll take a break there. KHM: Yes. 
INT: Tape seven, Kitty Hart-Moxon, 9th of June, 1998. Is there any other work that you did before you went into Kanada in Auschwitz. KHM: Oh, yes, yes, yes. The next stage I think happened-- well, I-- I was also working in-- in a place called a Weberei, which is a spinning factory, because sometimes you couldn't escape until you were drafted into all kind of kommandos. And it was all virtually impossible to get out. But I will now talk about possibly the-- the latter part of 1943, coming towards the end of the year. I suddenly became ill. And as I said, you disregarded any ailments that you had. But at that's point I had a high fever, and I collapsed. Now nobody wanted to go into-- into the hospital compound, because there was always a danger of being selected to die, because selections were carried out there every day. But, of course, there was absolutely no-- no way I could stand up, or stand at roll call. And I was simply carted off onto the hospital compound. And all I remember is saying-- I think some of my friends took me, you know, because we were living in a little family together at that time. So they took me in. And I said, don't forget, my mother is on block-- I think she's on Block 12. Take me to Block 12, my mother. She's on Block 12. She was on the typhus block, you see. And that's where I landed up, on the typhus block, in my-- on my mother's block, fortunately. And of course, I had typhus, like everybody else. But like I've said to you before, we were immunized against typhus. And so luckily, I actually survived. But I was ill for three months. Now what happened was I was put on a-- a bunk, which was a bunk for two, but there were four of us. One had typhus. One had scarlet fever. One had diphtheria. And I think one had-- one-- I had-- all four of us had some other infectious disease. It was the infectious block. But we-- we didn't catch these other diseases, strangely enough. Although I-- I'd had never had diphtheria or scarlet fever, I didn't get it. But I had typhus. And-- well, of course, I had typhus, and there-- there-- there was no medication against typhus as such. And I totally lost consciousness. And I-- it is a well-known fact that you are delirious for weeks on end when you have typhus. And you have hallucinations, and you also-- you are completely deranged, which I was for apparently a long time. And I was screaming and shouting. And prisoners-- not prisoners-- women were tied to their bunks, because they wanted to get up and get out and-- and do all sorts of things which you were not allowed to do.
So I was tied to the bed. But I-- I was unconscious. I didn't recognize my mother. All-- all I was told afterwards is that I was screaming and shouting and-- and telling my mother how cruel she was, that she doesn't give me all the oranges and grapefruits that are lying at the bottom of my bed, and nobody wants to give it to me. All you wanted was drink, because in typhus you have got the most incredible black tongue or something, like a deposit on the tongue. And you can't close your mouth. And, of course, it affects all your organs inside. And all you want is drink. Anyway, I had this typhus. And I was delirious. And of course, there were selections on the-- on the block, selections for people to be taken to the crematoria. And my mother knew when there-- there-- there were going to be selections. And as soon as she realized there was going to be a selection, she would pick me up, put me underneath a straw mattress, put a straw mattress on top, and put a corpse on top-- a dead person on top. Because people died. The-- the-- the death toll was about 400 a day at that stage on-- on the infectious block. And hoping I would keep quiet. And-- and the selections were carrying out-- these selections were usual two or three times a week, and I was ill three months. Eventually, I recovered from typhus sufficiently. And I had complications of typhus. I had-- I had pneumonia, and I had inflammations in both my-- abscess in both my ears. You do get all kind of complication. All my hair fell out. By that time, my hair had grown quite a bit, but it all came out in clumps, and I was completely bald. And I was deaf-- completely deaf. And I-- and I had this pneumonia. And of course, there was no medication. But one of the prisoner doctors decided she's got to do something about my ears. So she pricked my ears with knitting needles to let the pus out, and then completely destroyed one of my eardrums. Anyway, I recovered from typhus. And I-- I was already sitting on the-- what was known as a heating channel off the bunk. Again, there were selections, but this time everybody had to get outside. And it was Mengele, who we know. Dr. Mengele, he carried out the selections. And I actually had to go through a process of selection immediately after typhus. And I was still crawling on my fours. And I-- I-- I recall that I had huge, huge knees, because all my-- the skin just hung loose, and I'd lost so much weight.
And-- and I just couldn't stand up. And my-- my mother said, now, you've got to run. It's no good just standing up. You've got to run. If he-- if he doesn't see you run, that's the end, you see. Because once you were selected, there was no way of saving people. It's very difficult to get people out of a selection once they were already ticked off and marked off and crosses made or whatever they used to do. Sometimes they used to just tick it off on the list, you see. And you were tattooed. You couldn't-- you couldn't get away. And I-- I stood up. And I actually ran in front of Mengele. And you know, he hesitated, because he turned me around twice. My body was all covered in sort of red blotches. But I ran. And-- and he just let me go. Because there were so many others that couldn't run. They were crawling. And so in comparison, I could-- I could already run. So I-- I passed this selection. That was the nearest I came to being selected. Because I passed several selections prior to that. But I-- I passed the selection when we had delousing sessions and things like that. But this was, as I said, the-- the-- the worst selection that I'd gone through. I began to recover. And-- but my memory didn't come back. You know, I was totally deranged still. I still didn't recognize my mother. And that went on for a long time. Apparently this is a long, long process before you get your-- your, you know, your senses back to normal. Well, eventually-- and-- and at that stage they were throwing people out back onto-- back to the camp. And my mother begged the block leader, and whoever they were, you know. Just needed another-- just let her recuperate another few days to see if she'd recover a little bit better. And eventually-- eventually we managed to persuade them to let me stay and actually work in the hospital by the time I recovered. Now that was almost towards the end of the 1943, I think. Yes, I think-- might have-- I-- I tell you what I do recall. I-- I remember my birthday in 1943, because my-- I was already, I think, working on another block. I was working on a diarrhea block-- the Durchfall block, in other words, yes? Well, there you were just carrying our bodies, because people died of diarrhea. They got like cholera type of diarrhea, and people died all the time. And my mother came to me. And she said, today is your birthday. Now I've got a present for you. And she brought me an onion-- a huge onion. And do you know, this was the most wonderful birthday present I thought I ever had. And, of course, I didn't even know it was my birthday. We didn't know dates. But she found out it was the first of-- first of December. And by that time, I was already on the staff, working first as a cleaner. And then I was working as a-- as a-- as a-- like as an orderly. And I was promoted as a nurse. But, of course, the nursing consisted only as carrying out the dead. So this is how I came to work in the hospital compound. And I worked there until about an incident that happened around about March. I worked in the hospital all that time. And, of course, food there was, you could say, in abundance, because the sick couldn't eat. They each got a bread ration, although that's all we had, was bread and soup. But nonetheless, it was-- there was enough bread. Soup, I must just say a word about the soup. My mother had access to all of the camp soup. And she would always maintain that if she ate a lot of the soup, something happened to her memory. She couldn't think straight. And she couldn't really converse properly. And a lot of my mother's work was talking to people, persuading them, you know. You must go on and things will get better. And trying to-- because you couldn't-- there were no medication, but just giving them moral support. And she found she couldn't think if she ate a lot of that soup. And much, much later, we-- we were discovered that poison was actually added to the camp soup, a kind of bromide. It was called Avo, or something, that some research had been done, that had been added to the soup. And that sort of made people subdued and obey and not rebel, and they couldn't think straight. And it was a slow poison. So we-- 
INT: When did you find out about that? KHM: That I found out well after the war.  INT: Oh, well after the war. KHM: Yes. But we knew there was something wrong with the soup, because it had the most peculiar effect on your mind, on your brain. You couldn't think properly. It slowed down all your movements in effect.  INT: Right. You mentioned Mengele earlier. KHM: Yes.  INT: Did you ever have any contact, or did you ever see any other infamous names? KHM: Oh, yes. While I worked-- while I worked in the hospital compound, we had all the-- all the SS doctors. The same SS doctors that carried out selections on the ramp were the same SS doctors that came into the hospital compound and also carried out selections inside.  INT: Any-- yeah. KHM: I can tell you names. Yes. I can tell you Dr. Konig, Dr. [NON-ENGLISH], [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] oh, Dr. Clauberg, and, of course, Mengele. There was about five of them. And quite a lot of the commandants came in as well. There was a Rapportführer Taube. There was commandant Hossler. Lots and lots of personnel came into the hospital compound. They practically left us alone, the-- the actual people working in-- in the hospital. We were not subjected to-- to the selections as such. And we were not also subjected to roll calls--  INT: Yes. KHM: --which was a big advantage.  INT: Did you ever have contact with any of the prisoners who had been subjected to medical experiments [INAUDIBLE]? KHM: No, there were no medical experiments carried out on our hospital blocks. All the experiments were carried out on the experimental block in Auschwitz 1. So therefore, we didn't actually have direct contact with the experimental station. The people that were working in Auschwitz 1 had contact. But what-- what happened one day is the-- the only contact I had was they were hunting, actually-- hunting people for blood, of all things. And that was almost prior to-- to me having typhus. And I was caught. There was like a mini-roundup, and I was caught and taken to the hospital compound. There was like a laboratory-- sort of laboratory. And they were taking blood. And they-- every-- everybody was actually had the-- had the blood taken off them-- rather a lot of blood, because we came out sort of dazed out of the place. So they took a lot of blood of us. And that was the only experimental-- medical experimental event that I actually experienced. It was then. There was a special block where all the experiments were carried out. And they didn't do them in Birkenau-- not-- not while I was there. Not on my two blocks, anyway. Well, not my mother's and not mine. 
INT: Right. Were you aware of the sequence of the Jewish calendar during your time in Auschwitz? KHM: Well, absolutely no idea of any sequence whatsoever. The-- you-- you didn't know the time of day, the day of the week, or the month of the year. You-- you knew it was hot and it was summer. And you knew it must have been winter, because it was snowing. You did know it was a Sunday, because groups didn't go out to-- to work on outside groups. They didn't take groups out. So we knew that was a Sunday. But you-- you-- the only way you knew there were dates is when newcomers came into the camp. And if they could tell you what day it was, well, that's how you caught up with the calendar. Sometimes some girls got to know it was Yom Kippur. And you knew because they were sitting praying, and somehow they got to know it-- it happened to be Yom Kippur. It was-- but by and large you didn't know. I-- I didn't know. I-- I had no idea of-- of, from day to day, I didn't know the time of day or the- or not the time of day either, by the way. You knew it must have been early in the morning and roll call time was pretty well your clock. And that is all you knew. And in the hospital you couldn't actually tell the-- the date whatsoever.  INT: Did you ever receive any mail? KHM: No, no, no. Nothing whatsoever. 
INT: Any parcels? KHM: No-- no-- no Jewish prisoners in Auschwitz received mail, not to my knowledge, unless there were some privileged prisoners working in Auschwitz 1, and in the political-- in the-- in the offices. But the ordinary, average Jewish prisoner didn't receive anything. And in any case, no-- no one knew I was in Auschwitz. None-- none of my relatives were alive by that time or wouldn't know-- my father didn't know where we were anyway, even if he'd still been alive.  INT: Did you ever have any cultural or educational activities? KHM: I'm afraid all-- all your time was spent with the three occupations-- shit, sleep, and eat. And if you could just concentrate your mind to that, everything else you had to forget.  INT: Right. KHM: Privileged prisoners, yes, they indulged in all kinds of parties, and cultural things. I think there was a time on one of the blocks where things were reasonably quiet for a period, where some girls tried to stage a play. But I don't-- I'm not-- not at that stage. In-- in the Kanada we-- we managed some cultural activities, of all places. That's-- that's where we managed it. But not-- not-- not at that time, and not in Auschwitz, 1943.  INT: Would you ever hear any music? KHM: Yes, we heard a lot of music. Because we had--  INT: How did that come about? KHM: At the gate of B compound was a piece of ground. And there was an orchestra which were compiled of women prisoners. This orchestra was led by a woman conductor named Alma Rosé. She was the niece of a very famous composer-- Gustav Mahler. And she was only really part Jewish. But nonetheless, she-- she was brought into Auschwitz. And she was given the job of organizing this orchestra. And, of course, this is how some of the girls managed to survive very well. Because they were part of the-- a part of the orchestra. Some could play instruments. Some were singers. Most of the pieces that-- and what they had to do is they had to play marches first thing in the morning when groups of prisoners were taken out through the camp to work. They also had to play when they were coming back in. So you heard the music twice a day-- mostly marches. The music was usually directed by people-- by-- by the SS, who said what they had to play. Occasionally, they were allowed to give concerts on a Sunday. And then all prisoners, because they were not going out to work on a Sunday, were allowed to listen to-- to the concert, with the orchestra. The male orchestra also existed. So there-- there were orchestras in-- in the camp, both in the-- in-- in the male section and the female section. 
INT: Who was-- KHM: My mother knew-- my mother knew her very well, Alma Rosé, because she had typhus, and she came onto my mother's block. And my mother actually nursed her during her typhus. And she-- she survived typhus, and she went back to conduct. And then something incredible happened. They were actually going to release her, because she was only part Jewish, or so many percent. I don't know. And she was very respected and very highly regarded. And it was decided they were going to set her free. Now there was a conspiracy among the German ruling prisoners who became very jealous of her. And it is said, but I don't-- haven't witnessed it-- it is said that they made a party for her prior to her release. And she was invited to this party. And the next thing is she was poisoned. Because the next thing that happened is my mother saw her being brought back to her block. And she actually died. So she was poisoned by her privileged class of prisoners. This is-- this is what we've been told. There were-- and-- and the most amazing thing after that is that her body wasn't taken to the crematorium, but she was given a-- a proper funeral-- the only person in Auschwitz that was given a funeral.  INT: Was she buried? KHM: She-- I believe so. I don't know. I believe so. But we-- we didn't witness it. But this is what's been said. Mm-hmm. 
INT: Who was responsible for any discipline amongst the inmates? KHM: The discipline among the inmates was all carried out by the inmates themselves. The-- the-- the ruling party of prisoners had the-- held the whole place in an iron grip. The whole place was disciplined by the ruling hierarchy of prisoners, who above them had, of course, the SS hierarchy. But the prisoner hierarchy carried out the-- many of the discipline themselves.  INT: Do you remember any names of these people? KHM: You mean of the kapos? Well, I know the name of my block leader, or-- or one of the blocks. And her name was [? Berta. ?] She was-- came from Hungary. Our camp leader, lager kapo, [INAUDIBLE] lager, she was the highest in-- in the-- at my time, her name was Orli-- O-R-L-I. Orli. And she was a German, true German political prisoner. She was a communist. And she'd been imprisoned for many long-- many years. So she was the-- she was the-- the lager kapo-- the Lagerführer really. I don't know who was the lager kapo. The lager kapos were normally the criminal category of prisoners, rather than the political ones.  INT: And were people punished at all? KHM: Oh, punishments were carried out all the time. Maybe I'll give you one example of my own punishment, which took place, I would say, probably in the summer of 1943. I was on the block of [? Berta, ?] by the way, at that time. I think it was Block 20. And for some unknown reason, my mother was also on that block. Because like I said to you, sometimes you were transferred for no reason at all. And my mother was what was known as the-- at that time, torwache. She was on watch, so people didn't get out at night, because there was a curfew. After roll call, everybody was shut-- shut in, and you could no longer get out of your hut. That was immediately after roll call. There was no more going around. So-- but what happened was that I had-- I worked in the field at that time, and smuggled in some potatoes. And I was determined to cook these potatoes. And, of course, we-- and now and again we managed to make a fire in-- in what was known as the heating channel. At one end it was like a stove, and you could heat this. And if you were lucky, and you had a pot or something, you'd put your potatoes in there and they'd cook. But of course, we didn't have anything to make fire. And I'd spotted the pile of wood somewhere outside the block. So I sneaked out, and I persuaded my mother to let me out.
And she was on guard. And she let me out. And I went out, and I crawled along the side-- well, there was a curfew on, you see. And there was no-- no one patrolling such as patrols within the camp. But there were searchlights all around the camp. And, you know, you were likely to be picked up by the searchlights. And I got to this pile of wood. And I-- I grabbed a pile of wood. And I actually managed to get this wood. And on my way back, I was picked out by a searchlight. And I could feel this, the searchlight was following me from-- from the watchtower somewhere. Because there were watchtowers. And there were the guards in the watchtowers. And I was picked out by one of the searchlights. So I dropped this wood and started running back to my block. And I-- I was followed. I was chased. And what I didn't know is I was chased by one of the SS women. I was actually chased by her. And she saw which block I got in, although she didn't see me. And-- and I immediately got onto my bunk and hid. But I was followed. And she said, who was outside? And, of course, I didn't own up. But then she said, if the person doesn't own up, the whole block is going to be punished. That was a thousand people inside, yeah? So eventually, I had to own up. So I did own up. I said, I-- I did. I went to try and to get some wood to make a fire. She said, all right. She'd went out, took my number, and went out. The next morning, there was a roll call, and my number was called out. And I-- And this SS woman, her name was Borman. In fact, I've got a picture of her somewhere, because I've got picture of all the SS women that were eventually captured in Belsen, because they all were transferred to Belsen. And she was one of the one that was captured in Belsen. Borman, a tiny little woman. And she said-- she pulled me out. No, she called out my number at roll call. Oh, first of all, I got a hiding off the-- the Blockalteste. And then my mother got a hiding for letting me out. It was only after some people intervened so that they let her go. And I was pulled out at roll call. And I was told I was going to get 25 lashes as a punishment. So I was taken to another part of the compound, which was called, for short-- SK-- Strafkompanie. That was just a-- a small enclosure where all people that were being-- that were punished, like a punishments enclosure, were being flogged. And this is where I got 25 lashes. But she didn't give it to me. It was one of the-- it was one of the SS, Rapportführer Taube, he gave me the 25 lashes. And of course, if you think one whip wasn't one lash. But one whip had about 20 prongs. So you, when you got the first lash, you already had 25 lashes. And you had to count. But I don't know how far I got. But I-- I-- I was unconscious by that time. And I was actually left for dead, because they'd-- they'd thought they killed me. But eventually-- eventually somebody came and collected me. They-- they were collecting heaps of bodies there. And I was already thrown on a pile of bodies. But I-- I was collected. And I don't know. My mother arranged for somebody to collect me, and my friends. And they brought me back. And-- and what's more, they brought me back on another block, because I couldn't go back onto the same block. Because she would have known that I had come back. So there was a lot of wrangling going on. And eventually I-- I-- I got onto a different block. And that-- that's-- there was a lot of punishment like that, a lot of punishment dished-- dished out for various-- If you were caught writing, that was one of the biggest crimes. If you were caught talking to a man who purposely called to the other side of the fence, or if you were caught talking to-- to the arrivals as they were passing on the ramp, that was strictly forbidden. We're not allowed to communicate whatsoever. 
INT: Were you ever witness to any torture? KHM: Well, in the Kanada. Probably in the Kanada. Talk about that--  INT: Yes. KHM: What we've seen.  INT: Yes. Yes. Is there anything else you wanted to say about the time before Kanada? Before we move-- KHM: Well, I'll just say a word about these selections.  INT: Yes. KHM: When selections were carried out within the camp, the-- the-- the women that were being selected to die were all taken into one enclosure, which was known as Block 25. Now the women were put in there, and the-- the windows were barred there. So you couldn't-- you-- you couldn't actually communicate-- you could no longer communicate with anyone that was taken onto Block 25.  INT: And you'd been in there? KHM: No, I've not been a Block 25.  INT: No. KHM: No, you couldn't-- never get anybody out of Block 25. It was almost impossible to get people out of there. By that time, they were all sealed in there. The-- the whole block had an enclosure with a-- with a-- with a-- it had a yard with a brick walls around it. And you really couldn't get out of there. And nobody could get in. There-- these people were no longer fed. And sometimes they were there three or four days. And then-- and, you know, as selections were carried out, and that filled up, then they brought in the lorries. And then they took people to the crematoria. So that's where they put them first, when people were being selected all around the camp. So maybe that concludes the selections. 
INT: Yeah. All right, thank you very much. We're nearing the end of that tape. KHM: Ah, yes. All right. KHM: What?  INT: Tape seven? CREW: No, eight  INT: Tape eight, Kitty Hart-Moxon, 9th of June. 1998. We were at about March '44 or the beginning of the year 1944. What happened to you then? KHM: Well, yes. I think we'll talk about March 1944. I was still working on the [NON-ENGLISH] block in-- in the hospital compound. And as I said, selections were carried out all the time. And one day, they decided on-- Mengele, rather, decided that this diarrhea block has to be emptied completely, of all prisoners. They all had to be selected to die. Now, many of them were already convalescent. And there were also two girls that were with me, came with me from prison, two sisters. They had typhus, and they had diarrhea. They were on this block. They were already convalescent and hiding there still before being thrown out, back onto the camp. And without any warning whatsoever came a roundup of this one block. Well, they may have rounded up others, but this, I'm talking about the-- the diarrhea block. And they decided they were going to empty the whole block, because there was an epidemic of diarrhea or typhus or whatever, and they had to fill it again. So they decided all the prisoners that are there, all that are sick and all that are convalescent, didn't matter who they were, they were all going to die. And I was already on the staff. And we had to empty the block. We had to take the people out and put them onto the lorries. The ones that couldn't-- couldn't get up onto the lorries, we had to take two-- two people to a person, hands and feet, and we had to actually throw them onto the lorries. And I actually had to help my two friends onto the lorries. And believe you me, that was a day I wanted to die. That was a day I really wanted to go with my friends. Because I just couldn't see a way-- At that time, I was still pretty well convalescing. I was-- I was still not 100% fit. I was-- I'd lost a lot of weight, and I couldn't think straight. And I really almost lost my will to fight, lost my will to live. Although it was a good sort of place to be, because I was undercover. But nonetheless, I was carrying out bodies all day long. And here were my friends that I now had to help to die. But my mother saw what was going on, and she grabbed me while this was going on. And the lorries drove off. And that was the end of the whole of the block. And there we were, perhaps a dozen of us who were sort of working on this block, including the prisoner doctors who were working there and the nurses and the two orderlies, and we were just left there with this empty block. And they hadn't brought any new people in. And we didn't know what was going to happen to us. And then, perhaps it was 24 hours later, one of the kapos came-- I don't know who she was-- with one of the German warders [NON-ENGLISH]. And she said, well girls, we are forming a new Kanada Kommando. Because there was already what was known as an old Kanada Kommando. They were girls working in Auschwitz I. 
INT: What did Kanada mean? KHM: Well, Kanada was just a nickname for a [NON-ENGLISH]. A [NON-ENGLISH] was effects. In other words, the-- you know, all the possessions of people. We didn't know what it meant at that stage. We knew the word Kanada means that there is some-- abundance of everything. What we didn't know, we-- we gathered, it's abundance of what possessions people brought that were brought into the camp. There's-- all their possessions had to be left behind at-- at the ramp, where they were unloaded. And this SS woman, the kapo, said, we're forming this new kommando. They're going-- there's going to be a day shift and a night shift. You can volunteer, or you can stay here. Now, we had some hours to decide. Don't ask me how that happened, but we did. And my mother said, look, you must go. We don't know what there is. We suspected it is near the crematoria. You know, we-- we didn't quite know what was-- what we were going to see. We knew there was going to be food there. And my mother said, look, I'm afraid this is the only way you are going to go on. If you can eat, just one day, of what you want, and if you can sleep, and if you can keep yourself clean, you must go. We don't know what's going to happen in the future. We might not survive here, we might not survive there. That is today. You must go. And so I did. I joined the Kanada-- I was allowed to join the Kanada Kommando. And the next thing that happened, the day after that, we were-- this was a whole group of 400 of us. Or about-- maybe it was just the night shift. Because I was on night shift. Perhaps the day shift was there already. Perhaps it was just the night shift they were organizing, I don't know. But there was a day shift and a night shift. And I-- I was on the night shift. So we-- we were marched out, just the group of us. And we were marched through the gates and passing fences and more fences and wires and enclosures, as far as the eye could see, which we hadn't seen before. Going right through different camps. And there was the-- what was known as a familienlager, and there was the-- the-- [NON-ENGLISH] lager which was familienlager, like a-- a-- people that came from Theresienstadt, they all brought them in together at first. Then there was the Gypsy camp there. And then there was a men's enclosure. There were all kind of camps that we passed. And eventually we came to this very small enclosure.
Now what we didn't know is we were-- up-- up to that point, the Kanada, the old Kanada, they used to work in the Kanada and come back to the camp at night. But what we were told, that we are going to be isolated. We will no longer be able to come back to the camp. So we were taken to this enclosure known as BIIg. That's what it was known as, BIIg, Kanada, BIIg. And that was where we were enclosed. And it was quite a small enclosure. I mean, as camps go, it was a small enclosure. It perhaps had about 30 huts or so, wooden huts. Now, first thing that greeted us was-- [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] well, there were a lot of poplar trees at the bottom of the camp, and we sort of passed some of these poplars. And then we passed a low brick building with very tall chimneys. And we passed two of these, and we saw another-- we-- we saw four of these brick buildings, with four tall chimneys. And then we passed a low building, an L-shaped building, which was the sauna, known as the sauna. And then we came to this enclosure of the camp. Now just beyond the sauna, there were a lot of trees. In fact, it was a little forest of birch trees. And that is the very first time I realized that the name Birkenau is actually derived from Birke is a birch tree, and [NON-ENGLISH] in Polish is-- is-- is-- is the birch trees. It's a birch-- birch wood. And the whole part was called Birkenau because of these birch trees. They're very distinctive trees with sort of white-gray rims, proper birch wood. We also saw some lawns, laid out lawns. Now, we were taken, again, to a sauna at first, then deloused. It's the normal procedure. And then-- oh, and-- and perhaps I'll just describe the camp. There was a-- a very small enclosure with two huts. And this is where the whole of the kommando was to be housed, in two huts, the first two huts. Well, the huts were wooden huts, and they had windows. And the one window on the side had-- had direct view of crematorium 4. So we had a direct view of the crematorium. We couldn't have-- we didn't have the view of crematorium 5, which was at the back of crematorium 4, but you couldn't actually see it. We didn't have a view of crematorium 3 and 2, which was the-- pretty well the other side of the-- of the-- on the left-hand side of the fence. But we had a direct view of the one crematorium and a direct view of the sauna, where people were being brought in and selected. You know, selections to the camp or selected-- selected to die. The next thing that hit us was there were some 30 huts. They had no windows. They had sort of slots at the top. They were, in fact, [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] horse barracks or something, designed for horses, not designed for people. But they housed goods at that time, of course. Our two huts had, actually, windows. I'm talking about the first two huts. The men were housed at the very end, on the opposite side. They also had two huts. There was a men Kanada kommando, of men, who were housed at the opposite end, so we had no contact with them whatsoever. At the bottom of-- as I say, there were two rows or three rows, I don't remember now, of huts. Right at the bottom, the first thing that struck us when we reached that small enclosure of the camp, there was the most enormous pile. By-- I mean enormous, I think it was as high as a two or three-story building. And that was heaped up with goods of all description. There were suitcases opened up and jumbled up. There were toys. There were photographs. There were men's clothes, women's clothes, shoes, everything was jumbled up in this enormous, huge pile, because all the huts were already full with goods. Now, these obviously were the possessions that people brought in. And everything was thrown onto this heap. And we were brought there to do the sorting out of all the goods. So this is the start of my Kanada Kommando time. And I was there March, April, '44 until middle of October of 1944. So about eight months. So we now start on the Kanada enclosure. I can tell you about the work, et cetera. 
INT: Right. Can you tell me about a typical day? KHM: Well, I was on night shift. So-- well, first of all, the first thing that happened was that the SS woman that was in charge of-- we had a kapo called Manci. She was a Hungarian-- a Slovakian or Hungarian girl. She was very good to us. And we also had a-- a-- a-- a-- the SS woman who was in charge. I don't remember her name. The personnel, incidentally, in-- SS personnel in that enclosure was incredibly small. There were only about four SS people in charge of that whole enclosure, one or two women. As I said, we had an SS woman who was in charge of us. And she decided that her group, that is, we, were to wear navy blue dresses with white spots. But of course we were not issued with these. So everybody just scrambled in this huge, huge, enormous pile of clothes to find something that was Navy blue with white spots. And this is what we did. And then we had to paint red crosses on our backs, because everybody had to-- all the Jewish prisoners had to have red crosses on their backs. And these were-- we kitted out in this. And I think we also had white handkerchiefs on our heads. I cannot recall what we wore on our heads anymore. And-- and we were divided into day shift and to night shift. So I was working-- all the eight months, I was working during the night. Now, during the day, we were allowed into the hut to sleep. And we normally slept till the early afternoon, so we pretty well could observe what went on for the rest of the day, because we were just sitting. But we were in a very, very small enclosure, just two huts and the fence surrounding it. So we had-- we-- we couldn't get out. We had no view other than from this very small enclosure. [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] The work, there were different duties that people-- people did. You had girls that had to go to the big heap at the bottom, load-- jumble up in-- onto little hand carts, and bring it into the hut that you were working and throw it at the end of the hut, which again had a huge, huge heap, right up to the ceiling. Then you had other girls' duties, who would go to this big heap, and they would have to sort stuff that they were going-- they-- they had to find stuff that they were going to sort. So you were allocated exactly what you had to do. Now, at one time, I had to sort-- well, I think I sorted corsets at one time, because I found so much jewelry.
And at one time, I sorted men's jackets. So-- because you sorted different things. Now, what you had to do is you-- you had to go to this heap, find all men's jackets, bring them, or sometimes even the girls who who were doing the, you know, the ferrying to and fro, would bring you these jackets. And you then had to put these jackets on the table. Say I was sorting jackets. You put them on the table, and you had to sometimes slit seams, because you-- you knew that there was stuff inside. You had to empty all the pockets. There were photographs of people, of course. But very often, there were a lot of valuables there. And next to your table, you had a bucket. And into this bucket-- and sometimes you had a-- a blanket. You had to throw all the valuables in there that you found. When I was sorting corsets, again-- and I'll tell you about-- they had to sort jackets. You had to fold these jackets, sort them, and make a pile. I can't remember, perhaps it was a dozen. Then you had to bundle them up, and you'd put your number on there, what-- who-- who you-- who you-- were as the sorter. And this you had to hand in at another table. And there, again, sat a group of women, and they would tick off. Because you had a quota of how many bundles you had to hand in during a shift. Now, the-- the thing was, if you could do it really quickly, and you could find enough men's jackets or whatever, and you could do it quickly, you were finished quickly. And then we used to take it in turns and sleep in a big heap and very often observe what went on in the other half of the hut, because we were sort of-- it was a wooden hut, and you could see through the spokes what was going on in the other half of the hut. So very often, we used to observe. Because it was a SS hut at the other end. You know, the SS enclosure. And we used to watch what they were up to. Because they used to sort out the jewelry there and things like that. And they used to-- mostly used to sit and drink. Now, all the food was in a separate hut, and then you had girls who worked in this food, sorting all the food. The food was rotting away there, you can imagine. And it depended where people were bought from. I-- I remember transports, say, from Italy or Greece. And they were just full of this canvas bottles of-- of wine.
Because they used to bring a lot of wine in. And they were just lying there, and then the SS used to get drunk on-- on these wines. Now, we had no access, so we couldn't actually go there and take any food. But again, what happened is we lived in little families. In fact, one of the girls that was with me in Kanada, [? Batsheva ?] is in Israel now, lives in Israel. Now, you probably know [? Batsheva. ?] Well, [? Batsheva ?] and I lived together on one bunk for eight months in the Kanada. And I'm not sure she didn't work with me on the night shift, because the idea was everybody did something else. So we could organize, and food wasn't dished out. So you had to help yourself to-- to-- again, to the food. And you had to steal it. You were not allowed to have it. So it was very useful to, again, work in different places. Some girls worked in the sauna, so you-- you had access to water. And so this is how you lived there in this Kanada on the night shift. When it came to-- I'll explain to you-- when it came to sorting underwear and corsets, we usually came upon the most incredible [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] amount of diamonds and jewelry and dollars and whatever. And of course we didn't want to hand it in. Yes, we had to hand in-- there was an awful lot of amount that had to be handed in. Because we couldn't keep it. There was nowhere to put anything. If we were caught with the most minute piece, you would have been-- it was a death sentence. So it wasn't-- it was much too dangerous to have anything that you could keep. In-- in the hut you couldn't keep anything. There were-- in fact, there were constant searches and inspections of the beds to see if anybody's hiding anything. But nonetheless, at the end of our hut, there was, like, a little wooden hut, and that was a toilet. And many of us, with our bare hands, buried a lot of stuff somewhere there, behind the toilets, when-- when nobody could watch. Because we-- we-- we were very visible as well. We were visible from the crematorium side, you see? So it-- it was a very dangerous procedure. What else we did, we did know, of course, at that stage already, that there was an underground movement. There was a resistance movement somewhere. We didn't know who these people were. We didn't know how to contact them. Although one girl, I knew a girl called Roza Robota, who was one of the four girls that was eventually hanged for supplying explosives. Now, somewhere or other, we made contact with this girl, because she, at that time, already worked in the munition factory. And we did manage to-- to have contact with this girl. And we did manage to pass to her quite a lot of the jewelry, things that were inconspicuous, like small diamonds. You know, things that you could actually handle easily, not great big watches or anything like that. And part of this wealth found itself to the resistance. I wasn't the only one. Of course we all were at it. And part of this-- with-- with this wealth, with this jewelry, some of the Ukrainian SS were bribed. And some of the men eventually managed to obtain arms. The men, that is. We didn't have any arms in-- in our enclosure. But some of the men did. And some of the men of the Sonderkommando, you see, who worked inside the crematorium-- we had no contact with the Sonderkommando men. But now and again, we had contact with the Kanada males. Because they used to bring stuff in from the ramp. You know, they used to come in with the loads of stuff, bringing it in. So if we could possibly have-- What I mean, contact, you couldn't actually speak to them, as such. At one stage, there was one occasion where I had found a rather a large amount of jewelry, which I had to dispose of very quickly. And there was a group of men, and they were having their lunch brought to them. But they were guarded by one of the SS guards. And I-- I went up to one of the guards and said, can I just give some soup to-- to one-- one of the men. And I don't know. He said something or something. And while he turned round, I dropped a load of jewelery into the soup, which was a great big container of soup. And of course I couldn't tell the man what was there. But by just, you know, sort of shaking my head, et cetera, the man realized what was there. And it was a lot of jewelry that I managed to pass on to the men. And part of this jewelry eventually-- eventually contributed to the blowing up of the crematoria, I'm glad to say-- indirectly, of course, not directly. 
INT: Right. You-- you mentioned that one of the girls died during that time. How did that come about? KHM: Many, many things happened during that time. First of all, I explained to you that I was on night shift. So I didn't really know what went on during the night, except that we had direct view of Crematorium 4, and smoke was billowing out of Crematorium 4 all night, and so were the flames. But during the day, during the day, we could observe everything that went on after we slept, you know, after our night shift, after our sleep, sort of 3:00 or 4:00 in the afternoon. We were usually left in peace to just-- we had a little lawn there in the front, and we-- in fact, it was a very hot summer, and we were allowed to use water and splash ourselves, and we actually had, like I said to you, we-- there was actually where we made a bit of music. At the same time, there were hundreds and hundreds of people sitting in full view of us at the other side of the enclosure, outside the crematorium. Men, women, and children sitting underneath the trees in the woods. What they didn't know is they were actually queuing, waiting their turn to go into Crematorium 4. We didn't see Crematorium 5, but Crematorium 4. We also saw people pass by, both from Crematorium 3 and Crematorium 4 when they were being-- when-- when they were carrying out selections. They went into-- some-- some of the people they selected there and then, when they didn't carry out selections on the ramp. Sometimes selections were carried out just outside the crematorium, sometimes even inside the crematorium. They'd pull people out, when there were one or two young people. We saw them go into the sauna, where sometimes they got a-- a change of clothes and were taken into the camp, and others were put waiting in the woods. What they didn't know is they were waiting to queue into the crematorium. What these people thought is they were waiting to go to be disinfected. They saw us lying around on the lawn, sitting there, well-dressed. We had no communications with these people. Although we were within shouting distance, we could not communicate with these people, under sentence of death. There was no way we could speak to any of these people. Occasionally, one could say, where from. And on one occasion, it was a transport from the Lódz ghetto, one of my group, one of the girls, came from the Lódz ghetto, and she recognized her father. And she saw him go into the crematorium. And this is when she committed suicide. So this is one of the girls that died. But there were horrendous things outside the crematorium. 
INT: How did she commit suicide? KHM: Actually, she went on the fence, as simple as that. If you touched the electric fence, you were dead anyway, because it was high tension. What I didn't tell you is when we finished making the bundles, all these bundles were taken into the sauna. And there they had huge drums, sort of, I don't know, delousing drums. And all these bundles were put into these drums, and they were disinfected. And then they had another group of girls that were loading all this stuff onto lorries. And all this-- all these belongings were then shipped into Germany. And these big containers, I saw last year when I went back into Auschwitz. They were still there. The whole place was out-of-bounds. The whole sauna was closed. But now they are opening it up, and they are restoring part of the building. And I managed to get in before it was restored, and it was just as if you'd stepped back 50 years, and it was all there, intact. You could still see the pipes and the hot water system going to these big autoclaves, where they were disinfecting the clothes, by steam, I think. Now we come to some horrendous scenes that we actually witnessed.  INT: Yes, can you tell us about those? KHM: Now, as I said to you, we had all-- most of the afternoons to see what was going on. Now, most of us could no longer take it in. Because all day and all night, there was the stench of burning flesh and the stench of huge smoke billowing into the camp that make the whole place look dark. And at the same time, you had red flames coming out of four chimneys. And we only had, really, a view of the one chimney. But we had a direct view of the person who was placing the gas into the gas chamber. So we actually saw an SS man, person, personnel, part of what they're known, the disinfectors-- that's what they were called-- picking up tins of Zyklon B, going up on the ladder, opening up a flap in the roof, and emptying the tin into this chamber, which we had never been inside. Emptying the tin. And he wore a gas mask. And then came straight down, and he usually disposed of the can just outside. The hole place was littered with the Zyklon B cans. And soon after that, soon after that, you could hear a muffled sound of people screaming. And that lasted, depending on how many people there were, how much gas they were. That was all worked out by the SS doctors, how much gas was needed to kill a certain amount, a certain number of people. So once this died down, soon after that noise died down, we could see the smoke billowing out of the chimneys. And soon after that, we actually saw the men of the Sonderkommando who had to empty the gas chamber and burn the corpses. And pretty well soon after that, you actually watched the ash being emptied at the back of Crematorium 4. There was a sort of a pond. And the-- a lot of the ash was emptied there, into the pond. And at the same time, you had groups of people sitting, picnicking in the woods, waiting to go in. Now, they may not have been aware of the sound the way we were. The sounds were muffled. But nonetheless, you could hear a lot of screaming. Now, we don't know what these people thought, or what they didn't think. They, at that stage, had no idea they were going to die. 
INT: Do you have a name for any of these people who actually did some activity towards-- what was that name? KHM: Activity--  INT: To do with the Zyklon B. KHM: The Zyklon B. No. All the SS doctors that I mentioned to you, they were all connected with-- with working out the-- the dosages. The man who was in charge of the crematorium enclosure was Oberscharfuhrer Moll, M-O-L-L. And as I said, there were only about four personnel who worked in this enclosure. One was Gottfried Weise. And we know about-- we shall hear about him when he comes to the trial. Which we didn't-- I didn't know his name. We nicknamed him Schleppy, the blender. A man called Wunsch, and a man called [NON-ENGLISH].  INT: Right. KHM: And there might have been one or two others.  INT: Yes. We'll take a break there--  INT: Tape nine, Kitty Hart-Moxon, the sixth-- sorry-- ninth of June, 1998. KHM: [INAUDIBLE].  INT: You were talking about-- on the last tape, you were talking about your observation of activities around Crematorium 4. And you were mentioning some names that you-- KHM: Yes. Like I've explained before, the-- the SS personnel was very-- a very small number. I would say there were about four or five of them. There was a man called Wunsch. There was a man called [NON-ENGLISH], and there was a man called, what we nicknamed him as [? Schleppy, ?] which means the Blinde, because he had a glass eye. His real name was Gottfried Weise, which I didn't know at the time. These men all patrolled, sort of, where these people were sitting, waiting to die. And we witnessed individual murders there which were gratuitous, I would say, because these people were all waiting to die. However, there were-- these-- there-- there was especially that man, Weise or Blinde, who was known as the William Tell. Because his specialty was placing cans on children's shoulders. Also prisoners shoulders but, I'm talking about outside Crematorium 4. He-- he would place them on children's shoulders and onto their heads and then shoot at them. And invariably, he would kill them. So he would indulge in this sort of game outside-- just on the outside of the crematorium. I also saw children running out of the queue. Sometimes they were queueing in-- into the crematoria. Sometimes they were sitting, picnicking. But there were also children running around. I once saw a child picking a flower. And one of these SS officers-- now, I don't know which one it was, because I really didn't always-- could recognize them. but the one of the four, he picked up this child by its feet, and he smashed its head against the crematorium wall. Now, I don't know which-- it was one of the four of them. Now, that was the sort of individual gratuitous murder that went on. Now, one day-- well, it happened on many occasions. But I-- I recall one day, there was a child that begged for water. And somebody threw a bottle of water, and it came from our enclosure. And of course, that was strictly against the rules. But whoever this SS officer was-- and it turned out it was actually the Blinde, but I didn't see-- I didn't actually see his face. He picked up this child, and he threw it in the air, and he then speared it on his bayonet. So he killed it in front of its mother. Now, it was totally unnecessary, because these people were going to die in the next 10, 15 minutes. These were sort of murders that these people committed on the people that were going to die. Now, no one owned up from my group. Eventually, eventually a-- a-- a peasant had to own up. Because he said, if no one owns up, every fifth person is going to get shot. And in fact, he did kill some of them. Well, I don't know whether he killed, but they were actually taken out and killed. I don't know if it was the person that actually threw the water. Because again, as I say, I was on night shift, and a lot of these things happened during the day. And there-- there were-- there-- there were all kind of murders perpetrated in front of Crematorium 4 that-- that I saw while I was actually waiting to go on my night shift. 
INT: Did you ever have any opportunities of-- of responding to this at all? KHM: No. The-- the-- the-- the way to respond to any of this was to pretend you didn't see it. Because if you acknowledged that you saw it, and they-- the-- the SS people realized you saw it, you would have been next. So it-- the-- the thing to do is to just disappear from sight. So you were totally invisible. You didn't see it. And you tried to make yourself believe that you didn't actually see it, because you didn't really want to believe it. If you had taken in everything you saw, you-- you-- you would have committed suicide the next day or the same day. Because you-- you couldn't-- your brain just couldn't take it in. So the answer is you pretended you didn't see it.  INT: Did you see your mother during this time at all? KHM: Now, what happened there is that my mother was-- was still working in the main camp, B-- B2b in the hospital, and I had no contact. But now and again, we were permitted to take some sort of third-rate clothing back into the sauna, in the main camp, for the newcomers. And one or two people were allowed to accompany this-- this cart. And I was very friendly with the kapo. She was a very good kapo to us, actually. She helped us along, very much so. And she always made sure that I could go, because I have my mother there, you know. And it was a rare event, so she made sure that I could go. Now, in order to go back-- to go back, we used to carry stuff. We were not allowed to carry anything. Of course, you had this cart with the clothes that you took in. But we ourselves were not allowed to carry anything. We were not allowed to possess anything. But we used to-- well, I used to-- put on about four or five different layers of clothes and hang stuff at the back of my-- right over the back, with safety pins. Sometimes, I used to carry tins under my arms and tins between my legs and smuggle stuff into the camp. And that way, I would go and visit my mother. And on one visit, I found that she actually had typhus. And luckily, I managed to bring in enough stuff to pay for her to be looked after. And so if-- if I hadn't been able to bring stuff in, she wouldn't have been looked after. And if she hadn't been looked after, you know, she would have been selected to die. So she was hidden during her typhus. But on one-- on one or two occasions, our SS woman, warder, decided she was not going to take us along the normal route going in between the different camps to the main camp. She said, I'm going to take you to the outer perimeter, through the outer perimeter of the camp. Because the-- the camp was surrounded by different perimeters. And that was out of bounds to prisoners. But-- but she said, if you do see anything, you must look down. You must not look where you're going. And it was only a small group of us with this cart. And we went to the outskirts, to the-- to the outer perimeter, through the little wood, where all these people were sitting, waiting to die. And somewhere there at the back was a white house. Now, we knew there was a white house, because you used to sort of think we saw it from the distance. We never knew what there was. But in fact, what there was, while we were passing, there were men lined up to go inside that white house. And they didn't know what was going to happen to them. Each one was shot in the back of the neck. We could hear very, very faint thuds, like a shot. And then further on, as we walked on, we actually saw pits. And we saw the men of the Sonderkommando burning bodies in pits. Because by that time, I think it was May, June, 1944, and they were bringing in all the Hungarian people, you know? And there were, I don't know. They brought in half a million people. And they simply couldn't cope with disposing of all these people. And they were actually burning-- burning bodies. And I'm not sure if they were not burning people alive in-- in the pits. And they were-- they were carrying a lot of brushwood and making these great big piles, and burning people in the pits. So this is what we were not supposed to see. And this is what we actually saw on several occasions, going back into the camp. 
INT: What was that like for you? KHM: We were not allowed to see it. We were not allowed to look at it. We were just-- we were told to look down. But we did actually see. We did manage to see some-- some of the things that went on there. We managed to-- to witness. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] Now, this-- I think we were talking about summer of 1944. Now, when it came to around about August '44, rumors began to circulate that they were going to dispose of the whole camp. They were going to evacuate the whole of Auschwitz. Rumors began to circulate that the Russian front was closing in. We didn't know where the front was at that time. We had absolutely no contact whatsoever. But rumors circulated nonetheless. And we knew there was an underground movement. And-- and we knew that they were already evacuating people from Auschwitz. And transports were not coming as frequently as they used to. And we just wondered what was going to happen to us, because we couldn't believe that they were going to evacuate us who had actually seen what went on. Because during that time, we could have easily seen a million people die, which is a difficult thing to take in. But day in, day out, there-- 10 trains arrived, full of people. And most of them were taken straight to the gas chambers. And in fact, there came an order for the total liquidation of the camp. This has already filtered out by September. Now, what happened next was totally unexpected. We were still sorting clothes, because there was this-- this enormous backlog of stuff with all these people from Hungary that brought an enormous wealth with them in jewelry and clothes and furs and you name it. And it was all had to be-- still had to be sorted. So we knew there was still quite a lot of work for us, but transports were no longer arriving. They were bringing in people from different camps now. They were bringing in people from Majdanek, disposing of them in-- in the crematoria. So they were liquidating some of the camps. And they were also liquidating some of Auschwitz, we-- we realized. The next thing that happened was on a day-- the date I do know, which we got to know it later, was the sixth of October. And suddenly there was what we thought was a bombing. Because the rumor was they were going to bomb the place and raze it to the ground. And we thought we were going to be bombed. And there was a enormous explosion. But what, in fact, we saw was a chimney of Crematorium 4-- floor-- of Crematorium-- the chimney of the Crematorium 4 topple to the ground. And then we saw a lot of men running around, shooting. There was a lot of shooting going on. And we were told to lay down on our fronts, spread-eagled. Lay down. And this is what we did. We lay on-- face down, because they were shooting all around us. And we-- we run into our hut. One of the SS men, actually ran into a hut, and somebody got killed. And it transpired later that that was actually the Gottfried Weise, who was later facing trial. He ran into the hut and shot one person during the uprising. Quite a lot of people got killed during this uprising. The men in-- what happened was the men in the crematoria decided they could no longer wait for any official uprising. They also felt that their plan was unsafe, that it might have leaked out. Because they were going to evacuate all-- they were evacuating all privileged prisoners. 
INT: These are inmates? KHM: Yes, they were inmates. They started to evacuate a lot of the influential inmates. And so they thought that possibly, possibly it had leaked out that there was going to be a-- a resistance or an uprising. And the men in the crematoria were not going to wait any longer. And they took up arms, and they suddenly burst out and blew up the crematoria themself. They-- they blew up the Crematorium 4. They also blew up, I think, Crematorium 2 and 3, well, we didn't see it, because we had only view of Crematorium 4. And the kapo-- they had a German kapo. They picked up the German kapo and threw him into the fire, the-- the-- the actual kapo. And there was this enormous explosion everywhere. And the-- the next thing happened, the whole place was absolutely-- they raced in on motorcycles, and there was shooting everywhere. It was like a-- a miniature war going on. People escaped, cut wires. But eventually, of course, it all died down. A lot of people got killed. And they all got caught. And following this, there was an enormous inquiry, because they wanted to know where, naturally, all these things came from, where the ammunition came from, you know, how it was obtained, and how explosions were-- were obtained from. And this is where we had a huge roll call. And what happened during this roll call was quite incredible, soon after this roll call, actually. Unknown to me, quite unknown to me, because I had-- didn't have a lot of contact with my mother. My mother realized that there was a lot of evacuation going on in Auschwitz. With the stuff that I had brought in for her, she managed to pay, actually pay, for her number and my number to be included in the list to be evacuated. And what else she managed to do, she'd managed to get us onto a list of privileged prisoners. Because she thought, well, maybe privileged prisoners will be evacuated to some place rather than be killed. And unknown to me, she-- she did this with the stuff that I managed to bring. I managed to bring some jewelry, and-- and this-- this is what helped to-- to do this. And she'd-- one day, she was waiting for one of the lager commandants, on his name was Hossler. Now, he-- she-- he-- she knew that he wasn't quite as bad as the others. And she went up to him, which was totally forbidden for an ordinary prisoner. She went up to him, and in her very best German, she said, I am prisoner 39933. I beg to speak to the commandant. And he listened. And he had oddly, a Lagerführer, a-- you know, the-- the prisoner kapo with him. And she said, I have been here for nearly two years, and my daughter is working in Kanada, and she's been there eight months. And I am now going on transport, being evacuated. Would it be possible for her to come and join me in that transport? And he just wrote this number down, but he didn't say anything to her. And during the inquiry that followed the uprising, my number was called. And I thought, oh dear, that's it. Because there was an inquiry, and I helped with all this jewelery, and I had things hidden here and there, and they found out. But no. They called, 39934, you're being transferred to B2b. And this is how I came to be transferred back to the camp. And it's the-- the-- the SS woman said, you're being-- you're going on transport with your mother. And that-- that's-- that's the conclusion of Kanada. And I was just transferred. 
INT: Right. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] You mentioned people that you were with. Were we-- were you particularly close to any one person? KHM: Well, I was very close to-- to [NON-ENGLISH]. Her name was [NON-ENGLISH] in those days.  INT: Yes. KHM: And she wasn't evacuated with me. She was, in fact, there, and she-- because they no longer had transports arriving, they were-- started to burn all the stuff that was that there. It was-- they started to destroy it. And they'd brought in all documents from-- from the records offices. And all records were being destroyed. This is why there are so few records now in-- in-- in the museum. Because following this [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] uprising, the-- the-- the crematoria were destroyed, and they could no longer use the crematoria. In fact, it was a most incredible event. Because it put all the crematoria out of action. And they could-- no longer could use the gas chambers and the crematoria. But of course, by that time, those October transports were no longer arriving. But they formed this, what they call a burning kommando. So all the girls that were left behind there were then in a burning kommando, and so was [NON-ENGLISH]. And she was-- she-- she was actually engaged burning all the records after I was transferred. And she was there almost to the end, and she was then on the death march from Auschwitz. So she wasn't evacuated. I don't know what happened to the others. 
INT: Was there ever any contact between men and women? KHM: No-- no-- none official-- no official contact. The contact was under sentence of death, if you had contact with a man-- with an ordinary prisoner. Some of the privileged prisoners did. There were clandestine sort of contacts, no official contacts. No, it was strictly forbidden to speak to a man. And even much, much more punishable was if you wrote a note. If you-- we were not allowed to write to anyone or contact anyone. No-- there was no contact.  INT: You mentioned that there were-- you saw children. Did you ever see any babies? KHM: Yes. We saw a lot of babies being killed there, yes. They were smashing--  INT: You saw them being killed? KHM: Yes. They were being killed outside the crematorium. Yes. Yes.  INT: Can you name any of the perpetrators? KHM: Well, there were all the four, four who were actually in charge there. There was Moll, who was the [NON-ENGLISH] while I was there. There might have been others. But I-- I know there was one called-- of course they-- they might have had one or two on the men's section as well. But I knew there was Wunsch, and there was-- and now, this Wunsch, funny enough, he fell in love with one of the girls in my group. She was a very beautiful Hungarian girl. And because he was very fond of this girl, he actually saved her sister. He actually saved her. I don't know how he did it. He got her out of the gas chamber or somewhere. And because there was this liaison between him and her, which was to our advantage, we had quite a lot of concessions. And he was no longer as brutal as he used to be. But then, of course, there were the others. There was this Weise, who perpetrated a lot of murders. He was eventually committed on five counts, but, I mean, he committed dozens of murders. 
INT: All right. So when you-- was your mother surprised to see you when you got back to-- KHM: Yes, she was. Because she didn't really-- she didn't think that this commandant actually would-- would do that, that he'd pull me out of there. She didn't know. She-- she was waiting to go on this transport. Nobody knew where this transport was going, but because it was-- it-- there was only a transport of 100 names or 100 numbers, really. There were no names. 100 numbers. And she realized that some-- some of the people, some of the numbers that were on this list were block leaders. There weren't any kapos, but they were all people that had privileged positions in the camp, good jobs. And how they-- and why they were selected to go on this transport was some unknown. But she surmised it-- it was better than being on transport with people who are perhaps in not a very good condition. And this is-- this is what really happened. What-- what happened was that one chief of some factory came and wanted 100 women who were in a reasonable condition to work in one factory. And this is how we 100 came to be evacuated on this one list.  INT: How soon after the uprising were you evacuated? KHM: Well, the uprising was on the 6th of October. And there followed this enormous, as I said, inquiry, and whatever. And there was-- I was still working there until-- probably till about the third week in October, something like this. And I-- I was evacuated on the 11th of November, 1944. That's when we were led to the trains, on the 11th of November. 
INT: What sort train? KHM: It was a cattle truck. In-- in a cattle truck. The same cattle trucks that brought people in to die were the same cattle trucks that took me out.  INT: What-- what did you take with you? KHM: Well, unfortunately, I didn't take enough. Because normally, if transports were leaving, they were, again, going through the sauna and being issued with new clothes. But it so happened, because this was some special transport of only 100 privileged prisoners, we were not searched, which, of course, I didn't know. But I-- I did have-- I-- I had-- the-- the diamonds that I had in my teeth, I actually had extracted while I was in Kanada. By some fluke, I managed to get to a dental station. I had these out. Because I-- I knew I might have needed them. But I-- they were in teeth, and no one would have thought there was anything but teeth. And I also had a gold sovereign, which I had sewn into the bottom of my coat. And I-- I actually went out. As-- as I was-- as I came in-- back from Kanada, I had a coat, and I had a dress, and I had some shoes, but-- but nothing-- nothing else. But of course, if I had known that, I could have-- I could have brought out a lot more. But at that stage, I thought, we might have to be searched. [BACKGROUND NOISE] So no, the answer is we didn't. Are you all right? 
INT: I think we'll take a break there.  INT: Right. Tape 10, Kitty Hart-Moxon, the 9th of June, 1998. This is, in fact, a repeat of tape eight. Kitty, you're still in Auschwitz, in 1990-- 1944. And in March of 1944, what was happening? KHM: Well, at about March 1944, I was still working in the hospital on the diarrhea block-- [NON-ENGLISH] block. And there were a lot of prisoners there that were already-- or a lot of girls there that were already convalescing. Not all of them were ill. There were two girls that were from my transport from prison who were already convalescent. They were sick, but we were hiding them in this block, because there was a possibility everyone was going to be thrown back out into the main camp. And completely out of the blue, there was a selection. And it was said that Mengele had ordered for the whole block to be cleared, because there were a lot of people that were having diarrheas and a lot of infectious diseases all around the camp. And he had to fill up the block with new-- newcomers. And he wanted to dispose of everybody that was in the block. And because they didn't sort them out, whoever was already convalescent, the order was that they were-- all had to be loaded onto lorries, and that they were going to dispose of the whole of the block. Maybe they disposed of other blocks as well. But I'm just speaking about the block that I was working on. And before we knew where we were, lorries appeared, surrounded the block. And we were already on-- on the staff. So it was really people who were on the staff that-- including-- including the prison doctors and the nurses and the helpers. We had to actually help all the people out of the block. And many of them were too sick. They had to be loaded onto lorries. There were two people-- one person taking the arms, and one person taking legs. And they had to be thrown onto the lorries. And in fact, I had to help my friends onto the lorries. And they was screaming and didn't want to go. And of course, I personally, just didn't want to live at that point. I-- I was still very weak, and I hadn't completely recovered from typhus. And I really lost my will to live. And when I saw that I had to actually load my friends to die, to-- to me, that was the last straw. And I-- I was struggling, and tried to climb onto the lorries. Well, it so happened that some people saw this, including my mother, and they were watching all that was going on.
And she rushed behind me. And-- and somebody grabbed me and took me away. And I struggled. But the-- the lorries had gone, and all the people were gone. And that whole block was emptied. This block was empty for a few days. And we didn't know what was going to happen with it. They hadn't brought any other people in. They said they were going to disinfect the block before they were bringing somebody else in. In the meantime, a kapo arrived with one of the German wardens, one of the Aufseherinnen. That's the German-- the SS women. And she said, we are forming a new Kanada Kommando, because there was an old Kanada, working in Auschwitz I. Those were girls that used to come back into the camp at night, and they-- they were taken to work in Auschwitz I. But she said, we are now forming a new Kanada Kommando. There'll be a night shift and a day shift. So there's going to be about 400 of us-- 400 people. And if you want to, you can volunteer to-- to work in this Kanada Kommando. Because we didn't quite know what it meant. We did know Kanada meant a-- a world of abundance, because that is where all the goods were brought in. Everything was sorted out that people were-- brought in from all over Europe. All their belongings were just dumped on the ramp and taken to this-- to some of the sections of the Kanada, where things were sorted out. And we did realize, of course, there was access to food. There was access to clothes, and access to things that we hadn't seen for years. And we'd-- we had a few hours to think about this. And my mother said, look. You have to go, because you-- you cannot recover your strength here. You'll be thrown out. You might be thrown out back onto-- to the main camp now that the block is empty. You got the opportunity. You must go. If you have the choice of doing it, you must go. And so I said, yes, all right. I will join this Kanada Kommando. And so early-- early-- it were perhaps end of March, early April, 200 of us were marched out from the main enclosure of the camp, taken through different sections of the camp between fences, and more fences, and more enclosures, all different sections of the camp, until we came to the very end, more or less, of the camp. And there we found a-- a very small enclosure, which-- the-- the thing that we didn't actually know is that-- which they didn't tell us-- that we were going to be isolated in that particular part of the camp.
We were not going to be permitted to come back at night. We were to be housed there, and we were going to stay there and-- and not return back to the camp. I think if I'd known that, that perhaps I would not have volunteered to-- to go. Because then I'd realized that I'll be parted, and I won't be able to go and see my mother. However, there-- there was no choice by that time. We came in-- into the Kanada enclosure. Well, what we found there was a-- a relatively small enclosure, probably about 30 wooden huts, which were, I believe, originally stables for horses. They were wooden huts with no windows, but they-- they had kind of skylights at-- at the top, except two huts that actually had windows. And those were the huts for the-- our group of 400. And we were enclosed. These two huts were enclosed with a wire, with a-- a electrified fence. Although, we were within the-- a camp, we were still enclosed within this camp and in a separate little enclosure. And this-- I believe the-- the men were also enclosed at the opposite end of this-- this small camp. Now, we passed-- on the one side, we passed two brick buildings with tall chimneys, which I later learned was Crematorium 2 and 3. And on-- on the other side, we passed, again, two crematoria, which Crematoria 4 and 5-- low brick buildings with high, tall chimneys. In the center was a-- what was known as a lagerstrasse, which just was a-- a-- a paved-- like a-- a street. And there was the-- the-- the sauna, a sort of a L-shaped building. And this, we were told, was the sauna. On the outside of the fence was a-- like a little wood, birch wood-- all birch trees. And this is how I realized that this is actually the-- the name derived for Birkenau is from this small wood. Because it were all birch trees. And in Polish, Brzezinka This is the name for a birch tree in Polish. So Brzezinka was the part of Birkenau-- was called Brzezinka. And in German, they called it Birkenau. The-- the actual camp itself, I think I said had about 30 huts. Most of the huts contained clothes and belongings that were to be sorted out from people that were brought from all over Europe. Right at the bottom of this small enclosure, of that 30 huts, were the most gigantic heap of all manner of stuff jumbled up. There were open suitcases. There were prams. There were dolls. There were toys. There were shoes. There were men's clothes, women's clothes, all jumbled up. The pile was as high as a two or three-story building.
And of course, the same happened-- was in most of the huts. They were full of these clothes that had been-- and belongings-- that were to be sorted out. What happened next was the-- the SS woman that was in charge of our group decided that our group was to be kitted out in navy blue dresses with white spots. But of course, they were not issued. And so there was a great big scramble. We had to scramble in all these huts and-- and this great big pile at the bottom, to look for these sort of clothes-- dresses-- blue dresses with white spots. And I think we also had some head scarves. And we had to paint red crosses. And I remember we used to paint them on with lipsticks that were found in the pile somewhere. So we had to paint. Everybody had to have a white cross-- a-- a red cross painted on the back. And of course, we didn't have any red paint, and we-- we used lipsticks that we found. We were then divided into a day shift and a night shift. And I was actually allocated on the-- to a night shift. Now, there were different-- but-- different girls had different duties there, during the day and during the night. Some girls were sorting out from the big pile and bringing cartloads of clothes into these huts. And then of course, the things-- stuff was sorted out. There were other girls that were working, sorting out food. So one of the first things we did is formed a sort of a small family, because it was important for one person to work in one place, one in another. Because we didn't actually have access to any of these things, although we were handling these things. But even food, there was no access. So you did need always to have one person working in one place so you could exchange food, clothes, shoes, whatever you needed. We-- we were four of us on-- all sleeping on one bunk. And one girl I slept with I knew as [? Ida. ?] Now, her name is [? Batsheva, ?] and she actually lives in Israel. And she and I shared a bunk for eight months in-- in the Kanada Kommando. And now my personal work on night shift was as follows. At one time, I sorted men's jackets. I also sorted, at one time, corsets-- women's corsets. This was-- well, what you had to do is you had to go-- either you had someone bringing you these jackets to sort out, or you had to go into the large pile and find men's jackets, bring them onto a trestle table, where you-- you had-- you laid out these jackets, and you had to open up the seams to see if there was any valuables inside.
And believe you me, when I was sorting out corsets, I used to find great big pouches of jewelry that were on, money that was sewn in. And all this had to be taken out and put into a bucket or-- or a blanket that you had next to your trestles, you know, next to your table. And you had to sort the-- sort out-- say, you sorted jackets. So you'd put them in bundles of 12. And they all had to be neatly folded and then parceled up. And you had put a number on-- your own number-- who did the sorting. And you then handed this in. And again, there were girls working, ticking off how-- how many parcels you did. Because you had to do a certain quota during your shift. Well, what we used to do-- as soon as you did your quota, [BACKGROUND NOISE] we would-- you all right? We would hand in everything that we'd managed to do-- the quota. [BACKGROUND NOISE] You all right? And then we would go and lie in-- in a pile of clothes, if we could, just to hide. Because there wasn't such a-- such a time that you could do nothing. And when you'd done your quota, you-- you thought you'd probably done your duty. But as I said, there were other girls that were-- some were sorting shoes, and some were sorting food. And this-- this is how we managed to-- to organize things so that everybody had enough to eat and-- yeah, and enough clothes. Now our hut-- I think I explained. It had windows. And our view from the hut, from my hut, was directly to Crematorium 4. I could actually watch what was going on outside Crematorium 4, not inside. But I could also watch how gas was being put into the gas chamber. Because I was on night shift, I slept sort of most of the day. But from perhaps early afternoon, we were free to roam until it was time to work. Well, I don't know what time the shift started, because no one knew a time. From what I saw, I witnessed the murder in Crematorium 4. First of all, I, on many, many occasions, saw one person, an S-- one of the SS personnel. Sometimes they wore white sort of overalls. And sometimes they were-- they wore just a green you know, army overall-- army uniforms. But they always wore a gas mask. And you-- you saw this person go up a ladder outside Crematorium 4, with a canister of gas, and throw it in through an opening in-- at the top. And he'd throw in this canister of whatever it was-- not the canister itself-- just the contents. And-- and then-- and with a gas mask-- and then he would come straight down and remove the ladder. And sometimes-- or mostly-- discard the-- the empty tin of gas. Now, outside Crematorium 4, there was a paved area. But the-- past the paved area, there-- there was like a-- a-- a meadow. And flowers were growing there. And the-- and the wood-- and there were people sitting in the woods there, actually picnicking. But of course, what they didn't know is they were waiting and queuing to go into the gas chamber. It was the next lot to go into the gas chamber, which of course, they had absolutely no conception. Because they saw us. We were pretty well dressed. During the afternoon we even sunbathed on the lawn there. And it was a very hot summer-- 1944-- and we were splashing ourselves with the water. And we-- we-- I actually found a-- a mouth organ. We did-- did-- we'd played music. Well, at the same time, we saw and watched what was going on outside the crematorium. And people were led in into this building. And soon after that, you heard screams-- first muffled screams, and then quite-- sometimes quite loud screams. And then it was probably deathly silence. Soon after that, you saw smoke coming out of the chimneys. And you also saw flames coming out of the chimneys. And a while later, you saw a group of men working. Or while you there, they're entering one entrance or another. And they came out with cartloads of ash, which was deposited at the rear of Crematorium 4. There was a kind of a pond, and they used to dump it into the pond. 
INT: Who were these men? KHM: Well, the-- the men working there were the Sonderkommando. But we had no actual direct contact with the Sonderkommando. We couldn't speak to them. But those were the men working inside the crematorium.  INT: Were they inmates? KHM: They were inmates working in-- inside the crematorium, yes.  INT: Did you ever have an opportunity to talk to those people in the woods? KHM: There-- there was-- there was an opportunity. It would have been. But it was strictly forbidden. We were not allowed to communicate. Anyone that attempted to communicate was immediately taken out and-- and immediately taken into the gas chamber. So it was under-- you were under sentence of death if you even tried to communicate. It was absolutely not possible to communicate unless you wanted to commit suicide. So there was no way for us. And it would not have helped. There was no way that you could have said to these people, you're now going to die. Well, they wouldn't have believed it anyway. You know, it was just something that you couldn't take in. Or it's something we couldn't take in. We-- we saw it day and night. We saw the smoking chimneys day and night. And sometimes the air was black with smoke and soot. But yet, you tried to believe that it wasn't really happening. Because you couldn't take it in. Your brain simply would-- didn't register this.  INT: Did the people who were so-called picnicking in the woods, was it their own food that they brought with them, do you think? KHM: I think so. I think this-- this was still the-- because you see, what happened is, that when people were thrown out of their trucks, mostly, they were-- they had to leave all their luggage behind. But if they had sort of hand luggage and things, they didn't sometimes do selections there. They didn't sort them out. Sometimes they did. Sometimes they didn't. Sometimes they selected people in the woods. Sometimes they selected them outside the crematorium. Sometimes they selected them inside the crematorium. And sometimes they still carried out selections in the saunas. So it was very difficult to know where people were actually selected. I think most of them that were already sitting around in the woods, they were never selected. They were just people who were going into the gas chamber. And they had small belongings with them. And perhaps they had-- if they had small babies, they had a bottle with-- with milk or water or whatever. But then-- but you could actually see them still eating or drinking or whatever. So, no, they were not issued with anything. Is this what you think? No, no. There-- there was all stuff that they just happened to have with them at that particular moment. Now, I witnessed a lot of murders-- 
INT: Yes. KHM: --being perpetrated outside the Crematorium 4.  INT: Tell me about them. KHM: What I think I must explain-- that there were very few SS personnel actually in charge of this section of the camp. But on-- and in overall charge was a man called Moll, at that time, when I was there. There were other commandants, et cetera. But all-- the person I remember was a man called Moll-- M-O- double L. And then were about four other SS-- Unterscharführer, Oberscharführer, Sturmbannführer-- you know, they have different ranks. One was called Wunsch. One was called [NON-ENGLISH]. That I know distinctly, because he once caught me writing. And I-- I was nearly sent-- goodness knows where. And then one was called-- we used to call him-- [? Schleppy ?] or the [NON-ENGLISH], in German. I never knew his true name. It-- his true name was Gottfried Weise, which I didn't-- hadn't known for many, many years, until much, much later. And well, there might have been just one or two others. They were not really in charge of prisoners as such. They were in charge of the goods. And there was no need for. And I had-- so there-- there, at that point, there was no need for guards, because the whole place, was in any case, electrified. No one could get out anywhere, even if they tried. So they didn't actually have any guards there. And they didn't want panics, and the dogs, and things like that. They wanted people to go peacefully to their deaths. They didn't want any shootings and suchlike. But there were a lot of gratuitous murders perpetrated by these four people who were sort of patrolling and just looking on as people were waiting to go into the gas chamber. 
INT: Did you witness those? KHM: Yes, I-- I witnessed a lot of murders there. Unfortunately, I couldn't actually put a name or a face to these murderers. Because there were four of them. And very often you couldn't tell one from another. But-- although, the-- the blind one, this one had the glass eye. So he was quite conspicuous. And there-- there were a few very nasty instances of-- of gratuitous murder. Because these people were waiting to die anyway. But I-- I recall an-- an occasion where one child pick-- wanted to pick flowers, had got out of a queue, and was starting to pick flowers-- a small child. And one of these four people, SS officers, picked up this child by its legs and smashed it against the wall of the crematorium in front of its mother. And there was another occasion where one child begged for water. And again, well-- well some water was thrown from my side of the camp. Somebody threw a bottle of water to this child, which was actually a disaster at that time. But he saw this. Sometimes we thought they hadn't seen it, because they weren't actually patrolling there. But he did see it, and he picked this child up, he threw it in the air, and then he speared it on his bayonet. And he did other things outside this crematorium. He used to pick out small boys or children and place tins or cans on both their shoulders and-- and-- on the child's shoulders and his head, and shot at them. And that's how he became known as the William Tell of Auschwitz. Because he's practicing shooting tins of prisoners. He also did this to prisoners. So there were quite a lot of murders perpetrated. But we were not allowed to see this. I mean, we watched this. But you-- you never had to admit that you actually saw this. So you-- you tried to disappear when you-- when you saw a murder like this committed. Sometimes we saw it from inside the hut. And we-- we tried to get away as soon as we saw a murder like that. Because if they had realized that we've seen it, I-- I think they would have not liked us to be a witness to-- to that sort of murder. 
INT: Did you ever talk about it amongst yourselves? KHM: We tried not to talk about it. We tried not-- we tried to push it out our minds. We always-- we decided we-- we cannot take this in. It wasn't actually happening, you know. You didn't-- we pretended it wasn't happening. Although, you know, there-- there were screams, and there were bodies all around you, and murder all around you. But you just tried not to see it.  INT: Did anyone ever try to resist what was happening? KHM: There were one or two occasions when people realized what was happening. And there was one very nasty occasion, which I didn't actually witness. But there was one person who realized what was going to happen. And she screamed out, you're not going to go in to kill me. We-- I'm not going to be gassed-- or something. And she actually pulled a revolver from one of the SS officers and shot him. And his name was Schillinger. I-- I do remember this particular SS officer. And he got killed by this-- by this person. And then there was a lot of shooting. And they let dogs loose And it-- it really was a-- a very mess-- messy way for people to die. And I think this is why they tried to keep it all calm and quiet. And there was a great big pretense. And nobody knew exactly what was going to happen until it was too late. By the time people were-- people realized once they were shut in the gas chamber. Because there were-- loudspeakers used blare to say-- because we could hear this-- please, tie your shoes together and put your clothes neatly on one side. You're now going to be disinfected under the showers. And of course, we knew what happened. Gas came out instead of the-- instead of water. 
INT: Mm-hmm. Did you know the-- that the person pouring in something from cans on top of the crematoria were-- did you know that it was gas that they were pouring? KHM: Yes, we knew. We-- we saw the-- the canisters of gas. The canisters of gas were all around the camp. All around this enclosure you could find--  INT: You knew what that was. KHM: --canisters of gas. Well, it said on it-- Zyklon B gas. It actually said--  INT: Right. KHM: --so. And there was a-- the skull and crossbones on it. In-- in fact, if you-- if you came too close to one of these canisters, there-- there was a smell of gas. There-- there were occasions when the gas chambers were opened a little bit too soon. And you could smell gas, you-- you know, in-- in the surrounding area.  INT: What were the cans that the-- the William Tell person put on them? KHM: Oh, any cans.  INT: Any cans. KHM: Any cans, yes. He used to shoot--  INT: Yeah. KHM: --any cans of-- of-- that's right-- used to shoot them off prisoners' heads and off their shoulders. But he shot until he killed them. So there was-- there was always a-- a death followed the-- the-- the shoot-- the-- the-- the game. It was kind of sport to-- to-- to this particular person. What I really must mention is about the jewelry that there was-- the incredible amount of jewelry and gold when-- I'm not only talking about gold that was taken from the corpses, which of course, anyway we know. But I didn't work inside the crematoria. I didn't see that. But I can tell you about the gold that I found while sorting the clothes, which very often, at end of a shift, could have been a bucketful. And one-- one person had a bucketful. And at the-- the end of the shift, it was carried in blankets. Now, we were very conscious that we must not hand in. But on the other hand, we couldn't keep it. There was just no way that we could hide it anywhere, because they were inspecting our living quarters almost on a daily basis. And so you couldn't hide anything. And anything found on you was classed as sabotage. And we know what death penalty-- that carries the death penalty. So nobody took a chance to have anything on them or in their bunks. But what we did do is at the end of our hut, there was a-- a very small, little tiny hut, which was a lavatory. And within this lavatory, we buried-- well, I buried. I don't know-- some of my friends as well. I buried a lot of the stuff that I found-- was buried there. This was eventually, of course, excavated by the Poles who-- after liberation. But this is where we buried an awful lot of stuff all there. All around the area there were places where some of these valuables were buried. Now the other thing-- we realized that there was a-- a resistance movement somewhere. Now, we didn't know where they were, who they were. But we knew there was a-- a resistance movement. Oh, I did have contact with a girl whom I knew quite well, a girl called Roza Robota. And she was one of the four girls that helped to-- to provide the explosives for the-- for the uprising. And I knew this girl. And I knew that she worked in a aluminum factory where they were producing explosives. And I knew that somehow or other I have got to get some of these valuables to her, because she had access to explosives. And this is eventually what happened. We did manage to get some stuff through to these girls, and they bought some ammunition-- bribed some of the SS people. And eventually, some of the guns and ammunition found itself back to the enclosure, to the-- to-- to the so-called underground. And in that sense, we actually helped to-- to-- in the uprising indirectly. 
INT: Right. KHM: But what-- what I meant to say-- there were one-- there was one occasion where I found an enormous amount of jewelry. Now, money was of no value. We used it as toilet paper, by the way--  INT: Right. KHM: --dollars and pounds and things like that.  INT: We're coming to the end of the tape. We'll take a break there. KHM: We'll take a break. Yeah.  INT: Tape 11, which is a re-taping of tape nine, Kitty Hart-Moxon, the ninth of June, 1998. You were telling me about how you got precious goods to men to help get ammunition. What was this for? KHM: Well, there was one occasion where I found an enormous amount of jewelry. That was during when the Hungarian transports began to arrive, between May and July, or-- July, yes. Between May and July. And I decided that no way was I going to hand this in. I sorted it out into all these small, precious pieces of diamonds, and small pieces, not great big watches. And I decided somehow or other, I've got to get this to the men. Now, of course we didn't really have official contact with men. There was no contact with men, whatsoever. And you were not allowed to talk to the men. But there was an occasion when-- when the men passed by. And they were just dishing out their soup. And I spoke to one of the-- I approached one of the-- the SS guard, just to say something about the-- I'm just going to just give them some soup or some-- some such thing. Can I give them some soup, I think. I can't remember the exact-- well, the exact words I-- I used. But while-- while doing this, I managed to drop the whole amount of jewelry that I had hidden inside of my clothes. And I dropped it into this great big kettle of soup. And my-- my only worry was they were going to-- they were going to swallow these-- these jewelery. But-- but I had sort of gesticulated, and made them understand, because you couldn't speak to them, that there was stuff underneath there. And it-- it did transpire they did eventually get-- got hold of all these jewelry. Because the-- the men of the Kanada actually couldn't get hold of all these precious things, because their-- most of their work was bringing stuff from the ramp, you know, where people dumped their clothes, to our enclosure. But they didn't actually do the sorting out. So therefore, they had no possibility of finding all these jewelery, which-- which only people who-- that closely sorted out clothes could find. And this stuff eventually found its way to the men. And I-- I do know for a-- for a fact that some explosives and guns and grenades were actually bought with-- with this-- some SS officers were bribed. Some of the Ukrainian SS guards, were bribed, and the-- the-- the resistance actually obtained some munition from some of the-- some of the things. But I wasn't the only one that was doing this, of course. We were all trying to do that. 
INT: So what was this going to be used for? KHM: Well, it was going-- well, it was going to-- it was useful. Because what had happened, the-- the-- about end of July, August, rumors began to circulate that they were going to liquidate the whole of the camp. They were going to bomb the whole place, the whole complex, especially the Kanada complex, and they were going to raze the place to the ground. You see, transports were not arriving all-- all that much more by that time. Although were-- they were still liquidating some of the camps. The Lódz ghetto, they were liquidating. In fact, I was going to tell you about a girl that lived with me who recognized her father going into the gas chamber, and she committed suicide. And I also-- I also remember the-- the-- a transport from Theresienstadt that came in just during that time. And they all went straight to the gas chamber. Because we-- the only thing we could sometimes find out is where these people came from.  INT: How did you know they came from-- KHM: Well, I think-- I think when there-- when there was no one around, you could just sort of shout where from, so that we knew where these people came from. And the-- the-- one lot of transport came from Theresienstadt, and also one transport came from Majdanek.  INT: Did you know those places? KHM: Did I know the places? No, no. Well, we knew what Theresienstadt was. We knew it was the-- the model camp. And we did realize then that they were liquidating the-- the model camp. And of course, we tried to think why they were doing this. But it was obvious, you see? The-- the-- the Russian front was nearing, and so they began to liquidate. They liquidated Lódz, and they liquidated Majdanek, which, again, was near Lublin, you know, far east. So we realized they were beginning to liquidate these people, and they were bringing them straight into the gas chamber. Now, so this is why the men prepared an uprising. Now, we heard rumors about an uprising, because they-- they were saying that they're not going to wait until the whole of the complex was going to be bombed and razed to the ground. They were going-- there was going to be this uprising. Unfortunately, it couldn't be organized, because there were so many informers. And many of the prominent political prisoners had-- they started to evacuate. So they-- the-- the authorities realized that there was a danger of an uprising. Then they began to disperse people also already from Auschwitz. And so the men in-- in the-- in the crematoria were not going to wait.
Because they were being liquidated. Every so often, the Sonderkommando was being replaced. There was not just one Sonderkommando that worked there right through. Every so often, they replaced these people. So they-- the-- the last Sonderkommando, I don't know what number it was, decided that they were not going to wait. They were going to have this uprising. And we didn't know. We knew there was something in the offing. But we thought they were going-- what-- the next thing that was going to happen, we were going to be bombed. You see, transports were no longer arriving from Hungary. They had liquidated the whole of the Hungarian Jews. Trickle of prisoners kept on coming in from different camps. We still had a lot of work to do there. We realized, as long as there's these pile and pile to sort out, we are still relatively safe, because they wanted all these effects. They wanted all these goods. But we realized that our time is possibly up, and they were not going to evacuate us. This is what we felt. Now, we knew this underground movement, but we didn't know who they were or what they were going to do. And one day, which in fact, I knew later, it was the sixth of October, 1944, there was an almighty explosion. And the very first thing I remember is the chimney of Crematorium 4 toppling to the ground. Of course, our first thought was that we were being bombed and razed to the ground. And we all lay down flat, spread-eagled on the floor. There were commands came from all sides, lie down flat on the floor. And we were we all lying flat, waiting to be bombed, I presume. But what in fact happened is the men in the crematoria, the Sonderkommando, staged a revolt and blew up some of the crematoria. I think they also blew up Crematorium 2, but we couldn't see it. We could see Crematorium 4, you see? But they definitely blew up Crematorium 4, and at a stroke, put all the crematoria out of action. So no way could they continue with the process of killing people, you know, the-- the way it-- it progressed. But-- and there was a skirmish. They brought a-- a whole armored division in, and there was a lot of shooting. One man-- well, I think it was this man, Weise, he got into our hut. Because some of the male prisoners ran all around the huts to hide. And one was shot in our hut. Well, I don't know who shot-- who exactly it was. But it was one of the four, anyway, one of the four SS officers. But a lot of other SS personnel came in with machine guns, and they came in, roaring in on motorcycles. And they rounded everybody up. Some men got away. They cut the electrified fence. But they-- they caught everybody. And a-- a lot of people got killed. But some of the SS people got killed as well. So that was the uprising, on the sixth of October. 
INT: What-- what contact did you have you with your mother during your time in Kanada? KHM: Now, I really want to tell you about this, so if we need to go a little bit back in time. As I explained before, we were isolated there, and we couldn't actually just go back into the camp, or we were not brought into the camp at night. However, every so often, there was a-- a cart with sort of junk clothes, taken in to the main camp as distribution for the newcomers that were coming in, I take it. We don't know. Anyway, that was the pretext that we were going into the main camp. I-- my kapo, Nanci, she was a-- a very-- Manci. She was a-- a very good kapo. As it-- obviously, she didn't have to beat us up, of course. You know, there was an abundance of everything there. And she arranged-- mostly, she arranged for me to go with a cart back to the camp, because she knew I had my mother there. And one day, I got back, and I found my mother had typhus. Well, luckily, I could bring in-- I-- I used to smuggle in a lot of stuff. Now, it wasn't-- it wasn't permitted to bring any-- you-- you couldn't carry anything. Because you-- at the gate, going into the main camp, you were-- there was an inspection, and you were searched. Your arms and your legs out, and they searched you to see if you brought anything in. But nonetheless, I had all-- I-- I usually wore about four or five layers of clothes. And I had various things pinned on my back, because I knew this is where they were not searching. And I also had tins tucked inside. And once I-- I got through with a tin between my legs, a tin of meat, would you believe it? I smuggled that in. And because I could-- I brought things in, my mother was able to-- or I was able to arrange for people to look after my mother, which they did. They nursed her. 
INT: Who were those people? KHM: They were the nurses on-- on-- well, the nurses and the-- the prisoner doctors. I could pay for that. And they looked after her, because there were selections to the gas chamber every other day from the typhus block. And so they looked after her and hid her while she had typhus. So eventually, she recovered. But on one occasion, or was it perhaps more than one occasion, our SS woman decided she didn't want to take us the shortcut. She said she was going to take us right around the outer perimeter-- perimeter of the camp, right around the other side, which was out of bounds. And it was certainly out of bounds for prisoners, because there were things that we were not allowed to see. And she told us, when you pass through the outside, you must look down. You must not move your head to the right or to the left. You look down as you pass. But nonetheless, we-- we did see certain things. One-- one of the places we passed was-- was known the white house. The white house had walls actually splattered blood. Now, outside this white house was a queue of men, queuing in to go in. They didn't know. They thought they were going in to be registered or whatever. But in fact, every time one person went in, they were shot in-- in-- in the neck. And you could just hear a very, very faint thud of a bullet going into their necks. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] Then we passed pits. And you see, in July or August, or July certainly, or June, July, the crematoria could no longer cope with the amount of people that they were bringing in and the bodies to burn. And even the gas chambers couldn't cope with the number of people. And so they had dug pits. And we passed some of the pits. And at the edge of the pits, there were people that were being thrown into the pits. And there were also bodies in the pits, and they were burning bodies in the pits there. So this is something we were not supposed to see. But as I say, this-- these are very few people that actually saw this on the way from the Kanada. The Kanada enclosure was, by the way, called B2g, a very small enclosure. And I have actually got a plan of it, which I can show later. 
INT: So-- KHM: And we come to the--  INT: What happened after the-- KHM: Uprising.  INT: --uprising? Were there any killings? KHM: There were a lot of killings after the uprising. Mostly killing-- mostly they-- they interrogated people, and they found-- certainly they killed off all the people in the Sonderkommando that participated, because they knew which-- where-- where the revolt originated. So yes, they killed a lot of people there. They-- they also-- of course, there was a battle, and people died in the battle. They found the four girls that were responsible for supplying the-- the-- the munition-- not munitions, the-- the grenades or powder or whatever. The four girls had actually worked in that munition plant. And these four girls were found. They were tortured, and they were hung in full view of the camp. Now, I was no longer there, because they were hung in January, I believe. And of course, I-- by that time, I was evacuated.  INT: Do you know the names of any of those girls? KHM: Well, I knew-- I-- I knew Roza Robota I knew. And then there was another one called Ella Gartner I knew. I-- I didn't know the other two. But I knew two of them, yes.  INT: How did you-- when did you hear that they were hanged? KHM: Oh, I didn't hear that until after the war.  INT: Right. KHM: Yes. I-- I-- we thought that they were, you know, shot immediately. But apparently, they were not. They were taken. They were questioned. They were interrogated, and they were tortured for a long time before they actually hung them. Now, what-- what happened then, there was a-- there-- there was an enormous interrogation. There was a-- a roll call, and, you know, people were questioned, and all kinds of things happened. But in the meantime, my mother did things that I didn't know. For starters, I said I-- I-- she'd recovered from typhus. And I smuggled in a lot of precious things which I shouldn't have had on me, and certainly all the clothes which were-- were tradable and were sort of currency, towels and soap, which you-- which you never saw, toothbrushes and things like that. And with that, my-- my mother managed to-- she found out that there was a-- a general evacuation from Auschwitz, and people were evacuated all over the place. But she found out that there was a transport of 100 women, all privileged prisoners on a list. There were only 100 of these, and they were all put on a separate list. And because she had all this to-- to give and to pay for, she managed to include her number and my number on this list.
And this is how I came to be on the list to be evacuated with some privileged prisoners. There were some block leaders there, women that-- some-- I don't think there are any kapos, but there were-- there certainly were some block leaders and people that had prominent positions in the camp. I didn't know this. What else my mother did while I was in Kanada, and that one day, she-- she decided she was going to speak to Commandant Hossler, because he was one of the more amenable commandants. He'd-- he'd not been actually seen to kill anybody or actually beat anyone up himself. Now, it wasn't possible, normally, for an ordinary prisoner to approach a commandant. You always had to speak via a prominent prisoner. So you had to speak to-- to a kapo or Lagerführer and say prisoner number so-and-so wishes to speak to so-and-so. Well, it-- it was practically unheard of to address a commandant, but my mother waited her-- waited and eventually had a opportunity. She saw the commandant there with the Lagerführer [NON-ENGLISH], and as I've said to you before, when she was ruling the camp, things began to improve. And my mother went up to the-- directly to the commandant. And she said, prisoner number 3993 wishes to-- begs to speak to the commandant, in her perfect German. And he was a bit sort of startled. But he said, yes? And she explained that she'd been nearly two years now in the camp. And of course, he realized she was quite elderly there. And he was quite amazed at that. And she showed him the number, 39933, it was quite an old number. It was an old prisoner by that time. And she explained that my daughter has been working in Kanada for eight months now, and I am on a list to go on transport. Would it be possible for me-- for-- for my daughter to be transferred, so that we could go on transport together? Well, he didn't say anything, apparently. Now, next thing that happened, during a roll call, soon after this interrogation, while there was a roll call in Kanada, my name-- my number was called. And my first thought was, oh, yes. That's it. They have discovered my connection with the jewelry and the passing on to other people. Somebody must have confessed where it came from. But it wasn't that. The SS woman said, prisoner number 39934, you're going to be transferred to camp B2b. You're going on transport with your mother. And I was transferred back to the main camp. Now, I do know what went on in Kanada after I left, because [NON-ENGLISH], who was with me, told me after-- you know, several times, what happened. She was there till the end and eventually was on the death march when they evacuated Auschwitz, just prior to liberation. And she was there. And they formed a burning kommando. The Kanada kommando became a burning commando. And they began to burn all the records from Auschwitz 1, which was the political [NON-ENGLISH], or the political department, where all the records were kept, and all, no manner of papers. And all these records were brought to the Kanada enclosure, and they were burning all the records and burning all the goods that were still in those-- in-- inside the-- the huts. So they started razing the place to the ground and burning all the things. And-- and they also exploded or sprung some of the-- the rest of the crematoria, which to this day are the way they had been sprung, some by the SS, some, of course, during the uprising. 
INT: Did the Germans ever request any sort of special things from Kanada? KHM: Yes. Oh, yes.  INT: In what way? KHM: Well, it wasn't that they requested. Of course, they had-- they themselves were not allowed to touch it. That was the rule. But of course, there was an awful lot of looting going on. And even the commandants couldn't actually come and take what they wanted. But of course, you can imagine the great wealth that was brought in there.  INT: Who was the commandant of Auschwitz at the time? KHM: Well, the-- the overall-- well, the overall commandant, it could have been Hoss. Or Hoss was transferred, and he came back into Auschwitz in September. I think the-- the commandant of this particular-- of B1, B2 was Kramer, who was eventually, of course, in Belsen, and he was hung. Because all-- all the commandants of Auschwitz and the women were transferred to Belsen during that time. But-- the-- the-- the one commandant was in charge of that area was called Moll. And there was an awful lot of looting going on, which-- which we witnessed. Because I think I have mentioned to you before that at the end of our hut, there was also a great big heap of clothes. Because originally, the clothes were brought into the hut and all the heaped up at the end of the hut, and we then had to sort out. And often, when we'd finished our quota, we used to go and hide in-- in this heap. And there was a dividing wall between us and the next part of the hut. And it so happened, the hut that I was in, there-- there was what was called a [NON-ENGLISH], which is a-- a duty room. I don't believe every hut had the duty room. It's possible, because we've never been inside it. But there was a duty room, just at the back of this heap of clothes. And there were quite sort of open gaps in-- in the construction of this dividing wall. And we could watch what they were actually doing. And believe you me, most evening-- because I was on night shift-- most evenings and nights, they were sorting out jewelry there. That's-- there-- and it looks to me as though that is where a lot of looting took place. They were actually sorted out. There-- it was all-- they had tables there, and they were sorting out the diamonds and the jewelry and the gold. Now, I don't know whether it was possible for them to-- to keep it or what, but most certainly, there-- there was that's where this black market was, and stacks and stacks of notes. We used to use notes as toilet paper, because that's all it was good for. It really wasn't of any use to us, and we didn't want to hand it in, so we literally used it as lavatory paper. But they had stacks of currencies there on the table. And of course, they were always drunk. They had huge carafes. When the Greeks came, when the Italian transports came, they had huge carafes of wine. And they-- they were always drunk, these-- these SS people there. There were a lot of drinking going on. So we actually watched what they were doing. But of course, they were also watching us, which we didn't know. And at one time, I was actually watched, and-- and somebody saw me write a note, which I-- I wrote a note to my mother, which I sent with one-- one of the carts, and I was caught writing once. So we were-- there was like a two-way-- two-way watch going on in-- inside the hut. So there was a-- and some of the commandants had their trustees that would come in and ask for various things for the commandants. So yes, there was a lot of private looting going on as well. 
INT: When were you aware that the transports were lessening? KHM: Well, we-- I would say already about August 1944. There were not as many transports. The-- the-- the worst period was between May and July. Transports began to thin out around about August, September. In September were the rumors of the-- of the liquidation of the camp. And of course, in October, we blew up the crematorium. And then a lot of transports came from other concentration camps and also, of course, from the main camp. You see, a lot of people thought they were actually being evacuated from Auschwitz. And what we found, that some of these people, the trains never left. They shunted them back to the Kanada, and they actually surprised them and put them all into the gas chambers, people that never thought they were going to be gassed. This is why my mother included our number on a prominent list, because she felt that this might perhaps be a-- a transport that was going to go out of Auschwitz, which of course, and-- and that's what happened.  INT: How-- how-- how did you go out then? How did you get back to your mother? KHM: Well, as I said, I was just simply transferred, and somebody just took me back to-- to-- and I was dumped back on my mother. And my mother was on the-- in the-- by that time, she was put what was like a transit block, where all these 100 people that were going to be evacuated were all put together. And of course, what I didn't know is that we were-- were-- normally, if transports were evacuated, they all went into a sauna where they were stripped of everything they had, and they were issued with different clothes. But it so happened, because this was a transport of prominent sort of prisoners, we were among them, that we were never searched, which was rather a-- a shame. Because if I had known, I could have smuggled in a lot of stuff which would have been invaluable in the-- in the-- in the next few months. 
INT: Who were the other prominent people on this 100? KHM: Well, on the 100, I-- well, some I-- I don't know the names, some of them. There was a-- a-- a mother and a daughter, a mother and two daughters, and a-- and a cousin and a niece of the mother. And they were all the family of Selinger. And they came from the town of Sosnowiec. The-- the one daughter was Henya, and she was actually a block leader. She was first a [NON-ENGLISH], a-- a messenger girl, and she then got a block. She-- she in fact, had the block, I think where the musicians were. So she had a good block. You know, she didn't have to beat anybody up. I mean, they-- they were all relatively prominent people on-- on her block. Her mother didn't do anything, because she was hidden, and same with her sister and her cousin. She saved all of them by herself having this prominent position. And then there were one or two girls that worked in the sauna. And who else? There was one or two girls that worked in the kitchens. And-- and I don't remember any kapos, actually. There were one or two other block leaders. So they were all people that had sort of some position of where they managed to get onto this list. Because they said that the-- the list was compiled because a chief of one of the factories came to look for 100 girls that were in relatively good condition. And so this is how we came to be included on-- on this list. And believe me, I came into Auschwitz in a much worse condition than I actually left it. Because during the eight months that I worked in Kanada, I at least managed to put on weight. Because after my typhus, I was what was known as a Muselmann. I was literally on the death's door. And I just couldn't recover on-- on the camp food, anyway. And the same with my mental attitude and my-- you know, I had lost my will to fight. And in Kanada, I just managed to regain my physical strength, although mentally, it-- it was the most horrific time. But physically, I actually put on weight, and my health improved. And the same with my mother's, because I managed to bring in other things than just living on camp soup. So we both left Auschwitz pretty well in a better condition than we actually came in-- 
INT: Right. KHM: --which was a paradox.  INT: We'll take a-- we'll take a break there. KHM: Yeah.  INT: Tape 12, Kitty Hart-Moxon, the 9th of June 1989-- 1998. Sorry. You finished on the last tape saying that you were about to leave Auschwitz in a better condition healthwise than when you entered. Right. What happened then? KHM: Well, one of the reasons I entered Auschwitz in a worse condition is because I had been, of course, on the run since 1939 until 1943, you could say, apart from the very short period in Germany. I was pretty well on a starvation diet. And I'd been on the run. And I'd been sick, and I'd been in pretty bad condition, and so was my mother. But the last eight months in Auschwitz I had recovered, having worked in the Kanada. The next thing that happened, we were led to some cattle trucks. We were pushed into the trucks and sealed with a hundred people. I believe there was another 200 that joined in another truck, which were not on our list. The whole group-- the whole transport-- there may have been others. There might have been men in-- in-- in a different truck. I don't know. We were taken-- well, of course, we didn't know where we were evacuated to. We had no idea.  INT: What had you been told? KHM: Nothing. Nothing whatever. Nobody told you anything. And you couldn't get any information from anybody. And nobody dared ask too many questions. The whole point was, which way did the engine face? Did it face to the crematoria, or did it face out of the gate? And that is where we all held our breath. We didn't know, because we were shut in in the truck. And it wasn't until it actually moved that we realized that it was actually gaining speed, gathering speed. And we gathered that we've actually gone through the gates of Auschwitz. But we didn't see it, because we were sealed in in the cattle trucks. We were in these trucks. And there was-- there was a lot of relief. People were crying and singing. We were actually singing the-- there was a special prisoner song. And I don't remember the words. And [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] my mother and I, we were both a little apprehensive, because there were all these prominent prisoners, and some of them we didn't know, and some of the faces we did know and didn't like. And we didn't quite know, you know, whether we were going to be attacked, or whatever. Anyway, we decided between us, my mother and I, we were going to say something. And we said, look, girls. We are all in this together now. You might have had good positions. We don't know what the next place is going to bring. We're all equal now. So let's just be friends, and let's just say that we help each other, and not kill each other, and look after one another. And lo and behold, all these prominent prisoners, they all joined hands. And we all sang and promised that we're going to look after one another. 
INT: Who suggested this? Who said this? Your mother? KHM: Well, my mother suggested it at first, you see. And-- and it-- it had all came out. And I-- and we, again, immediately formed into little families. We're going to stay together. So-and-so is going to stay together. We all chose groups that are going to stick together, because that was almost the first thing you did. Because even two of us couldn't be on our own. You had to be more than that. And we were together with the Selinger family. So that there was Henya and her sister Renya, and her mother and my mother, and myself and-- and the cousins. And we sort of stuck together, like sort of one little family. And from then on we were together until liberation, this-- this close group of-- of five of us.  INT: So how long were you in the train? KHM: I don't know how long we were in the train. We-- I don't think we-- we traveled very far, because we-- the next place where they tipped us out was Gross-Rosen. We'd never heard of Gross-Rosen. But it-- it-- it-- it was a-- a camp in the-- the-- within the Reich, within Germany. We didn't know where it was. We-- we had gathered it wasn't all that far away, because we hadn't traveled a huge distance. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] Eventually, we found out we were in a region between the Oder and the Neisse. And so this-- and not very far from the Czech frontier, the Sudeten mountain range, or what they called the Eulengebirge. So we knew we were in the eastern part of Germany, which was Germany. Of course, now this territory is Poland. But pre-1945 this belonged to Germany. We were tipped out of there. And the next thing that happened is our group of 100 were led to one side. There was a group of 200, like I explained to you-- 
INT: OK. KHM: --which didn't-- wasn't on our list. And this group was then transferred, which we didn't know for a long time. That transpired much, much later. Almost after-- sometime after the war-- they were transferred to the Schindler camp in Brunnlitz. By that time Schindler's camp was already in Czechoslovakia, because he'd relocated from where he was in Cracow. And 200 of these women were taken to his camp. So somewhere along the line we were together with these 200 Schindler women. But we were not on their list, and so they didn't take us. We-- we were a 100 group that was specifically chosen to work in a-- another factory in-- in a place called Reichenbach, not all that far away from Gross-Rosen. I don't remember how we got there. I think we-- we-- they took us there on lorries or trucks. When we got to this place, it-- it was a small camp situated on the outskirts of the town. But the actual factory was somewhere in the town. It was known as the Telefunken factory pre-war. But at that stage it was already part of the Phillips concern, and it-- it was an electronics plant. Of course, we never really got to know exactly what we were-- what's being produced there. But we-- we-- we think it was parts for aircraft, making valves. And in that I mean actually producing the vacuum that-- that produces-- produces valve for some aircraft. And we were taken to this small camp, and sorted out. And not everybody was doing the same sort of work. My mother and Mrs. Selinger-- [INAUDIBLE] that's Henya's mother-- they were simply sorting screws. That's all they were doing. They had trays of screws, and they're sitting there sorting screws. I-- I had a very peculiar sort of job to do. I was sitting next to a civilian German woman. And she wasn't allowed to speak to me, because there was no communication between the civilians-- [INAUDIBLE] the civilians working there and the prisoners. The whole place was patrolled by the SS women, and there was no contact. Well, I was just shown what I had to do. And what I really had to do was to take cylinders of I think it was carbon dioxide. I don't know what it was. But cold cylinders. If some of that stuff went on your skin, it burned. So it was cold like ice, but it burnt like fire. And these cylinders had to be changed in this particular machinery or whatever it was. And this German woman was sitting at the control panel, and looking and watching her dials. And every so often she would tell me I have to go and change the-- these cylinders. So this was pretty well my occupation. What I didn't realize, it was quite a dangerous procedure. Because this-- this thing was-- not only was it explosive or whatever, but it-- it-- if it overflowed, it burnt your skin. And this is what happened to me. I-- it had actually burnt me through my clothes one day. One of these cylinders overflowed, and I had a huge burn on my hand. And this civilian German woman mentioned this to the patrolling SS woman. And she was told off, to mind her own business. So that's, I think, where she realized, you know, what is happening. And there is no such thing as anyone looking after you, or whatever. And from that time on she used to leave me a sandwich every day. [INAUDIBLE] there was like a control panel with all these dials and a shelf underneath. And every day there was a sandwich there for me that this German woman would leave. But I couldn't communicate with her. I couldn't even say thank you or anything else. I just managed to take it and put it somewhere in my pocket. And when I got back to the camp we used to share it out with my mother. Because food became incredibly scarce there, because it wasn't like you could organize in Auschwitz, you see. There-- there was food coming in from outside. Not only was Auschwitz [INAUDIBLE] the greatest black market in Europe. But it was self-sufficient. You know, people were working on farms and fields, cattle, fisheries. And so things were smuggled into the camp. There you had a very small camp on the outskirts of this town. And it was strictly a ration of food coming in. And there was no way of obtaining any extra. So there we began to experience the starvation again, because the rations became smaller. 
INT: Do you recall what your meals were? KHM: There were no such thing as meals. It was your-- your bread and-- and your midday soup. Those were your meals.  INT: Who-- who dished it out to you? KHM: It was brought in. It was usually brought in, in-- into the camp. And midday soup was brought in and dished out, ladled out, pretty well as it was in the camp. But about-- [INAUDIBLE] interesting what was the-- what was there, that, for instance, if we wanted to go to the toilet, and you were working all day, you couldn't actually go. But every so often the SS woman would come and say, [GERMAN]. That means everybody, all everywhere in the holes, they all had to come. Everybody had to go to the loos together. So she used to collect all these workers. We were-- we were sort of a group of 100. She used to collect us. And we all had to go to these loos. Well, you can imagine what happened. They probably had two loos or something, and about a hundred people. But we-- we were actually delighted with this, because it gave us a-- a chance-- in those loos there was actually water-- running water. And sometimes there was hot water. And I did explain. My mother had sort of dishes where she was sorting out screws. And she used to smuggle a dish or two into the toilet. And we used to have a bath in a little dish like that, and actually wash ourselves, because there was no running water back in the camp. And so this is what I recall from-- from there. And the other thing I recall at-- the camp was on the outskirts of the town. And it took about a good hour to walk to the factory. And we-- we were accompanied by usually a guard at the back, and-- and perhaps some SS women at the side. Now we-- we used to pass-- we used to actually pass through the town quite early in the morning. And you could smell bread being baked in the bakeries. And, you know, you could just about see people getting up. It was quite early in the morning. And we had one or two girls that were just incredible. They-- they were able to snatch the SS women's food out of their hoppers-- out of their rucksacks that they had. And-- and so-- so we had to-- well, I don't know whether they allowed themselves to be raided. I don't know. But she always managed to get some food from the SS on-- on the way to work. 
INT: Did any civilians [INAUDIBLE] going through the town ever show you any kindness? KHM: No. No we never saw any civilians. We left very early in the morning. The bakers, well, you could-- well, the bakeries were working, obviously, because we-- we could smell, you know, fresh bread being baked, and curtains being sort of opened. It was very early in the morning. So I think we must have-- we-- we passed a empty town. And the same at night. We never saw anybody. Whether they took us from to the outskirts, somewhere where there were no people, I don't know. We never encountered any civilians in the town itself, although we were-- we-- we definitely passed the town. Streets in the town.  INT: Any idea of what hours you worked-- how many hours you worked? KHM: Well, usually you worked a 12-hour shift. And then, of course, you had the walk to the camp and back, as I said, to-- to-- to the factory in the morning, and back in the evening.  INT: Sleeping facilities [INAUDIBLE]? KHM: Sleeping-- well, what happened there, as I said, the 100 of us had-- we had just one hut. And we had two to a bunk. Now sometimes it-- it was very cold winter [INAUDIBLE]. We're now talking about going on for winter in 1944. Probably even January 1945. And there was no heating at all in-- in-- you know, in this hut. And it was so terribly cold. But there was a way of actually making a fire there. It was like a stove. But of course we had nothing to make fire with. So gradually we chopped up the-- the slats on the beds, and eventually [INAUDIBLE] we chopped up so many slats and made fire every night that in the end there was like a straw mattress that had a hollow in the middle. There was just one slot at each end. And one day there was a inspection. And they realized that we were chopping up these boards. And everybody was punished. I-- I can't remember the exact punishment. But I don't know-- they withheld food and things like that. That was the punishment. But they also decided to punish-- to take-- making-- make an example of one person. And they decided-- they pulled out-- they'd pull out my friend Henya, of all people. She was a very beautiful girl. And they decided to shave her hair as a punishment. And she actually lost all her hair then, because she'd had-- she already had quite long hair, and they shaved her head. That-- that was sort of the punishment for chopping up the boards. But by that time, as I say, it was January. But we were not ill-treated. We were left in relative peace once we got back to the-- to the actual camp. And in the factory we were harassed, but not beaten. So it was a-- a relatively quiet period of November, December, January 1945, except for the starvation. But what we didn't know is that the whole area had something like a hundred camps all around. [INAUDIBLE] ammunition-- the whole of the ammunition industry seemed to have been relocated into this region between the Oder and the Neisse, with Gross-Rosen being the base camp, and then all these camps all around. And prisoners were working in-- in different camps, in different factories. And they were also working in subterranean plants within the Eulengebirge, the-- the Sudeten range-- mountain range. And they were-- they-- they had high-tech electronics plants there. I believe they were making parts for the V-2 bombs. And also they were constructing the new Hitler headquarters. That's what most of the men were working, in-- in a quarry inside the mountains of-- of-- of the Sudeten range. But we didn't know that at the time. 
INT: Did you ever have any opportunity to sabotage the work that you were doing? KHM: We did a lot of sabotaging. We didn't do any good work whatsoever. I mean, I had to replace these cylinders. There was no way of not replacing the cylinders. But there were other work that were sabotaged all the time. People managed to sabotage. And then the next place we worked, we-- we didn't do anything-- anything of any-- any usefulness whatsoever. But the-- the thing that I, of course, didn't know, until I read Albert Speer's book, by Gitta Sereny, where Speer describes that particular factory, or she actually got it out of him, because he always maintained he didn't know what happened to the forced laborers, or the-- the slave labor. Now he said that there was a group of people who were working in the Reichenbach factory-- that was factory where I was working-- who were specially trained to do some very intricate electronic work. Now it certainly wasn't my group, and possibly there was another group. Because there was another plant like this in a place called Porta Westfalica, which was also part of Philips-- of a Philips factory. And he wanted this particular group that worked in Reichenbach to be relocated to Porta Westfalica. [INAUDIBLE] we didn't know all this. This is what I read. And I-- I then [INAUDIBLE] and then realized that it was my group, that-- because I didn't know how I-- eventually I found myself in Porta Westfalica. Why Porta Westfalica? But it transpired that there was this group of such people that were specially trained in these electronics-- women with very nimble fingers, apparently-- that were trained to do this particular work at-- at Philips. And because this was a subsidiary of Philips, they wanted these particular-- he, Speer, on his specific orders wanted this group to be transported to Porta. But of course, other things happened in the meantime. 
INT: [INAUDIBLE] how long were you in Reichenbach? KHM: Well, we were in Reichenbach the whole of winter, the whole of-- the latter part of '44, the beginning of '45, when rumors begun to circulate that the Russian front is not very far away. And indeed, early February, 1945, we could already hear, in a far distance, we could hear artillery fire. And we knew that the front couldn't be all that far away. And that became much closer. But what happened next was that there was a general roll call. We didn't-- we were not taken out to the factory on about the 17th of February. And on the 18th of February there was a order of what was known as a Marschbefehl. That means the order to march out. And in fact what I didn't know at that time, it was the first phase of evacuation from this area. They were evacuating this whole area. They were evacuating it in phases. And that was the 18th of February. And I believe on the 17th of February, that the day before a part of the Russian forces had already occupied Gross-Rosen, which was even a little further west. But we were slightly southeast. And they hadn't. So they drove us out the morning of the-- the 18th, which was just 24 hours prior to-- to liberation.  INT: So what happened to-- to your group at that time? KHM: Well, my group was taken out. And we were just told that this Marschbefehl-- we didn't know what it meant, of course. And we were lined up to be-- to be marched out. We-- we didn't know. We-- we thought we were all-- 
INT: All of you? KHM: Well, there were a hundred of us. But we soon learned that we were joined by hundreds and thousands of others from all the surrounding areas. But we didn't know that there were all these surrounding camps. But we found ourselves in a column that might have been between 5,000 and 10,000. I wouldn't know. But certainly most of the women working in all these different factories, they were all evacuated more or less at the same time.  INT: Were they women, or men and women? KHM: Only women. No, we-- we never saw the men. The men were evacuated separately. No, it was just a column of women that was marched out-- a long, long column of women.  INT: Any children? KHM: Oh, no, no. No, no children. No, those were all-- all--  INT: --any idea-- KHM: Mostly-- oh, mostly people that had been evacuated from Auschwitz to all these different factories that were working in-- in this area. And there were different death marches with different routes. But my route took-- well, I think. Because what happened was as we were marching out we realized that the main roads were absolutely choked with military convoys.  INT: Who were the military? KHM: German military convoys. Now we don't know whether they were retreating, or whether they were going to the front. I don't know. But they were military convoys. And the-- the-- some roads were choked with German refugees that were running away from the Russians. So they didn't want to mix all these people up. And then, of course, there were the slave, the prisoners who were being evacuated. So we were normally taken through the country, through villages and outlying pathways and hardly ever passed any towns. All we passed were isolated farms. But we were heading south nonetheless because eventually we reached a mountain range. And that mountain range was south. And it was possibly south, southwest, not southeast, because the Russians were approaching, and from the-- from the east. So I-- it was towards the southwest that we were taken. 
INT: Were you on foot all the time? KHM: We were-- we were on foot. And the columns stretched as far as your-- your eye could possibly see. And our guards were no longer the SS. They were mostly the Wehrmacht, the soldiers, what I term today elderly. But they were certainly not young people. There were those that could no longer fight on the front. And there-- there were some women [INAUDIBLE] as well. But mostly they were men-- soldiers with-- with rifles. And they-- they were leading the columns. And-- the-- the-- the column. And the-- the column got longer and longer, because it sort of stretched out. But we soon realized that people that were starting to lag behind were either clubbed to death or they were shot. Anyone that was stumbled or stayed behind or got out of line were shot. And we realized that one has got to, A, stay together, and B, stay to the front if you wanted to stay alive.  INT: How many of the hundred were there? KHM: We were all 100. We were the complete 100. And we tried to stick together within this enormous group of people. Because--  INT: How do you think you succeeded in this? KHM: Well, we-- we were pretty successful in sticking together. And we found that when someone lagged behind from the 100, some of us would pull them up and drag them along. And if-- if somebody stumbled, they were pulled up, and they were carried. And at one stage I was carried. And we had to carry my mother at one stage. So the 100, we do-- looked after one another during the death march. And not-- not only that, but no food was issued at all during the death march. Well, we were not issued with any food. 
INT: I see. KHM: That's right. Now the ones that couldn't in any way obtain food began-- became too weak. They started lagging behind. And once they lagged behind they got killed. Some of them tried to run away. But of course there was nowhere to run at that stage. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] At night there were-- there were different places where we stayed at night. Sometimes it was just on the open ground, just wherever, when it began to get dark we just staying on the open ground. Occasionally we were not far from some villages or barns. And then some of us got into the barns. Some of us raided farms-- milked the cows in the cow sheds, and found eggs, and even got as far as some of the farmers, and got some food from them. Or carts would pass by, and we'd throw ourselves onto carts and take some food. But those that didn't didn't survive the death march. It was either you took a chance, which was very precarious. Mostly we waited until the guards were asleep, because the guards became just as tired as we were. And we kept an eye on the guards. So when the guards were asleep, and whoever could-- could check, some of us would move away from the column and go into the neighborhood to see if we could find some food. Also fields, or whatever there was in the fields. We would find little cabbages in the fields, and raw potatoes, or whatever there was. We would try and obtain food. Now one night we slept in a coal mine. And you couldn't actually get anything in a coal mine. We all came out absolutely covered in-- in black dust. One night I had in a-- in a cow-- [INAUDIBLE] what was it? In a pig sty. That's it. One night I-- I remember was a pig sty. And I actually fell into a heap of manure, because it totally dark. And I came out covered in this heap of-- in this manure the next day. We eventually got to the foot of the mountains. And we had to climb the-- the-- the mountain range called the Eulengebirge. And it-- it was a climb quite high, the summit. I don't know now. But it would possibly be well over a thousand meters high. And we climbed up a path onto the summit. And when we got to the top it was the most incredible sight that met our eyes. It was early dawn when we got to the top. I always thought when we got to the summit we would just descend the other side. And it was, you know, top of a mountain.
But in fact it wasn't. It was a completely flat plateau. And it was early morning. And we were in the-- most of our Auschwitz group were pretty well in the front. We kept to the front, although it wasn't easy. But we did try to keep to the front. And what we saw were refugees-- German refugees-- sleeping, many of them still sleeping in carts. And they had kind of hoods over their-- you know, almost like the gypsy caravans. And they had like cattle with them as well-- cows. And when I saw these cows, the first thing that happened, I just ran for a cow, and started milking this cow. And we all had little beakers [INAUDIBLE] milking this cow. And the next thing was I was flung. I was actually kicked. And my mother came running. She said, [INAUDIBLE] what are you doing? This is not a cow. This is a bull. You can't milk a bull. Because I didn't know. At that stage you might know. Anyway, I picked myself up and milked the next cow that I could find. And by that time there was an absolute commotion, because people were coming up the hill. All this column was coming up the hill. And we got entangled with all these refugees, which they tried to avoid. I think the guards didn't know it was on the top there, you see. They were horrified when they found all these civilian people there, and we got mixed up with these civilians. And we started raiding their carts. We threw ourselves onto the carts, and pulled out sausages. And on one cart I dislodged a bucket. [INAUDIBLE] I didn't know what was inside of it. It was [INAUDIBLE] like an-- metal bucket was hanging [INAUDIBLE] from the top. And I-- I grabbed this bucket. And my mother said, what is it? What is it? I says, I don't know. It looks like lard. Oh, she said, marvelous. We're going to smear our bodies with this lard, because it was so intense cold, you know, and we didn't have any gloves. And by that time many of us were already barefoot, because our feet were sore, and many of us were just had the rags on-- on their feet, you know, after days of walking. And we smeared our feet with the-- with these lard-- with this bucket of lard. And it saved a lot of us from-- from frostbite. And so this-- this was the situation there. And, of course, the guards tried to lash out. They couldn't shoot, because we were mixed up, you see, with all the civilians. But they were just clubbing with their-- with their rifle butts. But nonetheless eventually they got us together, and we began the descent into Czechoslovakia. 
INT: All right. We'll take a break there.  INT: Tape 13, Kitty Hart-Moxon, 9th of June, 1998. You literally climbed up the mountain and you-- KHM: --raided the-- the German refugees--  INT: --refugee camp. KHM: And then, yes, it was a sort of camp. That's right. They were just waking up. And we descended-- we started to descend the other side. Of course, this was the border between Czechoslovakia and Germany. And we descended into Czechoslovakia. Now again we passed--  INT: Still in the column. KHM: --sorry?  INT: Still in the column of-- KHM: Well--  INT: --ex-prisoners, or-- KHM: Still-- still in a column of many, many people. A lot of them had by that time died of starvation, of having lagged behind, of weakness, or simply being clubbed to death trying to obtain food. Now that nearly happened to me, because as carts were passing by-- you see, farmers were still working on their farms. Not all people were running away. So there were farmers on, especially in-- on the Czech side, there were farmers working in the fields. And they would pass us by with their load of potatoes or beet or whatever. And as soon as we saw something resembling a horse and cart, many of us threw ourselves onto the cart, especially the Auschwitz group. We knew what to do. We knew we had to-- some of us had to get onto the cart and get some stuff. I threw myself on one of the carts. And I was clubbed with a rifle butt on my head. And I was actually knocked out. And I fell to the ground. And it-- it was part of the-- the Auschwitz group, and my mother who actually dragged me along. And I believe they-- they carried me for some time, because I'd lost consciousness. And eventually I came to. And I-- I continued walking. Eventually it transpired I actually had a fractured skull. But I wasn't actually shot. I was absolutely clubbed with a-- with a rifle butt on-- on my head. I've still got a-- a dent in my head. But nonetheless who didn't take a chance and try and get some food, all these people that didn't try didn't survive the death march. There-- there the difficulty was on the death march that the guards were not going to carry their own belongings. They each had like a blanket and a rucksack and goodness knows what. And they used to pass this down the line and expect us to carry this for them. All they would carry was their guns and the rifles. And everything else had to be carried for them. [? Of course, ?] nobody wanted to carry it, so you passed it down the line.
And, of course, when it came to the end of the line, those people were eventually shot, because they-- they couldn't carry it, you see? So that was another difficulty. This is why it was so important to [INAUDIBLE] stay to the front of the column. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] This went on for I don't know how many days. We got into Czechoslovakia. And we eventually reached a-- a-- a place called Parschnitz, which was a camp somewhere on the outskirts of a town of Trautenau. Parschnitz I've never found on the map, so maybe this was just a name of the camp. But I know there was a town called Trutnov-- Trautenau. This is-- this is how far we got. I don't think it was a huge, huge distance, but it was a very difficult ascent to the top, and a descent. And it wasn't just a road. It was a climb up and a climb down, and it was quite a difficult walk without proper footwear, and without food, and of course the extreme cold. At-- at one stage we passed, before we got on the mountain range, we passed a very, very beautiful part of the country called the Sachsische Schweiz, sort of the Saxony, the Swiss Saxony, with beautiful scenery. And-- and my-- my mother used to say, now don't think about your feet and don't think about your hunger. Just look at the beautiful scenery. That'll take your mind off everything else. And so this is sort of stuck to my mind. We used to try and look at the scenery and not think about what was happening to us. But eventually we landed in this camp of Parschnitz. I-- I think we were there on-- on only a very short time, because the-- well, first of all they were already evacuating the place as well. They-- they already had the-- the Marschbefehl, the, you know, the order to evacuate. And secondly, of course there was this group of 100 who we were supposedly to be transported elsewhere, you know. So they-- they called out this group of 100. And we were still all intact, still all alive. And they loaded a group-- quite a large group of people, possibly-- possibly about 3,000, something like this. And this time we were loaded onto open coal trucks. They were open. They were sort of to-- to somewhere here. And they-- they were obviously coal trucks, because they were all full of coal dust. We were piled into these trucks. And the first thing that happened is each truck had a guard. And the guard had a piece of chalk. And he marked out his area. And that was going to be his place where he was going to sleep.
And he announced, anyone stepping over the line will be shot. Well, they didn't just joke. That was a fact, that if you stepped over you were killed. So everybody tried to keep away. And we were-- we were all huddled together in the-- in about one or two thirds of this truck. And he had this whole section all to himself. Now we were in this particular train which went from Czechoslovakia and eventually landed up in a place called Porta Westfalica, which was the northeast-- northwest of Germany, not all that far from the Dutch frontier. And we were in the coal trucks eight-- either eight days and seven nights, or seven days and eight nights. One or the other. And many times during this journey we'd passed places that we'd seen two or three days previously. So the train had stopped, and then it turned around, and then it went round. And then it started. And then you stopped again. And then there were air raids. Part of the tracks were bombed. We-- we experienced several air raids, because they thought we were a military convoys, that-- bombed by the Allies by that time. They thought we were a military convoy, and they-- they bombed the train. When-- when there was an air raid, the guards would jump off and go into the ditches. But we were not allowed to leave the train. But we were not actually hit. Only the track-- the actual track was hit. So when the track was hit, the train was shunted back. And then it stood for hours. And-- and now the other thing that happened is of course we-- we didn't get any food. In Parschnitz, in that camp, I managed to trade in my one gold sovereign. And I still had my diamonds and my-- those [? teeth ?] that I had. And for that, I managed to obtain a loaf, which was the most incredible, precious thing that you could possibly imagine, a whole loaf in Parschnitz. And Henya, my friend, she did the same. She managed that. I don't know what she had. She also had to pay for it. And we-- we each-- we were in this whole group, one family. You must remember, all your family were looking after one another. But outside your family you couldn't help people and feed everybody. So our group, the others also, some of the Auschwitz girls also managed to get something, because of course they were very experienced prisoners. They'd been-- most of [? had been ?] in Auschwitz a long time. We sat on this bread, believe you me, for eight days. My mother and I sat on our loaf.
And every so often we would sit on it and just nibble a little piece of bread. This is-- this is all. We had no drink. It rained and it snowed, and we collected rain and snow in our mugs. [INAUDIBLE] we still had little mugs with us. And so this-- this is what we drank. Now at one stage, when the train stopped, it stopped near a heap of rotten cabbages. And despite all the screams and shouts of the guards, some of-- some of us climbed down and got some of these rotten cabbages. But everybody that had these cabbages had the most awful diarrheas. You can imagine what that was like in the open truck for seven nights, or eight days. In fact, if you had to go, you-- you had to be held by two people. And you sat on the edge of this truck. And you had to let it go over to the side, because they wouldn't let us dismount and-- and go and-- and do anything, although the guards went off, you see. When the train stopped, the guards got off. But they wouldn't let us get off. Anyway, we were-- we-- we-- let's say we were in-- in this-- in this train all these days. I mean, we were-- it was raining. It was snowing. It was absolutely freezing cold. We were all huddled together, because by that time many of us had suffered frostbite. And many were too weak to-- to stand up. And eventually we got to a place called Porta Westfalica. But how I know, because there was actually a proper station. And it said Porta Westfalica. Otherwise we wouldn't have even known where we were. But it said Porta Westfalica. And the next thing was there were shouts, alles raus. All out. Well, there were a lot of people that could not longer get out. We-- we lost a lot of the convoy. A lot of the girls had died. But all our Auschwitz group were still alive, and we still were able to stand up and-- and march off. So all 100 of us survived the eight days on the train-- in the-- in the open coal trucks. And we-- we were tipped out and marched off to another camp. Now that camp, again, it was a very small little camp. And it was run by Dutch prisoners, all from Holland. They were all women. It was a women's camp. And all the women, these Dutch girls, were working in-- in ammunition plants. And they were supposedly have been the girls trained with this very intricate electronics maneuver that they had to do in this electronic plants. And we were supposed to have been the experts having brought all the way from Reichenbach to-- to join this group to work in this factory. Because it was relocated by that time. You see, they started evacuating. They still wanted to produce whatever they were producing-- I don't know-- in this electronic factory. And so we were sorted out in this camp. And by that time my mother didn't have to work anymore. She wasn't selected for work, fortunately. She-- because-- 
INT: Who selected people for work? KHM: Well, they had kapos, and then ruling parties in the camp, just like everywhere else. So--  INT: Still Germans? The Wehrmacht, or-- KHM: No. They were-- the-- the-- the camp was run by the SS, and it-- it was run by Dutch prisoners. But it was a work camp, as compared to a concentration camp. So it was run on the-- on the-- on the lines of a work camp. It was-- I-- I don't even know the-- it was a subcamp of-- it might have been Neuengamme. I don't know. Possibly. Because it was-- and that was the nearest base camp, I think. We were told we were going to work in this munition plants, we'd-- plant-- which was a Philips factory requisitioned by the Germans from Philips in Holland, I take it, and relocated inside a forest. Now I believe the forest was called the Teutoburger Wald, but I couldn't swear to it. It was somewhere near the Teutoburger Wald. Somewhere there there is a very well-known monument. And somewhere not far from there was this munition plant, which we believed the-- the Allies never knew of its existence, because it was inside the mountain. It was underground. And we were taken 11 shafts underground. And right underground was-- was this munition plant going full [INAUDIBLE], making what we didn't quite know, parts for aircraft we gather, or-- again, the same sort of electronics factory, as similar to what we worked in Reichenbach. 
INT: Can you explain the 11 shafts? KHM: Well, all I can tell you is it was a kind of makeshift lift. And it-- it was, what I recall, it wasn't a proper lift. It was-- [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] it was almost like ropes on-- on the platform which took you down. And it took you so many floors down. And I believe ours was the 11th-- 11th shaft down the hole that we worked.  INT: From the surface. KHM: From the surface, yes. And the-- the-- the air was incredibly, well, it-- it wasn't well ventilated. And people became drowsy. And the-- the-- the German civilian population, the civilians working there, only worked very short shifts. They-- they worked like five, six-hour shifts. And they had to come back to the surface. But we were there 12 hours in these holes. Now the work wasn't particularly arduous. And I couldn't tell you what we were doing. We were not doing anything that of any use. That is where a lot of sabotage went on, because we didn't actually do anything. And whatever we were told to do, we didn't do it the way we were told to do it. So that is where there was plenty of opportunity to sabotage. But the girls who were supposedly these experts, they could no longer at that stage carry out their work, because their supplies were no longer arriving, and, you know, the parts that they needed. So all they were doing is sitting at sewing machines and sewing uniforms for the-- for-- for-- for the-- for the army. Well, we were still sort of fiddling around and doing intricate things, but sabotaging at the same time-- not doing any useful work whatsoever. 
INT: Did you walk to and from work? KHM: Oh, yes.  INT: Yeah. KHM: It was a very long way. And-- and the-- the walk was through the forest. And-- and at that stage I remember we were actually eating acorns. There-- there were forests. There were sort of acorns in the forests. And this is what we brought back to the camp. And we actually made a meal of acorns. The camp soup, strange enough, was better than we'd encountered in many of the other camps. And my mother always used to keep some for me, so when-- when I got back to the camp there was always some hot soup for me that my mother prepared, [INAUDIBLE] because she no longer went out to work there.  INT: Did-- did the local population see you marching to and fro? KHM: No. We, no, no, no. We didn't-- we didn't see-- we didn't see anyone other than some personnel, German personnel, that were working in the plant. But what we didn't know is there were-- in the surrounding area there were numerous other camps. We were only one of the camps. And then there were others. There were-- apparently there was a sort of a former hotel which had been converted into a concentration camp. And they had male prisoners there working in-- in some of the quarries and-- and some of the plants, because they constructed the plant, I believe, you see. So there were lots of other prisoners there. But we never saw them, and we never met them. This is-- this is only what I learned after the war. 
INT: Were you still aware of the progress of the war? KHM: No, because by that time we'd been taken so far west that we had lost any sound of-- of-- of a front approaching. And of course we didn't know how far the Allies were on-- on-- on the Western Front. We were talking-- this is now March-- March-- we're talking about March already, 1945. And we didn't hear. I mean there's only what you could hear. And we didn't hear any gunfire and-- and artillery fire at that stage round there whatsoever. So we didn't know where the front was. There were rumors that there was approaching Allied armies. But we didn't know where they were.  INT: When did you become aware of the-- of the war coming to an end? KHM: Well, during March we were-- early March possibly it was, yes-- we were actually-- there was again what was known as a Marschbefehl. In other words, there was an order to evacuate. And we realized then that if they are beginning to evacuate from the west, and are beginning to drive us back to the east, there must be-- the-- the Allies must be approaching from the west. This is how we became aware that there was a approaching front. But we-- we didn't-- we-- we could hear aircraft. But we didn't know where they were, and we didn't even know who they were. We-- it might have been German aircraft. You couldn't see them. I mean, we were, as I say, underground. And when we walked in the forest, we couldn't-- we couldn't identify who the people were, what sort of aircraft there were. But the next thing that happened was that there was a roll call, as usual. And during that roll call there was some commotion. We-- we got mixed up within the other prisoners-- the Dutch prisoners. And some-- some of our group [INAUDIBLE] was on one side, and the other, it was on the other side. And we realized that they were starting to count people. We could soon tell when they-- you were being counted. You were lined up in fives, and you were being counted. And Henya, my friend, decided she would-- she'd started a commotion. And she started to run to the other side and cause this commotion. And as there was a commotion, one of the SS officers approached. And as he approached I realized there was going to be trouble. And I hit her really hard, and knocked her down, and just to keep her quiet, and in event saved her life. Because she was trying to reach the other side of the column with her mother and with her sister. [INAUDIBLE] we were all together. We didn't know what was what at the time. But it transpired, when they were counting people, they divided the group, one group one way, one group another way. And the group that wasn't on my side was eventually led to the forest. And they were machine gunned. And we lost quite a lot of our Auschwitz girls, because Henya tried to reach our Auschwitz group. And I was on the other side of the group with the, as I say, Henya, whom I'd knocked to the ground. And eventually we rescued her. And there were possibly about between 12 and 14 or 15 of us of the Auschwitz group who were led away. And we'd lost at that point-- almost a point of liberation-- we lost a large part of our original 100 group at that point, because there was no room on the trucks. That's all there was. There was only room for so many on the trucks. And we didn't know that, but they divided up the group. And one group was led away, and in-- and after the war we were told they were machine-gunned. They-- they-- they didn't take them anywhere. And we were led back to the trucks. And we were taken-- we gathered we were taken northeast. And they took us to a place called Fallersleben, which was a bombed-out, disused DKW factory-- car factory. By that time, I think they thought there was still some work to be done there. But there wasn't. The whole building-- building had been damaged. And it was bombed out. And there there were some other prisoners there that were in that particular factory. And we-- we joined that factory. We joined these prisoners. And we were there some days. I couldn't tell you how many days. In fact, we were hardly guarded in that place by that time. If you wanted to, you could have escaped if you knew how to-- where to go, and how to escape. But of course it was not a possibility. 
INT: How did you look after yourself? How did you-- KHM: In-- in-- in.  INT: [? --feed? ?] KHM: Well, in that factory we did quite a few incredible things actually. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] They had a SS kitchen there. And they had air raids. Now one day there was an air raid. And they said, everybody's got to go in-- into the air raid shelters, into the bunks. And they shoved us down below into some cellars. And we saw some airtight doors. And it just rang alarm bells in some of our brains. People who knew what airtight doors meant thought there was only one thing, and that is gas. And one of us said, 'Gas!' Just that [INAUDIBLE] one word. And there was a stampede. And everybody started rushing out. And there was an SS officer. And he said, halt. What's the matter? And there was one of our girls who went up to this SS officer. He was [INAUDIBLE] fat man. And she [? kind of went ?] up to him. And she shook him by the belt. And she said, we're not going in there. We're not going to be gassed in there. If you want to shoot us, kill us here now. We're not going in there. And he said just a minute. Tell me more. And he led us into a hall and wanted to know what this was all about, this gas. And that's where some of us explained to him about the gas chambers in Auschwitz, which he didn't know-- or said he knew nothing about. He was shaken-- visibly shaken. 
INT: Did you have a name for this man? KHM: No, no. I didn't have a name.  INT: No. KHM: No. Anyway, what happened after that is he said, all right, when there is an air raid you don't have to come down to the air raid shelter. You can stay up there. And if you want to get killed, you stay up there. Everybody else goes into the air raid shelters. Now of course there were-- there were raids all the time by that time. The next raid came almost a few hours later. And all the guards, and all-- a lot of the other prisoners went into the air raid shelters. But we stayed behind. And what did we do? We raided the SS kitchens while they were all in the-- in-- in-- in the shelters. And this is how we got food.  INT: Can you remember any of the food? KHM: Yes I do. I remember it very distinctly. We-- we got into this SS kitchen. And they had a great big bowl-- it was absolutely enormous-- full of grated raw potatoes. And I think that we're going to make potato cakes, or some such thing. And we-- we just got hold of this great big dish of grated potatoes. And this is what we ate-- raw potatoes. And we found other provisions and things like that that we raided this kitchen. And of course, when they came up, they were absolutely furious. But there wasn't any punishment after that. They were just, you know, just fuming and shouting and screaming. But nobody was actually beaten up at that stage anymore. Possibly they knew what was to come. [LAUGHS] They knew the Allied armies weren't too far away. But we didn't know. But the next thing that happened, we were led out of the factory and back into trucks and taken we didn't know where. But it transpired it was Belsen. And when we got there we didn't actually go into any camp whatsoever. They just took us into an enclosure-- simply an enclosure. There were no huts. There were no tents. There was nothing. We didn't see any people. We were not together with anybody else. We were just in an enclosure. And I-- I-- don't ask me how long we were there. There was nothing there. 
INT: Was it a fence, or a-- KHM: It was just a fenced-off area. Whether it was the perimeter of the main camp or whatever, I don't know. We were just put into that enclosure, and we were just left there.  INT: Were you told where you were going? KHM: No, no, no, no. No idea. We didn't-- this only we knew afterwards that that's where we were. No, we didn't know. We-- we knew we were outside Bergen. That's-- [INAUDIBLE] we knew it was Bergen. I can't remember how we knew that. I think we saw a name of a station somewhere, or something like this. But nobody told us. We were there. And the next thing is we were led out of there. And we were marched. They marched us out to some sidings. And I think-- I don't know, but I think it was somewhere outside Celle. And this is while it was all around the area of Belsen. And Celle is not very far from Belsen. That was the main road junction at Celle. And it had a lot of sidings. And there stood a number of trains-- cattle trucks. From some of the cattle trucks you could hear voices-- moans, cries, shouts of some of the trucks. But of some of the trucks you could hear nothing at all. Now you didn't know [INAUDIBLE] were they empty or were they not. But what we realized at that point that they were going to load us into these trucks, and that we were going to be abandoned, and sealed in the trains, and left to die. We-- we realized at that point this is what was going to happen. But [INAUDIBLE] before anybody collected their thoughts, we were pushed into the trucks. 
INT: What made you think that's what was going to happen to you? KHM: Well, it made us think, because we heard moans and muffled sounds from some of the trucks. And we realized that these people must have been in the trucks a long time, and the sound that came from them. They were weak, or weakened. And we realized there were people in there. They must have been there for some time. And they weren't going anywhere. There weren't any engines. There were just simply trains standing there.  INT: What could you see? KHM: Trains. Trucks.  INT: But what could you see-- KHM: Out?  INT: --on the trucks? KHM: Oh, no. We don't-- nothing.  INT: On the outside? KHM: No, just cattle trucks. Yeah.  INT: You could hear the-- KHM: You could hear voices.  INT: Yeah. KHM: You could hear voices from some of the trucks.  INT: Could you smell anything? KHM: They were sealed. They were sealed-- sealed cattle trucks.  INT: Were there any guards around? KHM: No. No, we didn't see anybody. That is what-- what made us think that these trucks-- these people were left abandoned. I think there were some trains that were moving backwards and forwards somewhere or other. But I-- I don't remember seeing any people around. No.  INT: Did you-- KHM: Not outside the trucks.  INT: Did you have any guards with you at the time? KHM: Yes. There were guards. They were pushing us into the-- into the trucks. And the trucks that they-- I was pushed into, it became very apparent what the truck was, because it smelt of cheese. And we suddenly realized that that's going to be airtight. It didn't have any-- it didn't have any air come in whatsoever. You know, there-- there wasn't any spokes. There wasn't any slots. There wasn't any windows. The-- there was no barbed windows. There was just nothing. They were sealed trucks. And we-- at least we were pushed into that sealed truck, my group that I was together with. 
INT: Right. KHM: Pushed into that truck.  INT: We'll take a break now.  INT: [INAUDIBLE] Tape 14, Kitty Hart-Moxon, 9th of June, 1998. Kitty, you're in a place outside of Bergen in northern Germany somewhere. And you-- you've just been pushed into a truck by your guards, your group. KHM: Yes. We-- we were pushed into this truck, and the truck was sealed. And it was-- it was absolute total darkness. And soon we realized that it was pretty airtight, because there-- there wasn't any opening. There wasn't any window. There wasn't-- there were no-- no bit that was barred. And it became-- within the shortest time-- it became incredibly stuffy inside. And the-- the walls were wet with perspiration, you know. There was just running-- running water, or condensation, shall I say, not-- condensation down the sides of the truck. People started to scream and shout, and eventually become unconscious. And I realized that there was only one way to have air, and that is to have a look on the floor. And sure enough, there were gaps in the truck. And you could actually see the track. You could see-- you could see through the gaps. And I-- I had a knife, which was a forbidden weapon for any prisoner. But I managed to enlarge a crack. And my mother and I took it in turns to breathe through this crack. And believe me, this was the worst experience of the whole war, because at that stage we thought we were going to suffocate. And no way were we going to get out of this truck alive. People were getting unconscious, and some were dying, and-- 
INT: Was the truck moving? KHM: Eventually the truck moved. But it didn't go very far. Now we didn't know whether it moved because they were loading other people in from different places. And eventually it stopped. We didn't know where it stopped. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] And it became very quiet. And people were becoming extremely drowsy. And really at that stage everybody thought that we were going to die, because we were just left abandoned. There wasn't a sound from outside. If you were quiet, it was total silence. There wasn't a sound. Don't ask me how many hours we were there. We were-- impossible to say. We were in total darkness. And it could have been hours. It could have been 24 hours. I don't know. Suddenly we heard some footsteps, like on a gravel. It was obviously gravel outside. And you could hear footsteps-- not many, but some footsteps. And it certainly wasn't a lot of people. So it wasn't people being loaded in or anything like that. And as we heard these footsteps, as they became closer, we started screaming and shouting and banging at the side of the truck, open up, open up, because we are all suffocating in here! Open up! And suddenly, for some unknown reason I'm sure-- never know, one man began to unbolt the truck from the outside. We could hear-- because it was actually nailed to. We could-- we could hear some-- some nails of something going in as they were hammering it and-- and closing as a sort of iron bar. And all of a sudden we heard this release of this bar. And-- and there was this one SS man. And he opened up the-- the truck. And we were all pressing against the wall of the truck. And believe you me, everybody that was alive just fell out of the truck. And we fell out on-- on two or three men. I can't remember. It was two or three. And there were just these three men in green uniforms. And we fell onto them, fell straight out. And they were startled. Of course they didn't know what they had done, possibly. We were no longer in the same siding. We were seemed to have been elsewhere. And when we got out we were screaming and shouting and saying, kill us now! Just kill us here! We're not going back into this truck. We want to-- we want to be killed. And my mother got up, in her best German said, we want-- we demand to be taken into a concentration camp. So we actually begged to be taken into a camp at that stage. By that time nobody really wanted anything but breathing air. Nobody wanted a food or drink. All we wanted is to be able to breathe. And so these men conferred. And one of them went off in a bicycle. And he said he knew of a camp nearby, and he'd speak to the commandant. And if the commandant is willing to take us, they will take us there. And do you know, this was the only truck from this whole train that was opened. They didn't open another truck. And there were-- there was no sound from-- from-- from the other trucks at all. Now I now know where the siding was, because I actually went to see it two years ago outside the town of Salzwedel. There was-- there was a-- a-- a-- a siding with-- and-- and there were five lines there, apparently, five railway lines. And there were some five trains full of prisoners which were left abandoned. And these-- these corpses were found after the war. And the population of Salzwedel actually had to bury some of these people that they found in these trains that were sealed. And we were one of-- the one truck that was opened. There-- there were-- there were other trains that were brought to this siding, people that were taken to a place called Gardelegen, where they had the most huge, enormous massacre of men. And maybe I tell you that at a different stage, about the Gardelegen massacre. But some of the prisoners from Gardelegen were also on-- on this-- brought to this particular siding. And so I will tell you more about this siding. The result was that they-- they marched-- those that could still walk, because we lost quite a lot of people in this truck. Quite a lot of girls died during the period that we were locked in in that truck. We were taken to the small camp of Salzwedel, which was indeed just on the outskirts of the town. And it was a small work camp. And most of the prisoners, women prisoners who-- who were in that camp, came from the Lódz ghetto. And they worked in a chemical plant. But there were also some Hungarian girls. And they worked in a sugar refinery. And this is where I think we arrived, around about the beginning of April of 1945. 
INT: How many of the original 100 girls were in that group arriving? KHM: Well, I think we were around about 12, because we lost-- we lost most of them when we were segregated and divided outside Porta Westfalica. Because there, during this commotion, a lot of the Auschwitz girls got on to one side, and the ones that were in the-- in the-- in the other group, as I said, were machine gunned. So we have lost-- we-- we-- we-- at liberation we were around about a dozen Auschwitz-- original Auschwitz group at liberation.  INT: So we're at the beginning of April. KHM: We-- we come to the beginning of April.  INT: Did you walk? Who guarded you to this-- to Salzwedel? KHM: Well, the-- the-- the men who actually opened the truck took us into the camp of Salzwedel. And we were just dumped in in this camp. There wasn't any room for us there anyway.  INT: Were they glad to get rid of you? KHM: I should think so because the-- they couldn't get us back into the truck. They would have had to kill us. Or maybe at that stage they didn't want to do that, because it was pretty well the end of the war. And so they thought the best thing was to dump us in the next camp. And that was the nearest camp. And we were literally on the outside of the town. The siding was on the outside of-- outskirts of Salzwedel, because I've actually been to see the siding, where all these trains were left abandoned. 
INT: Did any of the local population see you at this stage? KHM: Not-- not at this stage. No, we were-- we were marched straight into the camp. And there was no more work in progress. Obviously the-- the-- the front was very close. And there were fighting. There were artillery-- by that time there was artillery fire. And we knew the front was very close. We didn't know who the front was-- were they British, were they Russian, were they Americans. We didn't know. We had no contact with a-- with-- with any civilian population whatsoever. The-- the girls who worked in the factories no longer worked, you see. They had all work-- there was no more work in progress. The-- everything had stopped. And they were just-- in-- in the camp there was no more food, in fact, handed out as such. There-- they were-- they were throwing in heaps of cabbages and raw beet. But-- but no food ration. That there just wasn't any more food available.  INT: Who was throwing in the food? KHM: From the SS stores they brought in cartloads of-- of cabbages, and sugar beet. And this is-- this is what we lived on the last two weeks of the war. But what happened in that camp was we realized that some of the girls that were in this camp were in a pretty good condition. Well, in a not too bad condition, shall I say. Of course, many of them were on a starvation diet, just like everywhere else. And they worked in the chemical factory. But there was a group of girls that worked in the sugar refinery. And we, some of our Auschwitz girls, realized somewhere in this camp there is food. Now we didn't know where. And we decided we've really got to have a look who hordes food and why and where. And if they do, they'd have to share it. And so one night we went on a raiding party into one of the neighboring huts, and overpowered some of the Hungarian girls who were working the sugar refinery, and found that they were hoarding sugar in their bunks. And so we had a fight. And our raiding party succeeded in obtaining some sugar. So the last few days in the camp we lived on some of the sugar that we raided off some of the girls that were hording the-- the food. 
INT: Did that create any animosity amongst-- KHM: Oh, yes. Oh, oh, yes. Enormous animosity, that's right. There were fights. But at that stage, there wasn't any more food in the camp. And whatever food there was had to be shared out.  INT: Were these Hungarian Jewish ladies? KHM: I think they were Hungarian working in the-- the-- yes. Because all the Lódz girls were working in the chemical plant. So I think there were-- the Hungarian-- a group of Hungarians were working in the sugar refinery. That's what we think, of, you know. Going by the language that they spoke, we'd concluded they were Hungarian.  INT: Who was responsible for sharing out the sugar when you discovered where it was? KHM: No, no, no. We're not sharing out sugar. There wasn't such thing as sharing out sugar. We simply stole it from them. No, no, no they-- they were not going to share it at all. We had to fight for it. Yes. There was actually a fight, yes, a battle between the prisoners over-- over some of the--  INT: How many people involved in that? KHM: I don't know. I don't know. But our raiding party was the whole Auschwitz party. We-- we-- we did-- we instigated the raid. [DRINKS]  INT: Were you joined by any others? KHM: No, we-- we think the others still had some provisions when they were working in the chemical plant.  INT: What did people do all day in this camp? KHM: Nothing at all anymore. Everybody was just sitting around, wandering around. Most people were dazed by that time, because they were-- as I say, food-- there just wasn't any more bread. Bread was life as far as-- 
INT: What about water? KHM: --rations were concerned. There wasn't any running water. There were tubs of water, buckets of water. But there wasn't any running water. Not-- not water that we could have access to, anyway.  INT: Where did this water come from? KHM: I don't-- couldn't tell you. It was probably polluted. But nobody cared at that stage. It wasn't-- it wasn't handed out as such.  INT: And what was the physical condition of the guards at that time? KHM: Oh, the guards? You're talking about the German guards? Oh, their physical condition was, the-- the SS guards-- they-- they were still patrolling and coming in and out. But they-- they-- they were not patrolling the camp too much. And now and again the camp was left totally unguarded on the inside. We didn't see any ruling hierarchy anymore, nor the prisoner hierarchy. So we don't know whether they actually had a hierarchy, as they had in another camp, or whether they had kapos or whatever. I don't know. We were the-- only there really literally a fortnight. But the next thing that happened was that the-- the-- the guards no longer began to come into the camp. Gradually they came in in civilian clothes. And so we realized, why are they coming in not in uniform? The next thing that happened is that-- and that was probably a few days prior to liberation by that time. Oh, there was-- there was a battle, not far, raging-- obviously the front was not far away, because bullets were flying, you know, and grenades right through the camp. And you had to duck and lie and dodge the-- the-- the actual front, the actual battle that was going on not all that far away. 
INT: Did you see any military? KHM: Not-- not at that-- no, no. We didn't see any military. All we heard was the whistling of the bullets and that were flying around. And it was very dangerous to actually be about. And some people actually got-- I don't know if they got killed. But they certainly got injured at that point. And so therefore, even the SS personnel no longer wanted to come into the camp. About a few days prior to liberation, a lot of leaflets began to-- scattered leaflets become to appear from nowhere. And these leaflets came from liberated French prisoners of war. There was a large French prisoner of war camp, also, prisoners working somewhere in the-- in the plants and things. And they had already been liberated. That's talking about a few days prior to liberation, but-- but somewhere not far from the camp. And these leaflets said that the whole camp was mined, and they were intending to blow up the camp.  INT: The camp you were in. KHM: Yes, that camp. They were going to blow it up prior to liberation, prior to being liberated by the Allies, because the order was that no prisoners were to fall into Allied hands, as you know, alive. No prisoners were to be allowed to be liberated. They also said that they were going to cut the electric fence at a certain stage when they knew it was safe to do that. And we were just sitting there tense waiting for something to happen, either to be blown up, or to be liberated, or what-- we knew something was very near. But many of us were too dazed by that time to really take an awful lot of notice. I remember sitting [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] at a fence looking out at the SS stores, because there were SS kitchens just the other side of the fence. And you could actually see whole rows of loaves, bread. You could see it. And it was just across the fence-- across the electrified fence, that is. And I was sitting there. I was sitting there for days, I think, just staring at this bread. By that time we were too weak to even walk around. Because we, you know, been going on for two weeks with hardly any food by that time. No way to organize, apart from a bit of sugar that we managed to organize from-- from these women. And you couldn't eat the-- the rotten sugar beet that were being thrown in, because you-- you would have been sick. And then about 24 hours prior to what happened next, one of the SS ventured into the camp.
And he didn't carry a gun. Well, that was quite apparent. Well, for a start, we knew that there was something up when they were not-- no longer carrying guns. They were no longer armed. Some of us threw ourselves onto this one lone SS personnel, and we tore his uniform to shreds. And as we tore his uniform, we all threw ourselves at this man, because he didn't have a firearm. He had a dagger on-- on this side. And I grabbed his dagger. I wasn't going to kill him at that stage, obviously, because we didn't know what was going to happen. But I-- I did manage to grab his dagger. At that point I think I grabbed it, because I knew if I didn't, he might kill us. But he was no longer armed. Anyway, we-- we-- we-- we actually beat him up, and tore all his clothes off him. And he escaped. And he got out. And that was possibly the last of the SS that we saw. What I learned after the war was that the commandant was actually quite a-- a decent sort of commandant. And he refused the order to blow up the camp. He refused it, because if he hadn't refused it, we would have been blown up, because the whole place was mined. Now we didn't know if the French prisoners of war had actually cut the wires. No one was prepared to touch the wires, because it meant instant death and suicide. And we-- we were just sitting there waiting. And it became deathly quiet. There was no more artillery-- nothing. And we thought, well, the-- the-- the front has moved, because there was no more artillery. There was no more shooting. There was no more firing, no more bullets flying. But what we didn't know, what we learned later, is that the town had capitulated actually. That we learned later. This is why it was quiet. The-- the-- the-- the actual town, the-- the-- the actual citizens of the town apparently negotiated with the German units and persuaded them not to fight and to destroy the town. Because there would have been total destruction of the town. And the town capitulated. And we didn't know this at the time. But the very next thing that happened was some very strange tanks started to move past the fence. And I was still standing there, sitting there, rather, watching the loaves, not taking any notice of anything else. Just mesmerized and hypnotized, looking at the loaves, waiting for a minute for anyone to say the high tension is off, or something. But the next thing that happened is somebody shook me and said, look. Look at these tanks. These are not German tanks. They've got a star. And we didn't know what the star was. But they were American tanks. And they just were just rolling past, and didn't even notice us. And there were screams and shouts, and everybody was screaming and shouting. And all of a sudden, out of nowhere, a tank just drove through the perimeter, right through the gate of the-- of-- and broke the fence. And it came straight into the camp. The first American tank came in. And that was the point of liberation. Now at that point I smashed the window of the SS stores. That was the first thing I did. I didn't even take any notice of these Americans. And I got into the SS stores, and I came out with a handful of loaves which were just across the fence of-- of-- of the-- of the perimeter of the fence. On the other side were the SS stores. And behind me was a mob-- mob of hundreds of women that threw themselves on me. And I eventually managed one loaf, which I managed. And I run back to my mother. And that was the first piece of bread, or first piece of food that I'd seen for two weeks-- or perhaps three weeks. Might have been three weeks. And that was the point of liberation. 
INT: What did you do immediately after that point, when you'd had your loaf with your mother? KHM: Well, we sat and chewed and chewed and chewed, as I say. And my mother kept saying, don't eat so much. Don't eat so much, because you're going to be ill. And, you know, we mustn't eat when our stomachs are not accustomed to eat. Just a little bit. Just a little bit. I know the gates were open. And what we didn't know is that there were quite a lot of forced labor camps, and Poles, and, well, who, who in the surrounding area also working in different munition plants. And they had already been liberated some days previously to us. We were the last lot to be liberated. And they had been looting the town. And so when our gates opened we joined all the people that were pouring into this small town of Salzwedel. And our first [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] thoughts were to destroy everything that came in our wake, everything that we saw. We had to destroy it. We didn't want anything. The only thing we really needed at that point was food. Everything else had to be destroyed. Now my mother, my mother was very weak at that point. In any case, she couldn't have no longer gone-- I didn't know where we found strength to do that. Because by the time I was weighed eventually and examined, I weighed some 5 stone. So my-- my mother was incredibly weak, and she could hardly walk by that time. But she did manage to get to-- to the outside of the gates and speak to the Americans. And her report from those very first days was almost the very first report that went out about Auschwitz to-- to the outside world. Because don't forget Auschwitz were liberated by the Russians. There was no communication with a-- with a-- what happened over on the Russian side. People didn't really know what had happened in Auschwitz. We were one of the first lot to be liberated on the 14th of April, because Belsen wasn't liberated till the 15th of April. Some places were not liberated until May. So we were almost one of the first to be liberated. There were one or two other pockets of places that were liberated. My-- my-- but my mother's report was one of the very first that went out, because she could speak English as well. So she was just sitting there talking and explaining all about Auschwitz, and all about what happened. But I joined the crowd into the city of-- into the little town of Salzwedel on a three-day rampage, which went on from morning to night, from house to house.
And we went from house to house. Mostly the population was hiding in cellars and in lofts. And some of them had left the town. We-- well, we did the most incredible things. We-- we got into a milk dairy, or something, and we upset all the churns, and actually bathed in milk, and drank it with our hands, and upset it all, just-- just to destroy it. We got into people's apartments and set fire to it, and just destroyed everything in our wake. We-- we didn't really want anything. We did look for food-- food-- mostly-- In one place we dislodged a bath. I remember that-- a bathtub. We got it into the street. And we filled it with jams and sugar and bread and provisions, and brought it all back to the camp. So all we were in search of was food. But really, the purpose was just to go on the rampage and vent our anger at whoever there was. Now we got in-- I got into, with a group of people, I got into one house. And we-- we couldn't-- we couldn't see anybody, but we could hear some voices. And they were all in the air raid shelter, in a-- in a cellar. And when we got down there, it was semi-darkness, really. And there was a group of people huddled in one corner. You couldn't really see who they were. But vaguely you could tell there were one or two children there. There were some women. There were some elderly men there. And when we got into there, we were on the point of killing. There was no doubt about that. All we wanted was revenge. And I was the only person that had a dagger. And I was urged on, come on, we must kill. We're here. We've got to kill them. And then, of course, when these people in the corner saw us, they-- they started screaming, and children started crying. And suddenly I realized there was the sound of these children crying, which I'd heard before, children crying on the point of death. And I thought, no, no way can I do the same thing as I've seen being done to others. I can't kill. I don't know if these children-- they're innocent. They may be innocent. These people might be innocent. I'm not going to kill them. And I was urged on by the mob to kill. And the next thing I remember is I took this dagger, and I threw it in a different direction. And it actually hit a door, and it sort of stuck in the door. And I-- I just threw myself down and started crying. And these-- these Germans all came up to me and started shaking my hand, you know, thanking me for what I've not done, I take it. And-- and all the people behind me started moving out. And I just ran out of there and went straight into another place. So we were on the point of killing, but we didn't do it. 
INT: At that point we'll stop.  INT: Today's date is June the 21st. This is a continuation of an interview started on June the 9th. The survivor is Kitty Hart-Moxon. The interviewer is Corrine Oppenheimer. And we are in Birmingham, England. And the language spoken is English. Tape 15, Kitty Hart. June the 21st, 1998. Kitty, you have been liberated after a-- a-- a long trail, and you are somewhere in North Germany. Where was that? KHM: Well, this was a little town called Salzwedel, not all that far from Bergen-Belsen.  INT: Right. Did you know what was happening with the war at this point? KHM: No, we had no idea what was happening with the war. We naturally knew the front was very close, because shells were penetrating the camp already a few days prior to liberation. We knew the front couldn't have been far. But we didn't know who it was. We didn't know who the Allies were. Were they the German-- the Americans, were they the French, were they the Russians, or were they the British? We had absolutely no idea. It was a total surprise when we saw an American tank come through the gates of the camp.  INT: And did you speak to anyone at that point? KHM: I did actually-- I already said before that I was totally mesmerized, looking at the SS stores, and I didn't even see the tanks pass. By that time, we hadn't eaten for about two weeks. And all I could see were loaves of bread across the SS stores. And I was just sitting there, watching these-- these loaves, waiting for something to happen. And it wasn't until someone actually tapped me on the shoulder and said, look, can you see what's passing by, that I turned around, and I-- I saw these tanks that were actually just passing the camp and didn't-- didn't even see us and didn't even take any notice. And then suddenly, one tank burst through the camp, and we realized that these were actually American forces that came to liberate us. 
INT: What happened then? KHM: Most of us made a beeline for the town itself, those that were still able to walk. Many people were too weak or were just lying around. My mother couldn't go. But she'd got outside the gates, and she was one of the first speaking to reporters and talking about Auschwitz, which at that time, of course, was liberated by the Russians. It was behind enemy lines, sort of, and there was absolutely no news filtering through. So she was one of the first people to give reports to the world press. But--  INT: Who were the world press? Were they military people, or-- KHM: Well, there were-- there were American reporters. Yes. That came to interview people that could actually talk. But most of us went onto this rampage into the town of Salzwedel. And I think I have already explained one or two incidents that happened in the little town of Salzwedel.  INT: Who were the people in Salzwedel? Were they Americans? KHM: No. Those were the German population.  INT: Yes. KHM: We rampaged through the city. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] And I think I explained on previous-- on the 9th of June, I gave you an account of what happened in one house, where I almost killed some of the people that were hiding in the cellar. So I will just carry on from there and give you more details of what happened in this town. We went from place to place, setting fire to some of the contents. And, of course, we didn't really want anything. We just simply went on a-- on a rampage of destruction. There-- there were people that hadn't been in the camp too long, and they were absolutely transformed. They took clothes and shoes, and immediately they-- they looked different. But people like myself and my friends, my Auschwitz friends, we simply just looked for food, nothing else. We didn't really want anything else. And that went on-- 
INT: What sort of food did you find? KHM: Well, we-- we were looking-- of course we were looking for bread, but we found sugar and jam and provisions. And we loosened up a bathtub in one place and filled it up and dragged it back to the camp. That went on for about three or four days. In one house, incidentally, in one house, I-- I-- there was a woman. And she-- she had something in the-- in the bed. We tried out beds, because, you know, we hadn't been lying in beds for years, so we wanted to see what it was like in the-- to lie in a proper bed. And there was something hard. And I put-- picked up a picture of the fuhrer, Hitler. And I said to this woman, what is this? You know. She said, oh my god, my fuhrer, my fuhrer. Please don't destroy this picture. And I remember, I just smashed this into thousands of pieces, and we ran out of this house. And as I said, this rampage went on for days. And there wasn't really anything left. The population was hiding, you know, in the cellars. And they must have taken most of the stuff with them into the cellars. And they were barricaded in the houses. But on about the third or fourth day-- the third day, I think. My mother said, look, you-- you've been there so many times. You're still barefoot. How about finding a pair of shoes? And I also need a pair of shoes or something to cover ourselves up with, a blanket. So on this third day, I found two blankets, which I brought back. And I was looking for some shoes. And we got into a shoe shop, and it was absolutely stuffed with boxes. And there weren't any shoes. I mean, there were just, literally, empty boxes. In-- in the end, I found two-- two men's shoes, two left shoes, which I brought back to the camp. My mother said, what am I going to do with this? Two left shoes? I need a right and a left. Anyway, we-- we-- we kept these-- these men's shoes. And then later on, in the DP camp, in the cobbler's workshop, which I helped to set up, they actually-- they transformed the left into a right, and I had a right and a left. And so we-- we actually looted nothing whatsoever, just two blankets. After that came a decree, of course, you know, that this rampage had to stop. And all people were confined to the camp. Our camp was then burned down. And we were there, watching the ceremony. And we were transferred to-- I think to the airport, the former aerodrome, where they billeted us.
And I was taken, and my mother, to interpret for the American forces. Now, I recall going into a-- a room with high-ranking American officers and some Russian officers. And on the table was a huge map. And I was asked to translate for the Russians and for the Americans. I could just understand and speak a little bit of Russian at that time. And they were actually carving up the territory around there and drawing lines on the map, which was going to be east, which was going to be west. How far the Americans were going to-- to-- to remain and how far the Russians were going to come forward. And they decided to hand the town over to the Russians. They drew a line. And Salzwedel was almost a border town of East Germany and West Germany. And that became, in fact, the-- the-- the-- the East Sector, the-- later on, the GDR, the Democratic Republic, the Communist part of Germany. And the Americans were going to withdraw or go forward to-- to-- to the south of the country. Because they were still fighting, don't forget. There was still a war on. Of course we became very alarmed at that, most of us. And we didn't want to stay with the Russians. So we begged the Americans to take us with them. And so we left practically on-- on the very last American tank, further to the west. And eventually, we-- we asked them to drop us at the-- at the British sector, which was-- by that time, established the British sector. And for the-- the British Army of the Rhine took over the town of Brunswick, and we asked them to drop us there. And so some of our Auschwitz-- original Auschwitz group, there were about eight of us, stayed in Brunswick. And we almost immediately were taken over by the British military government and worked for the-- for the occupying forces. It was the 822 British Army on the Rhine, military government. And I worked for a Major Wilson, who was in charge of this unit, and the same with my mother. And we did quite a lot of work there. And they billeted us in a house in Brunswick. Well, soon after that, we were requested to move to the aerodrome a-- a section of Brunswick called Broitzem because they were going to establish a huge, huge displaced persons camp there. Actually, it was meant to be a Polish camp, Assembly Center 296 or something. And it was nicknamed Gypsy, but-- Gypsy Camp, by the-- by the authorities. But it wasn't a gypsy camp, of course. It was really for Poles, for Polish forced laborers, who were all around that area, to be repatriated back to Poland. But of course they came under the heading of displaced persons. And we didn't know who these people were. There were not many concentration camp survivors there, because there was Belsen not all that far away. And of course, most of them were still in Belsen, the-- the survivors. 
INT: What date would this be now? KHM: I-- I think that was-- I would say we're going into May '45, possibly almost into June '45. The-- the-- the Quaker Relief Team, RST 100, were the very first Quaker-- were the very first relief team following the Army into Belsen. And they did a lot of relief work in Belsen. And then of course UNRRA moved in, other relief organizations moved in. And this unit, the Quaker Relief Team, were asked to set up this displaced persons camp. And they needed somebody like myself and my mother to interpret, and Henya, my friend, as well. She could speak a little bit of English by that time. And so about seven or eight of us moved into the DP camp, and we became the official interpreters to the Quaker Relief Team.  INT: Were you paid for this work? KHM: I think I was paid a nominal sort of sum. I can't remember in what currency, actually.  INT: Did you have accommodations? KHM: Yes, we had very good accommodation. And food was scarce, actually. It wasn't particularly good. But we were certainly not starving. Food was difficult in Brunswick while we were working for the British, because we were sort of living among the Germans, and we-- we had no access to food. So we were better off in the DP camp, actually. That was a very interesting time, actually, in the DP camp. Because we helped to set up. Not only, of course, did we work to try and persuade the Poles to go back home. Many of them didn't want to go. A, they were afraid to go back to-- under communism, and many had other reasons for not wanting to go back. And we were afraid that they were also-- under the guise of displaced persons were a lot of former SS people, Ukrainians, Lithuanians, ethnic sort of Germans. But of course, it was very difficult to say who was who. We set up a large registration office, and I was actually working. My boss, one-- one of the Quaker chaps who set up this, he was-- he-- I was his interpreter, and we set up the registration office. I actually worked in that registration office, because you-- you also had to interpret there. We had staff working there already, you know, from the DP camp. But-- but-- you-- you did need people who could actually communicate also liaison with the-- with the-- the Quaker relief team. And it-- it was a very important part of the displaced camp, because we registered people, and we reunited a lot of families. Because people from all over came to look for their relatives or whatever. And we had this proper registration system. So that was the very first thing that we set up. We then set up all kinds of other things, like a cobbler's workshop, a tailor's workshop, to keep these people occupied. And schools for the-- there were quite a lot of children there. We set up some schools and got the DP people themselves to do some teaching. And my mother was incredibly busy, because she immediately started to teach English. And she set up English classes in the DP camp. We were both sent on the welfare course, which was very nice, an-- an UNRRA welfare course, somewhere in the south. And so we had a little bit of training. I-- 
INT: Did you-- sorry. KHM: Sorry.  INT: Can you tell me the name of your-- your boss in this? KHM: Oh, yeah, my-- the name of my boss was [? Errol ?] [? Hall ?] Williams. He'd studied law and then joined the Quakers as a-- as a relief worker. My mother's boss was a-- a lady called Jane Levison. She was a Jewish Quaker, actually, a social worker who joined the Quakers because that was the only way she could quickly come to do some relief work. And she was eventually responsible for getting us to England. My mother was her interpreter, you know. So she-- my mother was going-- going with her, and I was going with [? Hall ?] Williams. One of the very-- in the very early days, I realized that what I must do to try and document what actually happened to me and my mother. And so very early on, I set about of writing a small-- a-- a small sort of account. I couldn't write English too well. I couldn't actually write German at all. I didn't want to particularly write it in Polish, so I-- I did it as best I could in-- in English. And this was really the very first-- the beginning of me documenting of what happened. But I realized I must do-- do it immediately, because so many things had happened. And while it was fresh in our minds, and the same with my mother, we-- we decided we have to set something down, pen to paper. We worked in the DP camp for-- well, from about probably oh, May, June '45 until September 1946. In the meantime, we tried very hard to locate members of our family. We've tried-- there was a very large tracing center in a place called Arolsen. And I-- I traveled all around Germany, with my friend Henya, to most of the DP camps, just trying to locate people. See where our friends are, who is alive, any relatives, if there's any news of my father and of my brother. And so we did an awful lot of searching around and tracing. And it soon became apparent that there is no one alive. 
INT: Who-- who took you around? How did you get around? KHM: Oh, it was amazing. We simply-- Henya and I, we used to board trains. And without any money, without any tickets, we simply showed our concentration camp number, and doors were opened for us. And we just went into the trains and traveled around.  INT: This is by the-- the nationals-- German nationals? KHM: Everywhere.  INT: Everyone. KHM: Everywhere. Everywhere we had a free hand. We also hitchhiked lifts everywhere, from the army, from the-- the French. Well, you were not supposed to go onto the French side and onto the German side, but we-- we traveled all over. We went onto the American side and visited most of the DP camps on-- on the-- in the American-- in the southern sector of Germany. We've been far north. We-- we traveled all around. And we simply checked into the nearest DP camp and searched for people and stayed the night and then carried on.  INT: In your-- in your base camp in Broitzem-- KHM: Yes?  INT: --were there many Jewish people? KHM: No, there were very few. Because the main Jewish camp, of course, was in Belsen, you see? So there were very few of us. There was just a-- a handful of the-- of-- of the girls, really, the original girls. And who were asked to come there to interpret. It was by and large a Polish repatriation camp. But of course-- and of course, we-- we actually took these people to the trains. Because there-- there-- there was a-- a terminal there somewhere. And the trains came right in, and we decorated the coaches with green and branches, you know, for them to-- to-- to welcome these Poles and try to get them to go home. And many of them did. We did manage to persuade. We used to go around from hut to hut and persuade people to go home. You know, telling them there's time they go home to their families. Most of them had their families there. There was no reason why they shouldn't go home. Oh, it was difficult for us. I mean, some had political reasons, I suppose. But others had economic reasons. Others had criminal reasons they didn't want to go back, you see? So there-- there were people with different reasons. But something I must really tell you what happened early on. When the trials of the SS women and the SS commandants in Belsen took place, which took place, I think-- I think it was Lubeck, but I couldn't be-- I couldn't swear to this. The-- north of-- not all that far from Brunswick and not all that far from Belsen. We-- we got to know that there was going to be the trial. And of course they hung the the-- commandant of Belsen, Kramer, and I think they hung one or two SS women as well. And some of them had been given heavy life sentences. But we didn't realize that there was also a commandant of Auschwitz, named Hossler, who was on trial. 
INT: Where was this? KHM: Well that was-- I think it was Lubeck where the trials were-- I-- I don't know the exact town. I think it was a place called Lubeck. I don't know what the other town was called. Anyway, northern Germany. They held the trials, the British. It was in the British sector, anyway. We-- my mother and I decided we really ought to go-- really get up there. And the-- the reason was that this man, Hossler, although he participated in many selections, at the ramp, no doubt. I didn't see it, but he must have done. He was quite a lenient sort of man. And he actually saved my life by transferring me at the crucial moment from the crematoria back to the camp and onto the transport with my mother. And I just felt we need to go and speak up for him. But I'm afraid when we got there, they didn't want to hear. They didn't want to know, and we were not even allowed to-- to proceed.  INT: Who were they, didn't want to know? KHM: I couldn't tell you. I don't know. At the-- at the place where the trial took place. It was the tribunal, the main tribunal. And he was hung. So that was the end of Hossler.  INT: And this was 1946? KHM: I think it could have still been in 1945. Yes.  INT: All right. Right. Can we talk a little bit about your mother and yourself? What was your health condition like immediately after the war? KHM: Well, my-- I-- I was not sick in any sense of the word, but I had lost an awful lot of weight. And by-- by the time we were examined and medically examined by the Americans, incidentally, still, I weighed about five stone. So I'd-- I lost most of my body weight, half my body weight. My mother was-- was in poor health by that time. She also lost the same as me, an awful lot of weight. And she-- it was apparent that her health had deteriorated, very much so. And she never, never really fully recovered. She'd had blood pressure problems and heart problems ever since the time of liberation. And it transpired that she'd also had TB, which she didn't even know. 
INT: How old was your mother at the end of the war? KHM: Oh, she was-- she was 55, yes. So you know, she was no longer young. Yes. And she was-- she certainly wasn't in good enough-- in good health anymore to pursue any career or occupation sort of after the war. She was all right interpreting and still teaching in the DP camp, but it was apparent she wasn't going to be able to do that for very long.  INT: Were you given any medical attention? KHM: Oh, in-- in the first instance, by-- by the Americans, we were given a lot of medical attention. Because there-- we all had these horrible boils all over. And I-- I had a-- a huge, huge boil somewhere here, on my temple. And that had to be lanced. And so yes, the-- the American military, the military gave us quite a lot of medical attention. We were X-rayed, and yes. And-- and of course, they tried to feed us too much. I remember there-- there was a time when they stood over us and said, you eat five eggs. You know. There was no way could-- could we do that. So a-- a-- a lot of it, of course, they didn't quite know how to handle. Yes. But a lot of people were taken to hospital in Salzwedel, and a lot of-- a lot of the women died after the war in the hospital in Salzwedel. In fact, somewhere I have a list of the ones that died after the war. There's still a list available. It was handed to me when I went to Salzwedel, to a reunion in 1996. 
INT: Did-- did you ever spend any time in hospital at that-- at that time? KHM: No. No.  INT: Did your mother? KHM: No, no. We-- we didn't. No.  INT: Were there any children around at this point? KHM: Well, there were a lot of Polish children around in the DP camp. I-- I don't know who they were. There must have been women that gave birth during that time, as they were forced laborers. But Poles were all forced laborers, you see, that had been taken to Germany. So there were quite a lot of-- not very small children. There were sort of-- yes. I don't remember very tiny children. There-- there-- of course there were post-war children, don't forget, as well. Yes, they were giving birth.  INT: What about-- what about Jewish children? KHM: There were no Jewish children in-- in the-- in this-- in this DP camp in Brunswick, none at all. Oh, perhaps-- perhaps one, I think. I recall one. In-- in fact, I don't think he was a Jewish child. He came over to England after. So I think he was a Polish child. He came over to England. I met him in England, some years afterwards.  INT: Did you see any Jewish children at all in the DP camps on your travels? KHM: Very few. Very, very few. One or two, mostly young girls that-- young girls and young boys in the American sector. No, very few. Mind you, we didn't look out for the children. We were looking-- we were looking for adult friends and relatives. But of course, soon it came apparent, you see, that-- that no one of my family was alive. We-- we made contact with the-- with the town, with Bielsko. We wrote to the community. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] We did have some information pretty soon that none of my family had actually come back to the town. Because if-- if anybody had been alive, that's the first place they would have gone, to the Jewish community, to register that they are alive, and they hadn't. 
INT: Did you try to go back to your hometown? KHM: No, my mother would never let me go back. That's one thing she didn't want me to do. She didn't-- no--  INT: Did she ever tell you why? KHM: Well, she said there was nothing to go back to. I mean, she just couldn't bear the-- the memories. She just didn't want to go. And she didn't want me to go. And it wasn't until she died in 1974 that soon after that, I actually made the first trip back.  INT: Did you ever-- were you ever aware of survivors with any mental illness at that stage? KHM: Yes, I think so. There were-- there was a lot of mental problems. I think so, yes.  INT: Did you actually know anyone who committed suicide at that stage? KHM: No. Everybody was too glad to be alive. Although of course they knew-- they didn't know what the future was going to hold. But no, I-- I don't recall anyone actually committing suicide.  INT: What about female survivors? Were there more or less than male survivors? KHM: I think so. I think I've-- I've always felt that more women survived than men. Because women somehow managed to look after one another. And as I've mentioned before, it was almost impossible to survive on your own. And men were not very good at forming sort of families and looking after one another. And women took humiliation better than men as well. Although they were not treated any better than the men. I think more women survived. I don't know what the statistics say, but it seemed to be so when we went around the camps. We saw more girls and more women than men. 
INT: Can you recall any problems, health problems, that they had? KHM: Well, they-- most people had some health problems. I mean, my-- my main health problem is that I lost most of my teeth, because a lot of my teeth had to be extracted, because I had holes made, you know, so that I could go and see the dentist. I had these diamonds in my teeth. And so a lot of people actually lost their teeth because of the diet as well. So that-- that was one of the main health problems, I think, they've had.  INT: Right. KHM: I must just tell you that we then had information about my father. The next thing that came through was that my father was discovered where he was hiding. And he was lodging with a-- a farmer. And one day, they came for my father outside this town of Tarnow. And he was shot, and his body was thrown down a ravine. I went to have a look at this ravine last year.  INT: We'll take a break there, Kitty.  INT: Tape 16, Kitty Hart, 21st of June, 1998. You were telling me about finding out about your father. Was there anything else you found out about your father? KHM: No. We never really found out how he was found out. Whether he was denounced, or whether they found any of his documents that were not in order. I'm afraid we-- we could never get to the bottom of it. All we knew is that they shot him. 
INT: What about your brother? KHM: Well, I think I did explain that my brother left Lublin in 1939, with most of the young people, to-- to go east, hoping to get into Russia, or, via Russia, into Romania, like everybody else, and eventually either go to Palestine or go through China or somewhere and join the Allies. But of course, he got as far as a place called Lwow. And he stayed there for-- for some time. And that, in 1941, was then occupied by the Germans. When the Germans declared war and invaded the Soviet Union, they occupied Lwow. And my brother, I think he ran further into the Soviet Union. And we have got some documentation, and we've got some cards, postcards that came, via the Red Cross, to England, to my relatives in England. So he has written in 1940, 1941, and as-- as-- I think there is one card dated 1942, all the way from Samarkand, somewhere in the midst of the Soviet Union. Well, after that, we believe he was drafted into a Polish unit. Now, how we knew about that is a friend of my own friend-- a-- a brother of my friend, who lives in Sweden, was the commanding officer of this Polish unit. And my brother served under him. Now, this chap survived the war. And after the war, he told us what had happened, that my brother was drafted in, under his command, into a Polish unit. And he was fighting, a Polish unit under the Russian-- in the Russian Army, until 1943. And he died under the battle of Stalingrad. Because there was a siege of Stalingrad, and they were dug in there for I don't know how long. And one night, apparently, my brother went out to get something, I don't know what. And he was hit by a sniper. And he was killed. So he actually died on the Stalingrad, during the siege. But we don't know the date. 
INT: How did-- how did you find out this information? KHM: Well, we got from my friend's brother. My friend lives in Sweden. Her brother came back after the war, and he became quite a well-known commentator, sports commentator, in Warsaw. And he's-- he remained in Poland until 1956, I think, where the Poles purged all the Jews from their posts. And he then went to live in Germany, where he-- he now still lives in Germany. He's now in his 80s. He now lives in Germany. And he still worked for German television. And he gave the account of what-- what happened to my brother.  INT: And do you know his name? KHM: Yes. Yes. Konrad Gruda. Yes.  INT: How do you spell the last name? KHM: G-R-U-D-A.  INT: All right. And your friend's name? KHM: Oh, her name-- well, her name is [NON-ENGLISH]. She-- she was also in Russia during the war. And she married also a refugee. Her name-- and she lives in Stockholm. She was a dentist in Stockholm. That was her brother.  INT: Yes. And how did you make contact with her again after the war? KHM: I made contact with her after the war in-- in Bielsko. She came back to Bielsko, and she eventually studied dentistry in-- in Wroclaw, that's formerly Breslau. And her mother-- her mother was also a teacher of English, with my mother, together. They were very close. They were distant, sort of related, almost. And her mother became a professor of English. But they all had to emigrate, in 1956, when there was a purge of Jews in Poland. And they all left. They went to live in Sweden. 
INT: What were your hopes and special wishes for-- for you-- you yourself, after you were liberated? KHM: Well, because my mother decided we were not going back, and we-- we soon realized there are no-- there is no one alive from-- from Bielsko. If there is anyone alive, it is only people who had escaped pre-war or had gone to Russia, like those cousins of ours that were, at that time, at a-- on a frontier town. And they eventually got to America. And of course, my mother had a sister in Vienna, and they emigrated to Birmingham in 1938. So we realized that both my mother and I, we were totally on our own. And the-- the closest relatives were actually my mother's sister. And my mother, having studied in England, knew England well, and, of course, had a sister here, naturally thought that possibly this-- eventually this is where we will have to go.  INT: What was your aunt's name? KHM: My aunt's name was Dr. Muller, M-U-L-L-E-R. And she was at that time-- I'm sure-- she was a dentist, but she was also a doctor. She'd studied medicine and dentistry. Well, when she came over, she-- she actually worked as a doctor at the Birmingham Accident Hospital. So she-- she was actually working as-- as a surgeon at the time. Anyway, after much deliberations, we didn't quite know where we were going to be permitted to go. Because it was-- you know, we-- we were not-- it's blood relatives that I think had priority, if you had a mother or a father. If you were close like this. But of course I was a niece, so I wasn't considered close enough, and I was no longer a minor. I was 18. So naturally, we had to wait for some immigration or immigration policy. However, my mother, having worked, and myself as well, for the British military government, the American military government, for the Quaker Relief, from the minute of liberation, we had a very strong case for emigration. And Jane, who was, as I said, a Jewish Quaker, she had friends, MPs, who took up our case. And both my mother and I got special permits to actually come over to England in September 1946. But we also almost simultaneously had affidavits to go to the States. However, my mother decided we ought to go to England, because this is where she-- her closer relatives were. And this is how, one day, in September 1946, the Joint, American Joint, paid our fare, by train and boat, to come over to England. 
INT: Before we-- you go on with that, did you ever try, or did you ever wish to go to Palestine? KHM: Not at that stage. No.  INT: Was anyone else with you and your mother? KHM: Yes, quite a lot of girls went. Yes. They-- they-- they were on the boat that was then shipped to Cyprus. Yes.  INT: Mhm. So continue. What happened in September 1946? KHM: In September 1946, I left my friends behind in the DP camp, Henya and her sister. They-- they were-- we were very close by that time. And they didn't know where they were going to go. They hadn't-- they couldn't find their own relatives. They didn't want to go back home. And they eventually moved to the American sector, because the DP camp was gradually being wound up, and everybody moved pretty well south, to the southern part of Germany. Most of my friends went to a place called Feldafing, which was in the American-- DP camp in the American sector, southern Germany, outside Stuttgart, or some-- somewhere like this. But my mother and I were met in Dover, by my uncle, who-- the reason my uncle came, actually, to England, was that, pre-war, he had some business connections with a firm of Elkington's, which were jewelers, jewelers or some-- something. And he got permission to come to-- to Birmingham in 1938. And this is how he came to Birmingham. And he had already set up a small jewelry business in Birmingham. And my aunt was already working as a doctor. And they had two-- two daughters, two cousins of mine, which were not all that-- one was younger than me, and one was a little older than me. Anyway, my uncle met us in Dover. And he drove us-- and he-- he had his own car by that time. He drove us to London. And we stayed in London, which was incredibly confusing for me. Because the first time I-- I saw a city in years. Because Brunswick was totally destroyed, and all of Germany was just in ruins. And there it was, this hustle and bustle of shops and traffic lights and things that I'd never seen or couldn't remember. And my uncle made a remark, which altered the course of my life, I would say. He said the following. Just remember, in my house, I don't want you to say a word of what happened to you. I don't want to know. And I don't want my girls upset. This is what he-- these were his words. And from that moment on, I realized, one thing I must do, keep talking, even if it-- nobody wants to listen. You're just going to talk for the next 50 years. And I knew that's what I had to do. That was my duty. And it's really-- I knew I'd have to make enormous sacrifices. At that time, I-- I-- I didn't know how it-- I was going to do it. But I knew that somehow, in my life, I'd have to make a-- sacrifice my career or whatever. That I'd have to set time apart for educating people and telling them exactly what had happened. 
INT: What immigration status were you given when you arrived in this country? KHM: We were given-- we were given temporary permits, 12 months alien permits. And I was not allowed to take on any employment other than in a hospital. And my mother was not allowed to teach, naturally. Only-- the only employment she was allowed was as a domestic, domestic help. That was-- that was the proviso for the 12 monthly permit.  INT: Where did you actually live? KHM: Well, when we arrived, we-- we went to my uncle and my aunt's flat, which was a very nice, big flat, not all that far from here, in Edgbaston.  INT: Which city? KHM: Here, in Birmingham. Yes, it all happened in Birmingham. A mile away from where we are now, I would say.  INT: How did the rest of the family react to you? KHM: Well, I'm-- I'm afraid my cousins didn't relate to me, whatsoever. They practically ignored me. My older cousin, she was-- she was already going to university. My younger cousin was still in school. So they had their own friends, and I was sort of left on my own, and I was an outsider. And for-- for two or three weeks, I was just doing nothing at all. Just wandering around the town. Well, eventually, of course, I got to know there was this International-- Birmingham International Center, and that became just my-- my second home. And I spent most of my time there meeting people. 
INT: Did your mother go with you? KHM: No. My mother, well, immediately got a-- a-- a job in the same building where my uncle and aunt lived, in the same block of flats. It was a-- a widower, who had lost his wife, a Mr. [? Getzler. ?] He came from Vienna. He was an extremely nice man. And he-- and my mother became his housekeeper. And it-- it was a godsend for her, because, you know, she had this little house to keep. And he was such a nice chap, a very, very nice man. And in fact, he-- he-- his family were in Australia. And he was going to emigrate. And he wanted my mother to come. And he wanted to marry her. But my mother didn't want to go, because I-- by that time, I was already in training. And she didn't feel it was right to-- for me to be upset and relocate. And she wouldn't leave me. So she decided against it. And he eventually emigrated. And she had to take another job.  INT: Tell me about the International Club. Who did you meet there? KHM: Oh, I met so many people in the International Center. The only people I didn't meet were people who actually came out of the camps. I found that there wasn't anyone in Birmingham that I could relate to. In fact, at that time, all-- all I knew, people from the camps, was just one other person, and that was [? Magda, ?] [? Magda ?] [? Blum. ?] But of course she was adopted by a-- a family here in Birmingham and immediately had sort of her own family. And she didn't even come to the International Center. I just met her once or twice. So I had no one. I was pretty well an outsider. I didn't fit. I-- I had a feeling that I didn't actually fit in anywhere. There were no survivors, from the camps, in Birmingham except me, not at that time. Of course, we're talking about 1946, maybe they came later. None of it-- nobody of my age. There were a lot of refugees that came over in 1938, 1939. Most of them came from Germany and Austria and Czechoslovakia. And there was-- there was no one from Poland, so I-- I didn't-- 
INT: Did they ask about your experiences? KHM: No, no. I-- everywhere I went, I was met with a-- a total indifference. No one-- I would say, no one ever asked me one single question of what happened to me. Not one person. I couldn't-- I couldn't-- I couldn't possibly find one person that would have asked me one question in those days.  INT: Did you see a lot of your mother? Did you-- KHM: Yes, I saw a lot of my mother. Well, in 1940-- when I first came over, yes. Because she was in the same block. So we used to talk quite a lot about the past. An awful lot, because we both felt, you know, we must not forget. It was so easy to, you know, forget and get on with your life. But we knew, especially I knew, that I'd seen certain things that perhaps there's nobody alive, I don't know, that have seen what I've seen. I must document it. I must think about it. And soon, I must talk about it.  INT: Did any organization or any one person or group of people ever want to contact you about your experiences? KHM: Well, in those days-- we're talking about 1946?  INT: Mhm. KHM: No. All-- all I know is it was a very, very difficult time for me. Because, in 1946, I-- as I say, I was told, I was told, that I have to do something for my living. And this is not what I wanted to do. I wanted to go to school. I made this plain to my uncle, that what I wanted to do is I wanted to go to school. Because I'd lost six years or seven years of my schooling, of my most important years of schooling. I needed to go back to school. That was the first thing. But my uncle said, where are you going to live? Who is going to keep you? You know, I can't keep you. I've got two daughters. They're-- they're at the university and at school. I can't afford to pay for your education. So I went all around to different places. I went to the Jewish Community, first of all. And of course they said, well, you-- your relatives guaranteed for you. It's their responsibility. We can't help you. And so-- and-- and I went to places like the education committees and whatever, just to see if I could get a loan. Well, everywhere, it was the same thing. I wasn't given a loan. I couldn't have a loan. There were-- there was no such provisions for people like me. Social security, income support, or any such thing, there was no such support, whatsoever.
And so I pretty soon realized that there wasn't going to be any help, and nobody wanted, really, to-- to know or to help me. Once, I think, I was asked, would I come and speak about the DP camp, because they were sending old clothes to-- you know, sending clothes to the DP camps for-- for people. And I remember getting up there and saying, it isn't old clothes that these people want in the DP camps. They've got plenty of old clothes. They want other things. They want to be taken away and have a new life. And they want money. They don't want old clothes. That-- that was the only occasion. And that was, perhaps, in the early days of 1946, when I came over. But the next thing that happened to me was that I was told, you are going to do nursing. And of course, this is not what I wanted to do. But at, at that stage, of course, I had no choice. I said, well, all right. I'd give it a try. So I was taken to the Birmingham Accident Hospital, where my aunt worked. And I was taken to the pre-nursing training. It's called the PTS, I think, Pre-nursing School-- Training School. And I was-- I was a resident in the-- in the nurses' home and started my nursing course. But it was mostly academic, the first three months, anyway. And then you had to pass an exam before they let you onto the wards. And I passed this exam. And I started on the wards. And then I realized that no way was this what I really wanted to do. So I said to my aunt, and I said to everybody in the hospital, I'm leaving. I'm not staying. I don't want to do nursing. And everybody said, all right, all right. Fine, fine. Well, one day, I packed my suitcase, and I left. But, of course, I didn't know that you have to give a month's notice, and you have to formally leave, and neither did I know where I was going to go, but I simply walked out. And I went missing. Well, of course, the next thing was that the police were looking for me. Because I was an alien, and I wasn't allowed to be anywhere, you know? I had to report to the police and places like that, a place of residence. But in fact, what happened is that Jane, the Quaker person, relief worker, she was back in England, doing social work in London, in Bethnal Green. And she was in contact with me, and I was in contact with her. And she said, come to me.
And this is what I did. I packed my suitcase, and that's where I was. And I stayed with Jane for about seven or eight weeks. She said, you come here, and you tell me what you want to do, and you sort yourself out. You don't-- you're not going to do something you don't want to do. And you're not going to be made to do something. And I stayed with her. And I had a marvelous time in London and talked about nothing but just, you know, tried to live for a few weeks. Anyway, I then returned back to Birmingham, now going into probably 1947. And I decided, well, what I really wanted to do was some physical training. I always said I wanted to go to physical training college. But that obviously wasn't-- was no longer possible for me to do. I thought I'd like to do physiotherapy, which was the nearest thing to physical training. However, it was a very, very costly course, and I couldn't raise the funds. Again, I couldn't raise a loan. I couldn't raise the funds from the Jewish community, from the-- from the Jewish Council. I went to Singers Hill, to the-- to the offices, to see the president and people like that. And I just-- I just couldn't raise any funds to-- to help me do that. In the end, I met-- well, I saw one of the doctors at the Accident Hospital, who was the radiologist in that hospital. And the thing that took my attention, I think, was the X-ray department. And I thought, well, that's perhaps something that I would be interested in to do. I had no idea what it involved or what you've got to have and how you get set about it. I knew that this man, Dr. [? Brailsford, ?] was in charge of-- of this department. And one day, I turned up on his doorstep. Simple as that. I went to see him, and he was sort of taken aback. He had never seen me in his life. And I said, I've just come to see if you can help me. And I explained to him that I've been-- And he was the first person that asked me some questions about what happened to me during the war. Now by that time it was 1947. And I told him a few things. And I said to him, I am on the point of going back to Germany, back to the DP camp, because that's where my friends are, and I shall start again. I don't know where I'm going to land up. He says, what? You're going-- you're not going back to Germany. No, no. I can't see you do that. Please, don't do that. I'll see if I can help you. And he went to the faculty of radiologists, which was in London, and put my case to them to see if there was some way that I could do a training, a radiography training. Well, of course, you had to have your matriculations and such, all these examinations. And I had lost five years-- seven years, of schooling. However, I did pass my PTS, and, apparently, I passed it very well. And you know, that was my strange language. And-- and I passed it without any problems, whatsoever. And so they decided-- he did. He actually-- he was-- he was-- this was in the days pre NHS. And he was sort of on the-- one of the governors of the Woodlands Hospital, the Royal Orthopedic Hospital in Birmingham. So he-- and, and that was run, at that time, by the Cadbury family, who were also Quakers, if you recall. And they all decided to take me on, at Woodlands, on probation, give me a chance to-- to see if I could train in radiography. And this is how I started on my career. In March 1947, I became a resident, a student radiographer, at the Royal Orthopedic Hospital in Birmingham. And I had to go into the wards, of course, and do some nursing. Mostly, they only took girls that had already done two years orthopedic nursing. But because I had done some pre-nursing training, and because I was prepared to go onto the wards first thing in the morning and do some nursing, I was taken on. And I started on my career. 
INT: Wonderful. So what happened to your mother at this time? KHM: Well, my mother then worked for the next person. Again, she could only do domestic work. And she wasn't in terribly good health, so-- as I've explained. So she-- she worked as a housekeeper for another gentleman, and he was the chairman of Tube Investments, a-- a very nice people. And she was there-- well, she stayed there until, eventually, I could take her to come and live with me.  INT: So how long was your training? KHM: Well, my training wasn't too long, actually. Because nowadays, it's four years. In those days, you could do it in two years. And I-- I managed to do the diagnostic and the radiotherapy all in the two years. And I had a horrendous time, because I was ostracized. I was the sort of odd person out. You know, I didn't fit in. I didn't fit into the-- the environment. I didn't fit into the rigid nursing regime that there was. You had to be in, locked in at 10 o'clock at night. And I didn't like that too much. And I did the most horrendous things, like climbing up drain pipes into other people's bedrooms, and come in at night. And you know, I just didn't like to obey these rules. To me, it was like being in another prison and not-- losing my freedom. However, I eventually was the only person to qualify, [LAUGHS] out of-- out of all of us. I think there were about seven of us. I-- I was the only one that eventually got the-- the qualification. And the reason for that was that the girls used to get together, and they-- they-- they actually played around so much and didn't work. But I used to go to the International Center, where I used to meet my friends. And then I used to lock myself in, in the reference library, and work there, because I couldn't work anywhere else. And I also had friends that helped me with math and physics, which I, you know, didn't know. So I had to have a little bit of tuition. And there were quite a lot of chaps that helped me along. And-- and this is where I was. I was actually working incredibly hard. And as I say, I was the only person to eventually qualify. 
INT: Apart from your mother, was there any other person who gave you support and emotional help? KHM: No. You-- you were left totally to your own devices, as far as your emotional health was concerned. No. I-- I very quickly realized that I have got to come to terms with what had happened to me. And it's no good shutting it out. And I think this, in a way, helped me. I was determined to talk about it. Although I never talked about it at-- at work. But wherever there was the opportunity, I'd take the opportunity to start talking about it, and people didn't want to hear, but I made them-- I made them listen.  INT: Can you recall how you initiated the subject? KHM: Well, it wasn't very difficult, because I had a number on my arm. And you could-- and people would remark or something, and you came from there. So it wasn't very difficult. I wouldn't sort of go up to people and say, you know, so-and-so and so-and-so. But yes, it wasn't very difficult. We had the arm number. My-- my mother, when she was in company, some, she used to cover her arm up, because she didn't like people asking her questions and looking at her. But I-- I didn't do that. I preferred to have my-- my number visible. There was a time when I actually had to have it removed, because it-- because--  INT: Right. KHM: Yes. Because it became-- it didn't become an embarrassment. I don't say that. People, of course, in the hospital, were looking at me. When you wear-- you wore short sleeves, and it was visible. And you're constantly being-- you know, remarks being made behind your back. But there were some irritating instances which I was no longer prepared to put up with. And that was one of the reasons when I eventually had it removed. I was working in the Children's Hospital at that time. And there were one or two people, and one was a doctor, who, whenever he saw me, would make some peculiar remark, such as, is this your boyfriend's telephone number? CREW: OK. 
INT: Tape 17, Kitty Hart, 21st of June, 1998. You were talking about your life in 1946. What was your social life like? KHM: Well, social life was very, very good in the-- the International Center, where I found all the friends that I needed. In-- in fact, I didn't go anywhere else but the International Center. We had dances there, and we had discussions, and outings, and just the-- the whole of my social life revolved around the International Center. And that-- when that closed down, of course, by that time I was already married. I met my future husband at the International Center, who came over with a kindertransport, and-- the very last boat on the in 1939. So then I got married--  INT: Did he know about your experiences? KHM: Well he knew about it, but he didn't know any details. No, he didn't know any details. He didn't-- he didn't ask me any questions. Exactly the same as anybody else. He-- he didn't ask me a single question. In fact, my own husband never asked me one single question of what happened to me. If he hadn't read my book or seen my video, he wouldn't know what happened. So that's just how it's been with everybody.  INT: Did you have children? KHM: Yes. I got married in 1949, and by that-- we only had a very tiny little accommodation. And so I realized I couldn't have any children until it's possible to have a house. Again, my friend Jane lent me deposit for the house, which was an awful lot of money in those days. And we purchased a first house 1953-- May '53, and in June '53 my son David was born. My mother-- immediately we had a house, my mother came to live with us and my mother helped look after the children. Peter, my younger son, was born 1955, and I started work-- well, I never stopped work. I'd worked right through my pregnancy, and I worked immediately after-- after I gave birth. But I did realize that I will never take a full-time appointment because I had to set some time aside for my Holocaust work. So in-- in effect, I knew I had to sacrifice part of my career, but I worked weekends, evenings, nights, sessional work, and my mother took charge of-- of-- of the household. 
INT: Did your-- what year did you have your number removed? KHM: Well, I had my number removed while I was still working at the children's. So just before my elder son was born. As as I explained before, there were circumstances where I just could not have this number any longer by-- mostly by the ignorance of most people who should know-- should have known what this number was, but always made these ridiculous remarks. And it-- it just irritated me so much that one day I decided that I've had enough, and I-- I was going to have this removed, and I was going to have it mounted in a specimen so that it lives forever. Even when I'm not here my number will live on in some museum. And this is when I had my number removed.  INT: As your children were growing up, did you ever talk to them about your experience? KHM: My mother and I never stopped talking about our experiences. It came into our everyday life. It came in-- in the discussion during meal time, it came in play time. My children were brought up in it from a very young age. Of course, we'd never talked about the most horrible atrocities. Very often we talked about the funny things that happened. And children used to tease, oh, here we go. Oh, little bits of food have got to be put into the fridge. Nothing must be thrown out. Because remember, during the war you didn't have any bread. Now you mustn't throw it out. We must go and collect it from everybody's dustbins if they throw it out. So they were brought up in this constantly. They didn't know the depths of it, and the ins and outs of it, but they were in that environment-- brought up in an environment of knowing what had actually happened to us. 
INT: Do you think your experience affected the way you brought your boys up? KHM: No, I don't think so. I think they-- they took it in their stride pretty well. They didn't-- they didn't show any particular stress, or any inclination to any revenge, or anything like that. Not at-- not at all. As a matter of fact, what we did-- what we used to do when my children were small, most of our holidays were camping holidays because money was-- we had a very, very difficult time and money was incredibly tight for many years. And this is why I had to go out to work so much to help support the household. That we-- we had camping holidays all around Europe. And we usually set up tent-- a tent next to a German family so that we mix with a German family. And just to see how my children were going to get on with some of these German children, and the Austrian children. And mostly they got on very well.  INT: What about the adults? How did you-- KHM: With the adults, it was-- I would mix with people that were younger than me. I would never mix with people that were my age or older because I never knew who they were, what they did during the war. And if ever I made a remark, well, there was just a deathly silence and that was the end of the conversation. And it normally started, how come you speak such good German? And I would make a remark like-- although because my German was-- my mother tongue was German, sometimes I would say, my mother was-- was born in Austria. But if I really wanted to see a reaction I would say, oh, I had a marvelous university that I went to where I learned German. And the university was called Auschwitz. And that, of course, provoked a-- a stunning silence. Stunned silence, shall I say. And then you could sort people out of whether you could actually talk about it. 
INT: And did you ever meet people you could talk to about it? KHM: Yes. Oh, yes. Yes, I met people I could talk to. I-- I was friendly with a-- a-- a whole group of Germans who were just slightly younger than me, as a matter of fact. So they were sort of in the Hitler Youth, I think, during the war. And we used to meet up with these people quite often on a holiday in Italy. And-- and we-- we used to talk about it a lot. They didn't, of course, know-- knew what went on in the camps, and they were all younger people than-- than I was. So yes, we-- we-- we did-- we did actually make friends with some of-- some of the Germans. We are talking about now in the '60s and in the '70s. And by that time I-- I'd already published my book, and it had been printed in Germany, and these people have actually read it in German. So-- and I remember sending them signed copies. So we've-- I've had quite a lot of contact. On various occasions we've had contact with the Germans and Austrians, yes.  INT: Have you ever been involved in any war crimes trials? KHM: Well this happened-- yes, I have. Of course, I-- I've-- when my first book was published I said to Lord Russell of Liverpool, who was one of the chief prosecutors at-- at the Nuremberg trial, if ever you get Mengele, remember, I will come to give evidence. And he said, yes, you should-- you should be one of the first to come give evidence. But of course-- 
INT: When did you write your book? KHM: Well, I wrote my first book in 1961. That was when I saw Lord Russell of Liverpool.  INT: Yes. KHM: But of course, this never happened with Mengele, as we know.  INT: Were you contacted at all for any trial? KHM: Yes. The-- the-- the--  INT: When was that? KHM: Well the next thing that happened is, of course, I-- I did-- I went back to Poland. I went back to my hometown. I went back to Auschwitz. I was one of the very first.  INT: When-- when did you get back to-- KHM: That's right.  INT: --Auschwitz? KHM: I went back to Auschwitz 1978, and-- and I-- I was one of the first because that was still under communism. And I made-- I made the video, Following this, of course, there are lots of things happened.  INT: Who initiated-- who initiated the video? KHM: Oh, the video was initiated by Yorkshire Television in Leeds.  INT: Who-- who was the contact? KHM: Well, there was a-- a film director called Peter Morley who'd done many documentaries. And he wanted to do-- he did the queen's jubilee, he did-- he did very, very famous documentaries.  INT: How did he-- how did he know of you? KHM: Well, he knew of me because of my book. My book was published already in the '60s and had been reprinted in the '70s. It had a reprint about 1974 and 1976, and that-- that was in 1978. And they were looking for somebody-- they were not looking for someone to come-- go back to Auschwitz. They were doing women at war, and they wanted to do a half-hour episode on me. And when they came to me I said, I'm terribly sorry, my story does not fit into the half-hour documentary. If you really want me to give you a documentary, I want to go back to the camp. And he said, you go back to the camp? No, no, no, that's-- nobody goes back to the camp. I said, oh yes, I want to go back. I want to show people what it was like and talk about it there because that's the only way people will understand if they physically come into the camp. Of course, in those days you couldn't just go because as I said it was communist country. 
INT: What organization did Peter Morley represent? KHM: Yorkshire Television.  INT: Right. KHM: And-- and he said, well, I can't let you go on your own. I said, well, that's all right. My son was, at that time, working in Canada. I said, I'll give him a ring and ask him. So I put a call through, and it happened to be 3 o'clock in the morning in Canada where he was. And I said, David, do you want to go to Auschwitz? He says, yes, can we go tomorrow? And that's it.  INT: How old was he at this stage? KHM: How old was he? 50-- was born 1953. '53-- 25.  INT: And what was his occupation? KHM: He was a doctor. He was already working as a doctor in Canada.  INT: So what happened then? KHM: Well, we flew out and we-- we, as I said, did the whole We did some taping in the house, pre-Auschwitz, post-Auschwitz, the reflections on Auschwitz. And the things that happened, it was just like a catalyst because in this country very few people knew anything about Auschwitz. In the States you have so many survivors, and so many groups of-- of people that know about it, but in this country it was unknown. And this caused the most enormous storm, I would say, in this country. And I received mail bags upon mail bags of post from-- not just from this country, from all over the world, because it-- because it went right through the world. 
INT: Saying what? KHM: People didn't know. Everybody appalled that they hadn't been taught in school of what happened in Auschwitz or what happened to people in the camps. There'd been two generations grown up by that time with hardly any knowledge of what had happened.  INT: Were you ever asked to testify at all after that? KHM: Well, this is really what happened. Because of my videotape, I was asked to testify at-- at the war crimes trial in 1985, '86. I was contacted by the German embassy in London and asked whether I knew a man called Gottfried Weise, but I'd never heard of the name, which I explained. But nonetheless, I said I'd come down and give an interview, which I did. I went down to the embassy and I was interviewed by a lawyer who actually interrogated me on my time in the Kanada Kommando in Auschwitz. And you know, the next thing he said, I've got a-- a picture album I'd like you to look through, see if you recognize anyone. And I flicked through this album and I saw one person sometimes sitting with a girlfriend, sometimes in uniform, sometimes without uniform, sometimes with a peaked cap in different poses at different times. But I picked out that same person on perhaps six or seven different pages, and this lawyer closed the book and said, Mrs. Hart, you've just identified Gottfried Weise.  INT: Did-- did he have a name? KHM: I knew him by a different name. Well, I gave him the name of Wunsch because there was a man like that called Wunsch. But there was also-- I also gave him the name of der blinder, the slepy in Polish. He had a glass eye. And I-- I recognized this man instantly. I knew his face belonged to the Kanada Kommando a-- a-- a section of the camp. 
INT: Did the solicitor have a name? KHM: The lawyer? No, he was-- he was just a lawyer-- an embassy lawyer. I don't know, I'm afraid I don't know. The-- and the next thing that happened, I had a subpoena from the high court in Wuppertal in Germany to come and attend a trial. When I got there, I was just met by one person who looked after all the witnesses. Ruth Cunning, her name was.  INT: I'm sorry? KHM: Her name was Ruth Cunning. She-- she died-- she died since. She looked after the witnesses who came from all over the world, but we never saw any of each other. There was only one person and one person there for so many days-- I can't remember how many days-- and we never met them, we didn't know who the other witnesses were. So I was in court just on my own and I was confronted with this Gottfried Weise. I was asked to identify him, which I had not the slightest difficulty because the man hadn't changed. He looked a lot older, but I would have recognized him anywhere. He wore glasses.  INT: Did you to go alone? KHM: Yes, I went on my own.  INT: Were you offered any protection at all? KHM: I was-- I was looked after. I was very, very well looked after, yes, by different people, yes. There were some teachers--  INT: Were all your expenses paid? KHM: Yes, all my expenses were paid, yes. 
INT: Were you ever threatened? KHM: No.  INT: Did you ever feel threatened? KHM: No, no. I was never threatened. In fact, they brought the schools in-- the local schools came to listen to-- to the proceedings. And-- and-- and of course, they also had television-- they were televising it, as well. I don't think they allowed to televise the actual proceedings. I had television interviews there. And what they did have, which was very important, which they didn't have before, was my videotape. They showed the video me returning to Auschwitz. They showed the film there and they showed the terrain where it all took place. And I had to point out all the different landmarks of where things took place. And from that point of view, this was-- the videotape was absolutely crucial in-- in-- in-- in the court proceedings.  INT: Yes. Did you-- were you interviewed before the trial-- KHM: No.  INT: --or after the trial? KHM: Oh, you mean by the television people?  INT: Yes. KHM: Oh, during-- during break of proceedings, you-- you were-- you could be interviewed, yes. You could be interviewed by-- by the press, yeah.  INT: So the trial was going on and you were interviewed? KHM: Yeah, you were interviewed, but not-- not in the courtroom.  INT: No. KHM: Yes, yes. Outside. Yes, we were interviewed by different-- different-- it's all written up in the German press. Such-and-such a witness has arrived from so-and-so, giving evidence against Gottfried Weise, who was actually [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] eventually convicted of five specific murders, although he committed many, many other murders. But he was convicted on five counts and given life. And the judge actually wrote the whole proceedings up, which I've-- I've got a copy of the-- of the whole proceedings. 
INT: Were you involved in any other way in a pre-trial court? KHM: No.  INT: No. KHM: No. This was the actual trial, and he was-- I think I attended in 1945, but the-- the court went to Israel, the court-- the whole court went to Israel, I think. Because some people were not fit to travel to Germany. And eventually he-- he was convicted in 1986.  INT: Do you know where the trial-- you said Wuppertal-- KHM: Wuppertal.  INT: Do you know the name of the street where the courthouse was? KHM: No. It's a high court in Wuppertal.  INT: Right. KHM: No, I'm afraid I don't.  INT: Where did you stay? KHM: I stayed with-- with this lady, Ruth Cunning, in her house. And-- and I also stayed in a hotel, I think, but I then moved into her-- into her house, yes.  INT: Just one defendant you were testifying against? KHM: I was testifying just against one, yes.  INT: Was there any sort of security in the court? KHM: Yes, there was a lot of security in the court, but it wasn't-- it wasn't really very obvious. But yes, there was quite a lot of security. But there-- there were no demonstrations or anything. In-- in fact, the press was absolutely horrified at-- at the allegations, you know, because this man committed the most horrendous murders, as I have talked before. And everybody just wanted to see this man convicted. It was a question of conviction, of getting people to actually testify of-- of-- of-- the crucial thing was to identify this man because he lied and didn't-- in his CV he totally left out his time in Auschwitz. So it was crucial for us to-- for people who remembered him to identify him. And that-- that was so very important because he could have said it had been a mistaken identity. Well, it couldn't have been because people came from all over the world to-- to actually testify. But another thing is there was another SS officer called Wunsch, whom I-- I think I gave the wrong name. He came to testify for the defense. But of course, his testimony was also crucial because he identified the fella that he was there. Oh, he'd-- of course he-- he said he never saw him kill anyone. Came in his defense. But the other thing that he did, he drew the only plan of the Kanada that is available today. Because of course, everything was razed to the ground and the prisoners couldn't produce a plan because they had no free access to-- to the whole-- they didn't have the run of the place. But there was this man, Wunsch, and he drew the plan for the-- for the court. And this is the only plan that we have got today. 
INT: Were you in court for the entire trial of this man? KHM: No, everybody had their own allocated time. I think I was there a few days.  INT: No, were you in the court? KHM: In the court? Yes.  INT: Yes. KHM: Yes.  INT: When you were invited into the courtroom, who brought you into the courtroom? Can you remember? KHM: I couldn't tell you. I don't know. I was just called-- I was in the anteroom and I was just called in. It was my day. There-- there wasn't-- there wasn't another person being interviewed, you see. You were there-- the only witness at that time. And when you departed from the country, then they brought in the next witness so there was no collusion with witnesses, you didn't know who the other people were-- not until after-- after the trial.  INT: Can you describe the room? KHM: Well, it was just a-- it was just a straight courtroom, and on one side was sort of a semi-circular table. And there was Gottfried Weise with his lawyers sitting on one side.  INT: How many lawyers did he have? KHM: I don't know. I couldn't tell you. Going back 10 years, I don't know.  INT: What about how many prosecutors were there? KHM: Quite a lot of prosecutors. There was a chief prosecutor, and there were a lot of-- and a judge, and there were a lot of legal people around going backwards and forwards. And then, of course, there were quite a lot of a gallery with the public that were allowed in, yes, to-- to listen to the proceedings. And then they had this huge, huge screen where they were projecting my film. 
INT: What about-- what about the actual dock in which Weise was sitting or standing? Can you describe that? KHM: He-- he wasn't. He was sitting-- he was sitting with-- with his-- with his-- with his lawyers. Well, his defense counsel, whatever. He was sitting. He wasn't on his own. He was sitting in a row with-- with these people, and he never--  INT: At a table? KHM: Well, a kind of long semi-circular bench, I think. But he-- he never said a single word. His silence actually went against him. He didn't deny anything, and he didn't confirm anything-- total silence. And the judge actually remarked that that went against him.  INT: Was there any sort of protection or security for him? KHM: No. Well, I didn't see it. No. No. This is-- this is all I can tell you about the trial.  INT: How many hours do you think you were given to that trial? KHM: Well, I think one day I was there about six hours. It was a long, long time because I was cross-examined under my most minute details, not just details pertaining to his murder-- or murders-- but the locations within the camp itself. For-- for instance, I was asked, do I consider that the barrack-- I said it was divided up, on the other side was a duty room-- the SS duty room, and we were sorting out clothes. Do I consider that the-- the construction of the barrack was such that the-- there were vertical gaps or horizontal gaps. And what I could see over the other side. I said, I think it was vertical gaps. That's what I thought. But this-- that's how I was cross-examined. I think I was cross-examined to see if I was actually there so that I could give detail of my own time there, not just of what I saw. Because there were so many other people that confirmed some of these murders, but it was a question of confirming that you were actually in the place yourself. 
INT: Where were you when the verdict was announced? KHM: I was-- I was back in Birmingham when the verdict was announced. I was told-- I was told the verdict by the judge who actually telephoned me and told me the verdict. And he sent me a copy of the-- of the whole-- of the trial. That's how I got to know. But it-- but it was in the papers, of course. I've got all the newspaper cuttings, as well, which I asked Ruth Cunning to send to me, and she also sent me a videotape. I have somewhere got a videotape of the-- of the court proceedings, so I think some of it was-- I think it wasn't actually during the trial, but his-- he-- his interview with the press or whatever. So somewhere I have actually got a videotape on-- on Weise, on the trial.  INT: You already told me once, but will you tell me again when was the verdict announced? KHM: I think it was 1986.  INT: And what was the verdict? KHM: Well, the verdict was life imprisonment. But of course, what happened was the man himself wasn't in custody. He was out on bail. He was allowed on bail, although he was on-- on a murder charge, he wasn't in custody all the time that the trial was conducted. The man was free. So when the trial was over, before the verdict was announced-- which was a lapse of time, I believe-- he disappeared. And Interpol was looking for him. And what happened next was that he'd fled to Switzerland, and he had a stroke. He was taken to hospital, and there, of course, he was identified. And he was helicoptered back to the-- and then, of course, he was told the verdict and that's it. He got life. They brought him back to Germany. They actually allowed him out on bail, though he was convicted of-- alleged convicted murderer. 
INT: What was your reaction? KHM: A reaction of relief because we didn't know whether he would actually get life because not many-- not many of the Nazi war criminals had actually got life. We know that so many have been let off very lightly, and that was possibly one of the very last trials. But because this man committed the most gratuitous, horrendous murders, he actually got life, and there were so many witnesses testifying to that effect.  INT: Right. Thank you very much. We'll take a break now.  INT: Tape 18, Kitty Hart, the 21st of June, 1998. You have two sons. How did you choose their names? KHM: Well, David we chose at random, but the second name, Paul, is after my husband's-- my first husband's father. Peter again at random, and Charles after my own father's. So they each have got the name of their grandfather. But we didn't-- we didn't feel we want to call them that every day so we gave it to them as a second name.  INT: And what language did you speak at home with them when they were little? KHM: Well, we-- we brought them up on English because, well, my husband, although he came over with the kindertransport and his mother tongue was German, his German was not all that particularly good. And we didn't feel we want to speak German at home. What I was very much insistent on is that my mother spoke German to the boys so that they get the feel of the language. So very often I spoke English with them, and then my mother tried to speak German with them so that they are bilingual, or at least understand English. Polish I couldn't actually teach them because I had no one to converse with myself. So I couldn't really teach them the Polish language. 
INT: What kind of education did they receive? KHM: Well, unfortunately I couldn't afford to send my sons to any preparatory or private schools so they both went to the local primary school, which was absolutely appalling. And so I set upon educating my sons myself. And I taught them the basics, practically, of reading and writing. And eventually as they passed their 11-plus and went on to the grammar schools I actually educated myself through my boys. I-- I tried to-- when they did homework, I tried to do some homework. And in that way I went through the school system via my-- my children by the-- the system that I'd missed-- you know, the years that I'd missed. I caught up not totally, but I certainly learned most of the things that you learn in-- in a secondary school through my boys.  INT: What age where they when you first told them about your experiences? KHM: Well, they were brought up in it from-- from very-- very young age. They-- they literally lived it because in 1961 when my first book was published they were only very small. And David was seven or so, and Peter was only about five. So they knew there was a lot of publicity. People came and ask a lot of questions. I had television interviews, radio interviews, and talking about it in different places. And so they-- they knew about it from a very early age, and they took it in their stride completely. They-- they never had a problem. 
INT: Did your children get married? KHM: Yes, they-- they both married in 1981. They both married at the same time more or less. My youngest son, I think, married first, yes. Peter married first. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] He got-- he was at that time working for British Aerospace. He went through university and studied in Manchester. And David, my eldest son, got married-- again, after he finished university he studied medicine in Birmingham. And he'd been working in Canada and in Holland and then came back to England and married also in 1981.  INT: And the ladies that they married, what-- what were their origins? KHM: Well, Peter married a-- a girl from Saint Albans from quite a religious background. And in fact, he's sort of more religious now than he'd ever been because, you know, she keeps a kosher household. And-- but Peter married a-- a non-Jewish girl whom he met in London.  INT: Do you have grandchildren? KHM: Yes. Well, I have-- David has got three daughters. The elder one, the doctor, he's got three daughters. And Peter, my younger son, has got four sons. So--  INT: What are their names? KHM: [LAUGHS] Well, the girls' names are Lucy, Sophie, and Juliet, and the boy's name is Jonathan, Simon, [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] Daniel, and Michael. I tried to get them in the right order. [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] And the eldest will be 15-- or the girl will be 15, and Peter's eldest had bar mitzvah last year. And three more bar mitzvahs to go, and the youngest is five. 
INT: All right. Do you see a lot of them? KHM: Of course, they are a good way away. Yes, that's right, we see quite a lot of them, yes. But it isn't so easy because, of course, they are quite a long way away-- Bedford and Harpenden. It's not just in Birmingham.  INT: Are you involved in any Holocaust activities at all? KHM: Well, I've never stopped being involved in-- in Holocaust activities. I've been on numerous committees in the Holocaust educational trust, and I'm a patron of the Imperial War Museum. And because of the video I've been right through the States lecturing. I've been involved in many, many school projects and American bases in England, boarding schools, universities, functions. In fact, if-- if-- if I wouldn't be really keeping a-- a close eye on it, I would be involved full time. Which of course, I can't afford to do. Well, at the present time I'm-- I'm retired, but while I was working it-- it was very difficult because I had to get time off and do these projects in between work. And sometimes I couldn't actually be paid. You know, I had to give up work and lose so much of my salary to take time off to do these projects. And it-- it is a costly business these projects, because you don't always even get your expenses.  INT: How is your health today? KHM: I-- I do have my legacies from during my time in the camp when I've-- I've had injured-- I had my-- my spine was injured. I've had two operations on my back and I've had a fractured skull, of course. And so I have got a few legacies from the camp, but-- but you know, by and large it hasn't been too bad. It's my mother who never really recovered, and she died in 1974. She-- you know, she had heart disease and-- and high blood pressure from-- from the time she came out of the camp. 
INT: Have you ever received any psychological counseling? KHM: No, I've never ever had any counseling whatsoever at all from-- from any sources. There-- there was no such thing as post-traumatic counseling. No-- nobody thought about that. That's a sort of present-day phenomenon. We had to cope-- most of the survivors had to cope as best they could. The worst of it was the being ostracized, I think. That what hurt most. And people not really wanting to-- to know what had happened. And some of us were just determined to make sure that history was not going to be rewritten. Because where do historians get their information from if it isn't from the survivors? And so if the survivors are not going to speak out, history will be rewritten. And I was very conscious of that. I felt it was my duty to make sure that this wasn't going to happen.  INT: Do you ever have dreams or nightmares about your experiences? KHM: Not very often. Some-- something might crop up, yes, but mostly I can shut it out. I can separate it, yes. I can talk about it and then separate it from my actual life. The only time I couldn't separate it-- when I actually went back to Auschwitz the first time, I felt I'd never been away. And I almost got confused. It was only when I saw the taxi that was taking me away I realized that I was only there as a visitor. That perhaps was the only time where it-- it did hit me. But I've been back on field trips. Taking people back to Poland is a very important part of my work-- taking them back to different places, back to the ghetto, back to the Lublin ghetto where I was, back to-- to Belzec where I nearly landed up and where my-- my grandmother died. Back to where my father was killed in Tarnow, and of course, back to the-- back to the camp, and back to my hometown as well to show them the remains of where I was born and-- so it's been a very important part of my work, taking people back to Poland. 
INT: How did your experiences affect your Judaism? KHM: Well, I think it probably did affect my Judaism. Because the first thing you question-- or I questioned is, how could a god allow this to happen? And so you immediately begin to think, well, if there is something then they should have not allowed these innocent people to be killed the way they were being slaughtered. So you do question your religion very much. And because I was never brought up in a religious environment in the first place, it wasn't difficult for me not to believe.  INT: Have your experiences affected your Jewish identity? KHM: No. It never has altered my Jewish identity. I will always identify my Jewish-- my Jewishness.  INT: Are you affiliated to a synagogue? KHM: Yes, I've always been-- I-- I was married in-- in a synagogue. I was married at Singers Hill Synagogue in Birmingham. But of course, I've been-- since I've been-- I've been divorced and I remarried. I no longer belong to this particular synagogue [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] since-- since my divorce because I've remarried Philip, who is not Jewish. But [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] Philip understands the issue of the Holocaust very much more so than my first husband whose mother and two brothers-- well, his mother and his one brother were killed in Auschwitz. And yet he didn't want to know-- he didn't want to know any detail. He didn't want to know what actually had happened, and he didn't take an interest in my work. And he-- I wouldn't say he actually obstructed me in a physical sort of way, but in a subtle way, yes. He-- he didn't support my work, and I think it probably [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] contributed to the breakup of my marriage. Because I needed someone who was going to support my work. 
INT: Mm-hmm. KHM: And I found Philip supported my work wholeheartedly. And so this was what really happened.  INT: Did you apply for restitution? KHM: Oh, yes. I mean, restitution was very-- it was just really nominal when you think about it. When you think in present day restitution, people are expecting, I-- I have just been told if someone's been in prison for the extra 50 days or something they're going to get thousands of pounds because of wrongful imprisonment for a few days-- extra days in prison after they'd committed some sort of crime. Whereas for the actual time spent in prison we got nothing. Yes, I did get a-- a small pension-- just a small disability pension because I have got certain problems, and I was proved to be-- I don't know, so many percent disabled-- a few percent. And so I do receive a small pension. But my mother received a pension for-- because she lost her occupation. Strange enough, I didn't receive any money for my loss of education. Now, this really was the most unjust because you had people who came over to England, [INAUDIBLE] the kindertransport pre-war, went to school here in England, yet because they-- they went to German schools in-- oh, they couldn't go to German schools in Germany during the war, were granted restitution-- were granted compensation for loss of education. Whereas I, who genuinely lost my education, couldn't get any-- any-- not-- nothing at all because I didn't attend a German school. But nonetheless, they should still have paid for a loss of education. So yes, my-- my mother also got something for the loss of my father, but I mean, we did-- had no restitution for property, which still belongs to-- still in Poland. 
INT: We're nearing the close of this interview now. Why did you come forward to tell your story? KHM: Well, I came forward to tell my story because I've been telling it since 1945 and because I believe that this was certainly a worthwhile project. It will be there when I have gone. Hopefully people will come and listen to it. And because so many generations have missed out on this story, I'm hoping that the future generations will not allow history to be rewritten. And they will listen to what the survivors have got to say.  INT: What would you like to tell future generations? KHM: I think the most important thing to tell future generations is to learn from the past. Because up to now people haven't actually learned very much. We've had ethnic cleansing in Bosnia, in Rwanda, in Cambodia. It's called ethnic cleansing. The Germans called it [NON-ENGLISH], special treatment, but the result's the same. It's murder under a pseudonym, under the guise of-- of murder. They just give it different names. So the future generations have got to be vigilant and not allow dictators to come to power. And that, I think, is the most important thing of all, isn't it?  INT: Is there anything else you'd like to add? KHM: Well, I think we've said enough, haven't we?  INT: Thank you very much, Kitty Hart. Who is this picture of? KHM: Oh, this is a picture of my father, and that was taken in 1938 in the Vienna woods where he was on holiday. 
INT: Thank you. Who's this a picture of? KHM: Now, this picture shows three people. The young person is my mother. In the middle is my grandfather-- my mother's father-- and my-- and my grandmother, my mother's mother. This was taken in a-- a place called Czechowice where my father was a farmer. He had a farm there. That's where my mother was born, and I think it was taken around about-- between 1910 and 1914.  INT: And what were their names? KHM: Well, my mother's name was Rosa Lola, and my grandfather's name was Joseph Werber, and my grandmother's name was Anna Werber.  INT: All right, thank you. Who is this photograph of? KHM: Oh, well this picture shows my father. Next to him my brother, then my mother, my grandmother on my father's side, and myself. This was taken on holiday in Karlsbad. And I think I was about four years old. So it was taken about 1930, I think. I-- I can't be precise on-- on the date.  INT: All right. Thank you. Who is this photograph of? KHM: This picture shows my brother and myself. I think it was taken around 1938. My brother in-- in his new school-- in his new school uniform. And-- and-- and I am-- I think my dress was red. I-- I remember that. It was a red dress.  INT: And where was it? KHM: That was taking in Bielsko at home.  INT: And where is Bielsko? KHM: Bielsko is in Poland where I was born. 
INT: Thank you. CREW: OK.  INT: What is this object? KHM: Now, this is a specimen of two pieces of skin, each one showing a tattoo. The-- the upper tattoo, which is very distinctive-- 39933 with a triangle underneath-- is a piece of skin that belonged to my mother. After my mother's death, I asked permission to have this removed, and I wanted it kept. And eventually, I want it to go to a museum. The lower number, the lower piece of skin is not terribly clear. It is 39934, which is my own piece of skin, my own tattoo. The reason this is not so clear is because it had been removed in the '50s and had been just left in formaldehyde for many years before it was actually mounted together with my mother's. And so it-- it-- it wasn't all that well preserved, but I think it does actually show the-- the tattoo quite clearly if we can zoom it in to the lower number.  INT: Where were they removed? KHM: Well, my mother's was removed before she-- before she was buried--  INT: Where? KHM: --here in Birmingham in the hospital where she died, the Queen Elizabeth's.  INT: And where was yours removed? KHM: And my number was removed in the '50s, about 1952, at the accident hospital here in Birmingham. And when I woke up, this piece of skin was given to me in a bottle for me to keep. But as explained, I hadn't had it mounted until I had my mother's removed. 
INT: Right. What is this about? KHM: Now, this is a postcard which is addressed to my uncle and aunt in Birmingham, England. It was sent by my brother in 1940 from a place called [NON-ENGLISH], which at that time was still not occupied by the Germans. They didn't occupy it until 1941, I think, and that reached Birmingham during the war.  INT: Have we got a date for it, please? KHM: The date is 1940.  INT: Yes. And who's it from? KHM: And it is for my brother.  INT: Who was called? KHM: Robert Felix.  INT: Thank you. This is a letter. What is it about? KHM: Well, this is a letter that my mother wrote from Lublin in 1940 from the ghetto. And this letter actually reached Birmingham, England. It just describes what-- what actually happened in the ghetto. And the-- the other side-- the other side of this letter, there's some handwriting of my-- of my father's and-- and also of myself at-- at-- at the other end. [BACKGROUND NOISE] Oh, we've got a lot of noise, then.  INT: All right, thank you. KHM: OK. CREW: OK.  INT: This is a letter telegram. What is it about? KHM: Well, this is a letter telegram dated 1942, which is-- is the last communication from my brother from [? Uzbekistan, ?] and it-- it reached Birmingham, England addressed to my uncle and aunt, Dr. and Mrs. Muller in Birmingham. It asks for a visa for him to enable him to get out of Russia and come into England. This was very last communication. 
INT: Thank you very much. CREW: OK.  INT: Where is this building? KHM: This is a building in Bielsko. This is what was known as the Werber House. That house was built by my grandfather for all his family, and they had different apartments where different members of the family lived. This is the house where I was born. This particular picture was taken by Yorkshire Television when I did the and it is like this today. It hasn't changed.  INT: Thank you very much. CREW: [INAUDIBLE] KHM: [INAUDIBLE]  INT: What is this document? KHM: Well, this-- this document has been given to me by the American [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] headquarters in Salzwedel, and that's the only document that I actually possessed after liberation. This was my liberation document.  INT: Mm-hmm. And what year was that? KHM: Well, I think that was issued the 1st of June 1945.  INT: Thank you. Who is this photograph of? KHM: Well, this is-- I am up above and my mother down below, and this was taken in the DP camp, Broitzem in Brunswick in 1946.  INT: How old were you? KHM: I was just going on for 20.  INT: And your mother? KHM: I don't know. She was 56, I think.  INT: Thank you. What is this sheet of paper? KHM: Well, I did mention that I started to put my thoughts down almost immediately after liberation, and this is part of my manuscript which I started in Broitzem in Brunswick in the DP camp which I presented to the Quaker relief team. And it is dated June 1946. This was returned to me on the 50th anniversary of liberation. 
INT: Where was it found? KHM: Well, the person that I gave it to, one of the Quaker relief team workers, had it all these years and returned it to me.  INT: What was that name? KHM: [? Eric ?] Hall Williams.  INT: Thank you. KHM: OK. CREW: Hang on. What is this document? KHM: Oh, this is my naturalization certificate which I obtained here in Birmingham in 1949.  INT: What happened in 1949? KHM: Well, I got married, and my husband got the British citizenship. And I got it on the strength of his-- his British nationality. I got mine in 1949.  INT: Thank you. CREW: OK.  INT: Tell me about this book. KHM: Oh, this is the-- the first edition of which was published in 1961 originally in hardback, and that's a paperback version of it.  INT: Who published it for you? KHM: It was published-- the-- the first hardback was published by Abelard-Schuman, and this was published, I think, by Corgi.  INT: All right. Thank you. CREW: OK.  INT: Tell me about this video. KHM: This is the-- this is the film that I did for Yorkshire Television in 1978 when we returned to Auschwitz and I took my son.  INT: Your son called-- KHM: My son-- my elder son called David.  INT: And how old is he? KHM: He was about 25 when we went back.  INT: OK. Thank you. CREW: OK.  INT: Another book. Tell me about it, please. KHM: Well, I-- I elaborated on the first book [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] in the later stages, and I-- I did write up the actual on-- on the video. And this followed the video in 1981. 
INT: And did-- who helped you with the book? KHM: Well, yes, I had someone that came and helped me-- interviewed me so that we could make a comprehensive assessment of the whole situation. And it was published in the States in paperback in 1982.  INT: Thank you. CREW: OK.  INT: What's this report about? KHM: Well, this is a document written by the presiding judge in the trial of Gottfried Weise in the high court of Wuppertal. Now, that's the-- the complete report on the-- on the court proceedings. That's a 255-page report, and it gives the-- the verdict on the last page where he was convicted of five murders and given a life sentence.  INT: What date were you subpoenaed to appear? KHM: I was subpoenaed in October 1986.  INT: Thank you. Tell me about this newspaper cutting. KHM: Well, this is a newspaper cutting from the trial in Wuppertal, and it actually gives the precise detail of his conviction for murder where he was given a life sentence in front of the public. This is the public gallery shown and a picture of Weise himself. Next to him was his defense counsel.  INT: Is this related to the document we saw in the previous photograph? KHM: Yes, I think so. That's taken-- that is the day he was convicted.  INT: Right. KHM: 1988.  INT: Thank you very much. KHM: Well, we're nearly finished, yeah? UNIDENTIFIED SPEAKER: [INAUDIBLE] KHM: Nearly finished. 
INT: Who is this? KHM: Oh, this is David, my eldest son, and that was taken at his graduation here in Birmingham in 1976. And he's now 44.  INT: Kitty Hart, 21st of June, 1998. CREW: Tape 19.  INT: Tape 19, I'm sorry. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] Tape 19, Kitty Hart, the 21st of June, 1998. Who is this a picture of? KHM: This is a picture of my elder son, David, taken at his graduation here in Birmingham Medical School, in 1976. He's now 44. And he was then 22.  INT: Who took the photograph? KHM: I think I took it.  INT: Thank you. KHM: Photographer, this one, who did that. CREW: [INAUDIBLE] OK.  INT: Who is this is a picture of? KHM: Well, this is a group picture of myself and three of my granddaughters and my daughter-in-law. The-- the eldest girl, Lucy, at the top. And the middle one is Sophie, and the little one, Juliet. And that was taken about three years ago now.  INT: What's your daughter-in-law's name? KHM: Anne.  INT: Anne. Thank you very much. CREW: OK.  INT: Who is this young man? KHM: Well, this is my younger son, Peter, with his dog, [? Suzy. ?] He had a little Cairn Terrier. And that was taken when he was about in his 20s.  INT: And where was it taken? KHM: That was taken here in Birmingham.  INT: Right. And how old is he today? KHM: He is now 42. 
INT: Thank you. CREW: OK. Who is this a photograph of? KHM: This is a photograph of my younger son, Peter, taken not long ago, quite-- quite a recent photograph. And that's his family, his wife, Moira, and his four sons. The eldest, the biggest, Jonathan, Moira, my daughter-in-law, holding on to Simon. In the yellow shirt is Daniel, and then there's a little one with a hat. That's Michael.  INT: Thank you. Where was that? CREW: So I need you to say that again. It switched off.  INT: Oh. KHM: This--  INT: Where was that taken? KHM: This photograph was taken at Harpenden.  INT: Thank you. PHILIP MOXON: Do you-- do you want me to say anything about Kitty's work with me?  INT: Yes, you can. Briefly. KHM: No, unless it'll come into it. Come into it, yes.  INT: Kitty, would you like to introduce your husband, please? KHM: Well, this is Philip. And I have known him for about 40 years. And we got married in 1992.  INT: Philip, how did you get-- how did you meet Kitty? PHILIP MOXON: She was introduced into my private practice by one of my partners, who brought her in. I thought she was rather a sad little woman. She was brilliant at her work, but I got to know the reason why she was rather sad, and that she was the principal breadwinner in her family. She had two children and her husband. She was working full-time for the health service and part-time in private practice. So she'd every reason to be rather introspective at that time. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] Later on, that partner left to take a-- a job in America. And my other partner died. And so I was left running the practice on my own. And Kitty, by that time, was very, very experienced, not only in-- in radiology, but in administration and also on a good deal of the-- the pathology, the work which we did. She was able to run the practice for me extremely well. Well, we started to get more than professionally associated when we took up a mutual interest in sport. There was skiing, which we'd taken up later in life, but we became quite obsessional about, so that we were eventually spending about a year on the snow. And then in the summer, we used to do wind surfing. So with all these sporting activities, and the-- the work, and my radiology practice, we were in close association. And then we were-- I was rather taken over by events that my wife died. And Kitty thought it was-- we both thought it was time that we separated her from her first husband. So we got married. 
INT: Very nice. How much of Kitty's wartime experience did you know about? PHILIP MOXON: At first, very little, until I-- I read her book. But subsequently, I had been quite a-- [INAUDIBLE] quite a lot. I had been to Poland with Kitty on her various expeditions there, and I'd been around several concentration camps, and I found it fascinating.  INT: How did it affect your relationship with Kitty, do you think? PHILIP MOXON: Not-- not to any detrimental way. But I must say, living with Kitty, you're never far away from Auschwitz. She tends to assess people as how they would behave under those circumstances. And she-- she suffers fools-- doesn't suffer fools, I'm afraid. She-- I'm very much aware of the fact that her previous experience [INAUDIBLE] all her decisions.  INT: Is there anything more you'd like to say about Kitty? PHILIP MOXON: Well, I-- I-- I always remember Kitty as a-- an absolutely fearless skier. No run was too dangerous or too black that she wouldn't take it full crack. Much quicker than me. I sort of go down carefully. At the same run, Kitty would be at the bottom, waiting for me to catch up. But eventually, she paid a price for this, and she damaged both her knees. So she had to stop Alpine skiing. And she took up [INAUDIBLE] at a time when the new technique of ski skating was-- skate skiing, rather, was-- was just starting. And she became very, very good at that. So if I had a-- I had an injury happen to me to take me off skiing, I should have been terribly depressed. But for Kitty, it didn't mean anything at all. She immediately switched to something else, which I would have been quite incapable of doing. 
INT: Kitty, is there anything you'd like to say about Philip at this point? KHM: Well, I'd like to say that he supported me in my Holocaust work all the way. And he gave me the opportunity to-- to do so many things which I wouldn't have been able to do otherwise. He gave me time off from work, which was very difficult. It wasn't easy. We had to get somebody else to do-- cover me, do my work, while I carried on and gave interviews and lectures and went around America. And he encouraged me to do that because he knew it was important. Also, some of the filming we actually did on his premises, in-- in the X-ray department, in Philip's practice. So he supported me all the way. And I think that's brought us much closer together as well.  INT: Thank you very much, Kitty Hart and Philip Hart. KHM: No, it's Philip Moxon.  INT: Thank you very much, Philip and Kitty Hart-Moxon. Is it right now? PHILIP MOXON: That'll do.