INT: My name is Susan Schreiber. The date is August 18, 1998. We are in West Bloomfield, Michigan. And today I have the privilege of interviewing Mr. Mark Webber. MW: My name is Mark Webber. I was born in Poland in a city by the name of Pultusk on March 29, 1928.  INT: Mr. Webber, would you give us your full name now and spell it? MW: My name is Mark A. Webber. It's spelled M-A-R-K, Webber, W-E-B-B-E-R.  INT: And your name at birth? MW: My name at birth was a Hebrew name is Mordechai, and you would spell it M-O-R-D-E-C-H-A-I. And the family name was Wygoda, W-Y-G-O-D-A.  INT: Were you known by any nicknames, or-- MW: Yes, everybody in the family called me Motek, M-O-T-E-K.  INT: And what date were you born? MW: I was born on March 29, 1928.  INT: Where were you born? MW: I was born in the town called Pultusk, P-U-L-T-U-S-K.  INT: And where is that located? MW: It's about 35 miles northeast of Warsaw.  INT: So 1928, that makes you how old today? MW: Just over 70 years old.  INT: And what were your parents' names? MW: My father's name was Abraham Wygoda, and my mother's name was Dvorah, D-V-O-R-A-H. And her maiden name was Srud, S-R-U-D. And my mother came from another town called Nasielsk, which is about 50 miles away from our city, N-A-S-I-E-L-K. S-K.  INT: Did you have any brothers or sisters? MW: Yes. I was born to a family of-- there was two brothers and three sisters. My brother Leo is the oldest, and then cames my-- came my sister [? Brunya, ?] or Braindel as she was called in the old country. And then the third one was Ann or Hannah, and she was the middle child. And then I was born, and my youngest sister [? Ray ?] or Ryvka was born the last one. 
INT: The village of Pultusk? MW: Pultusk. Pultusk. It's not a village. It was actually a community of about 20,000 people. A city we would call it.  INT: What-- what are your recollections of the physical layout? MW: The city was actually on the west bank of the Narew-- the River Narew, which is one of the prominent rivers in Poland. And the population was about 50% Jewish, and the rest are Polish. My recollection of it, we-- we had some happy years there as a child from my perspective, growing up in a close knit family where everybody had to contribute in responsibilities to-- to the welfare of the family towards making a living, if you will, from it. But my parents were not originally well-to-do at all. They struggled for many years to make a living. My father was a candy maker, and we had a small retail store selling our candies as well as candies of other manufacturers. And my mother was helping out at home. And as a mother of five she obviously was a very busy person. My brother, after school hours, had to help out. It's not that it was mandatory, but it was sort of expect that everybody was stepping in and doing whatever was needed to be done.  INT: The-- your house or your apartment, what-- was that near the store? Was it in town, or-- MW: Yes. The-- the store and the manufacturing facility was in the same building actually where we lived. And it was on the main street almost right near-- in the center of the city right near the marketplace. And in every Polish town or city a marketplace plays a very vital role for the-- in the community. So it was quite prominently situated, our home. 
INT: Was it a single-family home? MW: No it was a-- it was a three-story building, and our business facilities, of course, were on the first store, on the first level, facing the main street. The buildings generally, in Poland, were with an inside courthouse-- they had a courtyard inside. And to go up to our apartment, which was on the first floor, we had to go through the courtyard up to the first floor in a different wing of the building.  INT: Do you remember who lived on the next floor up? MW: No, I don't remember exactly who lived there. I only-- my memory only remembers one old man who lived actually almost like on the attic of the building. He lived all by himself. And the reason I remember him is because every year before Sukkos we had to go up to him. He had one of those sukkahs that was-- it was way ahead of his times because he kept on reusing the same one. It was everything was just precise to-- to put it together. So-- and he was an avid chess player. And he used to play with my father quite frequently chess, so that's how I remember him.  INT: Was-- is-- is that a pleasant memory of Sukkos? MW: Yeah, Sukkos, like most all the holidays in the Jewish calendar were happy events from my child's point of view. Of course, I had no idea how much work would go in towards preparing all the goodies, especially foods and everything else, but It was a special-- a special experience. You used to dress up in your best clothes that you had, you'd go to the synagogue, come back home, and all of us would eat together and sing together. And then after meals we would go out and walk around on the streets, up and down main streets. And this was not only on the holidays, but it was every Shabbat-- every Saturday we had this same experience. Beginning with Friday night we would close up the store and there was a-- a man would walk around or drive around-- not with a car, there was no cars to speak of in those days. And he would sort of yell out for the people and the merchants to close down their businesses for the approaching of the Sabbath. So people immediately, of course, went and they closed up, and they went home, washed up, and got dressed, and they went each one to their houses of worship. And then afterwards we come home and we all sat down around the kitchen table in the family room, whatever you would call it in those days, and we had our Sabbath meal, which was wonderful. My mother's cooking, she was very good at it. And it was very enjoyable. 
INT: Do you remember what kind of food you'd-- MW: Well, it was mostly traditional foods. There was always Friday night was gefilte fish, which was not from jars like we eat nowadays mostly. But my mother would buy live fish and work them from the beginning. She would make gefilte fish, which means that she had to chop the fish and fill-- fill out actually the meat from the skin. That's why it's called gefilte fish because she had to fill the skin of the fish, the slice of skin, with the fish and then cook it. And-- and that's what we were eating. That's-- that's what the word gefilte fish means, actually.  INT: So you'd have gefilte fish. Did you-- MW: And then we had, of course, several courses-- I don't remember exactly was, it was always chicken soup with noodles. That was probably the customary traditional way of eating. And then it was chicken, and the only chicken that I remember we were eating was just boiled chicken. It was not barbecued. There were no barbecues, and anything like that. So this was-- and then we had some dessert. And was conversation going on. And every Friday night father would always-- I was sitting next to father at the table, and he always wanted to know what I have learned in the cheder, which was like a pre-school mostly religious school, actually. And the only subject we studied there was the Bible. And he always made me repeat for him the portion that we started to that week, and had to interpret it for him from the Hebrew into the Yiddish. And most of the time he was pleased that I-- that I've learned and that I remembered what it was, and all that. Then after that, father and mother, of course, they would rest up, and the girls would become busy with washing the dishes. There were no dishwashers and all that. And the young-- the younger generations like us, and especially my brother and my older sisters would meet up on the streets with friends. And that was a very happy and cheerful event. 
INT: Was it just your family at-- MW: Yes. Friday nights was strictly a family affair up until after the dinner. After dinner, then we went out mostly socializing a little bit. It didn't consist of so much going into people's homes to visit, but on the streets. You'd meet up-- walking around on the street you would meet an awful lot of people. You would stop and chat. You didn't go out walking fast, you know, sort of like exercising, but it was just gentle walking and back and forth. The studio was not long like Woodward Avenue here in Detroit. So you spent one, two, three hours, and then we came home. We would read something, or play some games if you will, and that was the end of the evening. And then the following morning, again we would dress up and go to the city synagogue because that's where my father davened and did the praying. And after that again was a repetition, where we came home. And it was a little bit different because every-- especially in the winter times we would have, ever Shabbat, a cholent, which was a specially baked kind of meal. And it was not done at home. But we had to take it-- my sister [? Brunya, ?] the one that lives in Israel now, she was the specialist of this. And she would take the big pot that was prepared by my mother over to a bakery, and the ovens were not heated for bread on that time. But they were heated and then put this in. And this state and baked there all through the night. And then it was ready for us when we came back from the shul. My sister had brought it back home and opened it up, and the aroma of it was just killing everybody. That's how-- it was just wonderful. 
INT: Who would go to the synagogue? MW: The synagogue was mostly attended by the males like my father, and myself, and my brother. We would go to the synagogue. On the holidays, my mother would go-- I don't remember, my sisters must have gone too, but I don't have any clear recollections of them being in the shul. But of course, the synagogues were separated-- the men from the women. They were not like here. It was-- everything was Orthodox, and the women were sitting on a upper floor just looking down through an opening on a balcony, if you will, and they could thus hear everything that was going on here and see what was going on in the synagogue.  INT: And how many synagogues were there in Pultusk? MW: Yes, customarily in all these towns or small cities, there was only one central synagogue and one rabbi. However, throughout the city there were many other places of worship, which were mostly worshipped by people that were mostly Hasidim that had their own unique way of-- of praying, and sometimes even small variances even in the prayer books. So Saturday was a place that you could find through the city, people walking in all directions-- Jewish people-- to worship because these were distributed quite well throughout the city.  INT: Did-- did you have any other family in-- in town? MW: Yes. My mother's sister, who-- Chaya was her name-- she also married a man from our city. And that used to be the custom usually, that you married to the husband's city, where he more or less had some people that he knew to start a business, or a skill, a profession, or [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] skills like most of the skills were artisans. People were shoemakers, and clothes makers, you know. And we had her, and then we had also my father's family-- parents, my grandparents. And my father had a brother and a sister living also in our city. And this is basically the close family that we had in our town. 
INT: Did you spend time with-- MW: No, not much. The only closeness we had was actually with my mother's sister. There was a rift between my father and his family which was started yet before my birth. And I don't know exactly the causes of it, but it probably had to do more with the fact that my father had gone off the general traditions of his father's-- my-- father my grandfather was a Hasid, and very observant, and he had a long beard that he never shaved. My father, on the other hand, was a very active and devoted Zionist, and he was more modern, you might say. He loved Yiddish language and Yiddish literature, and he was a great collector of books. In our home he had amassed quite a sizable library of Yiddish books not just of Jewish culture, but also of other cultures and translated all into Yiddish.  INT: Do you ever remember meeting your grandfather? MW: No. I never met my grandfather, sadly to say. Although, I was told when I was born that there was a peace made between my father and his family. And that they were over at my bris, and everything seemed smooth. However, shortly after that they resorted back to the separation, although we lived quite close one from another. But I'd never visited, ever been to the home of my grandparents. Occasionally some friend would call out to me, hey Mark, there goes your grandfather across the street over there. It must have been public knowledge. It was not a secret about our lack of relationship. 
INT: And the-- the same thing with your uncles? MW: Yes, yes. Because my uncle also was of that same fabric as his father. And they worked together, and another matter or the reason maybe of the separation was because both of them, in a way, were competing against each other. Both of them were the only-- they were the only two candy makers in the city. So I don't know how much of a contributing factor that was in this poor relationship, but it was more a matter of basically I think of religions and of the fact that to my grandfather my father must have been an embarrassment, I would say, because he didn't sort of follow in his own footsteps.  INT: You said that your father was strongly Zionist. Were there discussions that you can remember in the house? MW: Yes. We were all Zionist. The whole family was strongly Zionist oriented. My father was quite active. Not only was he a Zionist, but he was active in some Zionist circles. I was-- I overheard once some noted international Zionist having been once visiting our city that he even was over to our home. And my father was well known for that in the community.  INT: And your mother, did she-- what was her life like? MW: My mother was a unique person. She was actually you might say the cement and-- and-- and the engine of the family. She was holding everybody together because she was everywhere and she was doing everything that you could possibly imagine, and wonder how she was able to-- to do all these kind of things. Having five children, not having any servants or maids at home, she was able to prepare all the meals by herself and go shopping by herself. She would make clothes for the children. She participated in every facet of the business-- not to the extent as my father, but she also wrote letters to her family. She had a great responsibility of raising her own siblings because they were all younger than her, and they were without parents because my-- both my mother's father and mother had died at an early age. So how she managed to find all this energy was just impossible to understand. 
INT: Did she ever have to help with the-- the chores? MW: The only help that she had that I remember was with the laundry. Laundry, it was a big job. There was no such things as washing machines and all this. So everything was done manually, where they would-- my mother would have either one Gentile woman or two, it's not quite clear in my mind. And the-- the washing process was a lengthy one. It took sometimes either a day or two days, probably most likely two days. And the washing was down in a big circular, maybe four or five feet in diameter, wooden tub about 10, 12 inches deep. And in there that would put the clothes, they would use hot water that they boiled on their own stoves in the kitchen. There was no running water in the house. And they used bar soap. There was no powder soap or anything like this. And mostly it was all done on one of those metal rib boards. And the ringing, and then they had to cook and boil some of these-- there was another phase of it, and then the drying and the wringing, and all this here took up at least two full days of work to get to this done. That was about the only time that she had help.  INT: You mentioned before, Sukkos. Do you remember any other Jewish holidays like Purim? MW: Purim was a-- it was a happy holiday. We were not dressed up in costumes as it is down here in the United States. Most people could not afford it. Even if they could afford it, you couldn't go into a store to buy them. So some costumes were made. People were home making them and all this here. They were-- you didn't put anything on your face from what I remember and all that. It was a fun holiday where the family would get together. But it was a working holidays. The stores were not closed on Purim. It's not like any other of the major holidays in the Jewish calendar. We did not go-- I don't remember going to the synagogue on Purim, but I might have gone, but I don't remember it. 
INT: Do you remember any best friends or-- MW: I don't remember any best friends, but most of my friends were more or less of my age and-- but some reason their names have all escaped me. Early on in the war, I sort of lost memory of them. I-- I have images of them, and I can almost picture some of them. However, their names have totally escaped me. And I had quite numerous friends because the same ones that were going to the cheder with me-- because the cheder was not just a pre-school. After we started going in the formal school, we would go for still two or three hours a day to this cheder. A cheder, by the way, is a school which is only done by one teacher, and as I said, that there was no other teachings there, other than the Bible.  INT: What was school like? MW: Public school was-- this was a public school in my days-- it was a public school that consisted mostly of Jewish kids, boys and girls in the same classes and everything. The teaching was all done in Polish by Polish, and non-- by Polish and Jewish teachers. The director of the school, I remember his name for some reason because he was a Pole by the name of Zigmund Zbiglewski. It's amazing to me that he and only one other teacher that I remember their names, the other one being a person that was teaching religion. That was also a subject in a public school. And his name was also like mine, Mordechai, but his last name was Stern But this-- this principal, he was sort of a person that was very stern and disciplinarian. All the boys had to have very, very short haircuts. If somebody had a little bit longer a haircut that he could grab their hair, he could grab them and try to pull them, lift them up with the hands. [LAUGHS] So he would laugh of him a great deal, and made a lot of fun. And school was also fun. We had intermissions, and we would play all kinds of games with balls, like-- almost like volleyball, but without a net. This kind of things. 
INT: Was it far from your house? MW: It was not very far. It was, I would say, maybe 10, 15 minute walk from my home.  INT: What language did you speak in your home? MW: The home language was Yiddish.  INT: Did your parents speak Polish, though, as well? MW: They-- yes, they all were conversant because we lived and our customers were Polish, and you always came in daily contact with Polish people. And it was the official language, so everybody had a commanding knowledge of the language.  INT: Were you aware of antisemitism as a young boy? MW: Yes. It so happened that in my age-- my generation-- antisemitism was on the rise in Poland. In Polish history, throughout its history there had been periods where the Jewish people had experienced relative freedom of religion and that they were tolerated. They were not citizens, actually, of the country until after the First World War was ended. But antisemitism in my time that I can remember firsthand was that they-- there was an organized boycott of Jewish stores, and there were pickets standing around. That's the first time I heard the word picket, and they used that same word, mind you, in Polish. It's not just an English word, but it's also Polish, and it's used, I guess, in many other languages, where you had two rows of Gentile people-- Polish people-- were standing in the front entrance to our store. And any time a Polish person was trying to get into the store they would tell him, don't buy at Jews. You can go to that part of town, or that part of the town. There is Polish merchants there where you can buy. Buy at the Jewish people. And my brother was full of-- of stories when he was going to school. At that time there was no school just for Jews, but they were mixed with Gentiles. And he always had to carry a certain piece of metal in his pocket to defend himself because he was always beaten up in the corridors of the school as he was walking. He would come back many times bleeding, and that why he decided to take this along to defend himself sometimes. So antisemitism was quite prevalent. I remember also a story that my father was telling me about a landlord once coming into our store and he saw on the wall hanging a picture of a Polish president, Pilsudski, who was sort of friendly towards the Jewish people, but he was not-- he, the landlord. And he took that picture off the wall, and threw it on the floor, and stamped all over it. And he came up with some insulting remarks in Polish on this president of Poland. So it was quite evident in Poland, the-- the antisemitism. 
INT: Let's discuss this more on the next tape. MW: Very well, thank you.  INT: This is tape two of the interview with Mark Webber. Mr. Webber, you were talking about antisemitism and the boycott. Do you remember when that was? MW: Well, that was in the early '30s. Of course, what-- what helped out-- stir up the Polish antisemitism, which was always just below the surface, was Hitler's rise in Germany. And his speeches on the radio and the newspapers reporting it and all this here found fertile grounds in among a certain part of the Polish society. Well, for many years, the antisemitic movements were sort of laying off their antisemitism. However, just before-- in several years just before the outbreak of World War II, antisemitism in Poland was on a strong rise. You heard every now and then of Polish-- of Polish people beating up Jews. But there was still a really close-knit relationship between Jews and Poland-- and-- and-- and-- and Poles because they had to interact constantly. Most of the merchants in our town, most of the economy and everything was run by Jewish people. The Polish people were mostly living on the outside, on the fringes of the city. But in the downtown areas and on the main streets were mostly-- although in our building, there were also some tenants, very few, gentiles. But on the marketplace, which was right around the corner from our building there, most of the merchants there were peasants that brought in their wares from the outlying areas around the city. And-- and there was some people had close friends among Poles. And the Polish people, many of them, had Jewish people. They used to say that every Pole has his favorite Jew, that he is the good one, and all the others are good for nothing. But the one that they happen to know, he was the good one. So antisemitism was on everybody's lips, and we knew that. 
INT: Do you remember any discussions in your house about what was going on outside of Poland, or-- MW: Yes. I remember distinctly a lot of conversation always going on. We were fearful of these speeches that Hitler was-- was-- was-- was giving in Germany. And this whole program of Hitler's created-- it instilled great fears in the Polish-Jewish community. There were talk already then that thousands of Jews from Germany were expelled. It turned out that these were people that were of Polish ancestry. They were born originally in Poland but they lived in Germany. And they, the German authorities, had brought them over to the border and just forced them to cross over across the German borders. And then the Polish people didn't care to take them in either. So they were sort of in between, in a-- in-- in such a zone, you might say. And there was pictures of them in the newspapers, in the Jewish newspapers and all this here. There was also some if, I'm not mistaken, there were also some fundraising funds taken up, collections, towards helping some of those people that were caught over there. So there was constantly this thing. And the Polish nationalism was rising. I remember, I think it was already in 1938, when the Polish people were very angry for something at the-- the Czech people. And they were urging, they were yelling 'Not [? Praga! ?] Not [? Praga!' ?] It means to go [? on ?] the capital city, of course, of Czechoslovakia was Prague. That Poland-- that they were urging that Poles should go and attack Czechoslovakia for some-- I don't know exactly what the grievance was. It was still before Germany took over Sudetenland, which was part of Czechoslovakia. So we lived in a generation and in a period of time where antisemitism was just beginning to really pick up a lot of steam. 
INT: So then what-- what happened? What happened in-- in your town to your family? MW: You know what happened is that most people feel it's all right. It-- it'll blow over. And this was typically the Jewish people's attitude. Maybe that is what served them well through history, that they were able to survive somehow. Make yourself sort of invisible. Don't stir up any fuss or commotions and all this kind of a thing. It'll go over, and then we'll get another period, maybe, of benevolence and-- and-- and quiet. However, warnings were issued to the Jewish people, that they should try to leave Poland and to-- to emigrate to Palestine, because there was already at that time a serious settlement of Jews in-- in Palestine. But few people adhered to do this. Some individuals did, voluntarily going away, as one of my aunts, Miriam, had gone away, left their families and gone away to pioneer in Israel. But for the most part, the nature of human beings is not to pick yourself up and run and uproot yourself, where you have lived here for centuries in the same community. So it would take something more concrete to get you really going. Well, of course, September the 1st, we all know that date. That is the date then the first [INAUDIBLE] war started, when Germany attacked Poland. And while it came suddenly, but the-- actually, it was more or less predictable that this is what was going to happen. And the Polish army certainly was no match for the German-- for the Germans. So the Germans were just overrunning. They had that blitzkrieg, and they were running over without hardly much of any opposition. And in our case, my family, before the Germans came in, my father felt that he wanted to save at least the children and my mother. So he rented from-- with some Poles, a couple of-- one horse and buggy. And we loaded up some belongings on it. And this included all the children except for my brother, Leo, who was already by then of military age. So he and my father could not leave by law, leave, run away. They would be considered as deserters. So they stayed behind. And my family, which consisted of my mother and the four other siblings, along also with my Aunt Chaya that I mentioned earlier. And they had about a two-year-old baby, or a year-and-a-half-old baby. So we all got on this buggy, and we took off. I didn't know. We were not told actually by my parents where we were going or what. But they had some experience from the World War I. And they figured, well, even if the Germans do come in and all this here, they weren't so bad then. So we'll somehow manage to live and get-- get by. And we felt that if we're going away someplace else, maybe the Germans are not going to reach there. But sure enough, after we-- we got to that destination, which was only 75 kilometers away from our town, and that is another town called Wegrów-- was spelled W-E-G-R-O-W. And-- but on the way to there we were strafed constantly by German fighter planes. They saw convoys of people. They could clearly see that they were civilians. They weren't-- they weren't military. And all of us would try to jump off the-- the wagon and run off the side of the road-- most of the parts were a forest-- and try to make it into the forest. Some people did and some didn't. And that was the first time when I saw, actually, some people getting killed by the machine gun fire from the airplanes. They were flying so low that you could actually see the pilots in-- in the planes. 
INT: How long were-- you said it was 75 kilometers. About how long did it take to-- to get there? MW: I think-- I think we got there in about two or three days. We got there. And [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] my mother somehow managed to-- I don't know if they had prearranged this or not, but they managed to get a house. Like, we rented a house. And we all got in. We brought in our belongings there. And we tried to settle ourself there. There were quite a number of Jewish people, as it was in-- true in most of the cities and towns throughout Poland. We were living in a-- in a period of fear. We didn't know, first of all, what happened to our father and brother and my uncle left all the way behind in Pultusk. And sure enough, the German army suddenly came into our town. And this was quite an experience to see.  INT: To your town, meaning-- MW: To this Wegrów, that place where we were evacuated to. And they came in, and not long into the war. It must have been like maybe 10 days or eight days after the war started. And the town was-- was very quiet. And when they came in, it was all this motorized army. You didn't see any soldiers at all. All you saw was machines, tanks and trucks, and all this kind of thing for maybe an hour it seemed to me. We were not going out on the streets. We were just looking out through the windows to see what is going on. And of course, the tension was all in the air. We were all apprehensive and worried and depressed. And after about half an hour or an hour of this parade of the motorized army, you started to see infantry soldiers coming in. And within-- and nobody, of course, dared to go outside because, in a war, you don't-- you don't go out and run around the town. But still, we had a baby in our house. We needed to have some milk and all this here. So we had to make it out, taking actually great risk with your life because every now and then you would come across-- somebody will say oh, so-and-so and so-and-so, this one was killed, and not so much by design as by accident. You know, there were some bombings. And-- and first-- and first casualty that I have seen there was a totally burnt human being. Must have been from a bomb or something like that. So as a-- as a child still, at preteens age, it made a tremendous impression on me to see a totally charred body of a person.
And within hours of the Germans' arrival, there was a-- a mounted effort for them to-- to recruit, and not so recruit as they would actually grab people to do menial work, like digging for them trenches and whatever other things, to clean streets. They were just grabbing people, especially if they see somebody on the street. Almost everybody-- and this is mostly, I think, that it was aimed at the Jewish population [? worse ?] as the general population at large. So within several days after the occupation, all of a sudden, my father, brother, and uncle showed up. They left Pultusk. Of course, Pultusk was occupied. We were closer towards the German border. So Pultusk was occupied several days before this town of Wegrów. And they then closed up everything, and they marched. There was no buses or any means of transportation. So they must have walked the entire distance to come over. And they joined us together. And then shortly after being there for several days, they decided, why stay in a-- in a town under the Germans away from home when we could go back to-- to our home. So then they rented a couple of wagons this time. And we loaded up our meager belongings on it. And we took off back to come to our city of Pultusk. And this was quite an ordeal because you could only travel during the daylight hours. You were not allowed to be on the road, actually, after a curfew, which was like 5:00 or 6 o'clock in the evening. I remember one night that we were staying-- I don't know how many days or nights it took us to get back. But one night it was pouring rain. And-- and the little baby of my aunt's was crying. The baby was crying. I don't know if she was hungry or whatever it was. And we were off the road. We were not riding, because it was already the curfew. And I remember then two or three Germans pulled up, military people, in one of their motorbikes that they had an attachment to it, that two people-- one person would sit in that, and two people on the motorcycle. And this elderly German officer came out and-- and very friendly attitude. And he wanted to know where the child is. And we told them and all that. So he told us to follow him. And we followed him over to a village, which was right nearby, a Polish village. And he got us into the barn of this Polish family that lived in the house. And he situated us in the barn. There was hay in there. And he ordered the Poles to bring us some milk for the-- for the child.
And we were staying overnight. Over that whole night, we were staying in there. And then he sort of made a remark that sort of stays-- I don't know exactly the word, exactly, but it was more to the fact that he says, I have a family too in Germany, he said. Who knows if they're not in a similar position as you are? And I hope that somebody will-- will feel some-- offer some kindness for them like I am showing to you. OK, that's the only time in my experience with the Germans that somebody had such kind words. And actually he did an act of kindness. Anyhow, within a day or so after this here we came into our town. And coming into the town was like coming into a different world. It was not the town that I remembered. It was totally deserted. And this was already probably the third week into the war. And every now and then you would see somebody walking on a street, like in the shadows, invisible. And that was not just for the Jewish population. You just didn't see any population at all. And so there was this fear, I guess, that was overwhelming in the city. And we tried to make it over to our house. And we made it over without any problems. And we moved in, and everything was intact. We opened up our business because we were advised to open it up, because if not, then the Germans would requisition everything, and they would take it all away from you. So we just opened up for a limited period of time. We had removed most of our inventory. And my father and my brother had removed it before they left and hidden that in our factory, which was adjoining to the store. And-- and then they opened up every morning. They had covered up the door and concealed it so nobody would see that there was an entrance there. They would bring out some merchandise and put it on the shelves and stay up for several hours. And then they would close it. But all this here didn't last very long because, oh, within a week, the 26th of September came along. And it was, I think, on a Tuesday. It was the day before the day of-- of Sukkos. I mentioned before about the holiday of Sukkos. Yom Kippur, we must have been in our town, but nobody went to daven. Nobody went to the synagogues. Synagogues were not open, or people were afraid to leave their homes and to go. There were all kinds of rumors around that this person was shot because they saw he was wearing a tallis.
And so they went and they shot-- they mentioned the names. Now, of course, I don't remember the-- the people's names. All in all, there was an air of terror created. There were people taken out on the marketplace and shorn off-- they used some scissors to-- to cut their beard off, just to humiliate people. There was no mass murders yet. This was, don't forget, still before the Germans had adapted the-- the program of annihilating the Jews. So everybody was afraid that something shouldn't happen. So we all laid in. The Germans made all kinds of demands on the people to make sure-- if you have a radio or anything like this here, you have to surrender it to the German authorities. Some people did, and others didn't. They tried to keep it, hoping that maybe they'll be able to hear what is going on. Everybody felt that the other world powers at that time, England and France, that they would come. They were-- they had pact agreements with Poland, you know, to come and help them out. But of course, nobody lifted a finger to help Poland. Poland was just totally taken over. Not only taken over by the-- by the Germans, but the Germans had made an agreement, a pact, with the Soviets before the war that when the war comes, Poland will be carved up. The western part will be taken over by the Germans. And the eastern part will be taken over by the Soviets. And so it happened. On that day, it was just in the early afternoon. It must have been around 1 o'clock. I am just estimating it. I was in the store, and my father and my brother. My mother and sisters must have been at home on the upper floor. And all of a sudden, the store filled up with Polish people, enter the store. And it was not a large store. Maybe if 12, 15 people got in there, it was tight. And all of a sudden they were grabbing boxes and bags of candy. And they were just taking them out of the store. They were not paying for it or nothing. So my brother couldn't take it. So he ran out of the store and run up to the corner of the street. And there was this tall German officer in a uniform and everything. And he went up and told him. He says, would he please come in with him to the store because-- and restore some order because these people are coming in and robbing us and all that. Well, he didn't say anything. But he turned around and he followed him. And he was tall, must have been over six-foot tall.
And as soon as he walked into the store, everything fell out of these Poles' hands. They dropped it all, and they all cleared out the store. And then he quietly told us, in German, to close up the store. The store is not ours anymore. These were his words. And we were shocked. We didn't know what it was. So we ran out of the store to close it up. And there we could see-- and ours, being the main street, we could see Jewish people were marched in front of Germans, the Germans with the guns and all this here, Jewish families with some sacks, with bags on them shoulders, whatever they could grab, and all going in the direction of the market. So most of the population had to go through, more or less, our area. We were unawares of it, being in the store, what was going on. No sooner did we close up that store, and we went into the courtyard, and the courtyard was just in turmoil. There were people yelling and screaming and Germans running around. 'Raus! Raus! Raus!' So we managed to run up yet to our home. And my father-- we had prepared for Sukkos. My father had bought a bag with potatoes, was standing there and all this here. He quickly emptied that, opened up some cabinet and filled it with some clothing or things, or whatever he could grab and put it into this. And within five minutes, we were all downstairs again and marched out into the market. And from there, in the direction of the most prominent part in Pultusk was the seat of the county seat, which was right on the banks of the-- of the River Narew. And there was a park, a large park over there. All the Jewish people were taken into that park, all within these several hours on that one day. And the-- you can just imagine. People-- families were separated because they didn't wait until the family would get together. If there were two people in the family or there were seven people in the family, whoever was there was taken out. And in the park, people were running around. This one is yelling, where is my husband, and where is my son, and where is all this here, because we tried to group together so the family would stay. Somehow we managed to stay with whatever belongings we managed to get together. And all kinds of rumors were going on. You saw a little airplane in the sky, and people would say, oh, they're going to bomb us. Then we saw some on the ramparts of this-- actually, it was more like a fortress there-- there were German officers there.
And we says, oh, they're going to machine-- machine gun us. And so this was going on like this for several hours, until finally, in three, four hours later, they ordered the men separate from the women. So my brother and my father were taken with the men. I was still going together with the children and-- and the women. And they marched us in in groups, to-- there was a little house standing there. And they marched us into this house and ordered us to undress completely. And in that house there were standing boxes, wooden boxes, covers from luggage and all this here, open, and they were just spilling over of valuables, coins, rings, bracelets. Whatever people had, the women were wearing, whatever they had, they had to take it off and strip it and put it all in there. Whatever money you had, you had-- you had to throw it in there. In my case, I remember, I had this torn coat that I was wearing. And my father managed to give me a couple rolls of-- of zlotys. Two zlotys were made out of silver coins. So we knew already then that a silver coin would have a better value than regular coins. So I put them into the pockets of this here. And I saw my mother all dressed up, you know. All undressed, I should say. And my sisters, other women. It was bedlam over there. It was not big. It was only maybe 20 people in that-- in that room. They had several rooms and all that. And the officer, when he saw me undressed, he thought that I was searched already and everything. So he quickly gave me my coat and my clothes and kicked me out of the room. And what they did yet, they took away from you everything. And then he would go and take two coins and give it to me. And that's what he did. He gave me two zlotys of whatever Polish coins it was and kicked me out. And I joined the crowd outside. And somehow we managed again to unite. And they forced us all towards the river. And there was this bridge, a wooden bridge, which was put up, a makeshift bridge, because the original bridge was destroyed in the war. And that bridge was a narrow one. It was not-- it was more for pedestrians. It was not for any vehicles. And the bridge was just two rows on it. On each side of the row-- of-- of the bridge were standing German soldiers with-- with guns. Some of them with guns, and some just had big sticks. And Polish, some Polish individuals were standing too.
And as the Jewish people were going through there, and they were forced to go schnell, schnell, quick, fast, they would beat us. And some people were telling stories. And I know, I found it out later on from historic reviews about this matter. Some people were thrown overboard into the river. Some people were shot at. Well, we managed somehow to get over to the other side, which emptied into a meadow of the river. And in there we heard shots. We heard gunshots. I don't know if they were shooting at people, which they must have, or they just scared the people to run. And we were running all in one direction. There was no other roads open to us, only into that one direction. And we were now all on the eastern bank of the river. The town was on the west bank. It was getting dusk. And I remember turning around, looking over at the city. And I said to myself, let me take one more glance of that town. I don't know if I'll ever see it again. This is where I was born. That's my town. And it's like a photograph in my mind. And we came over to a road, which was the main road going east. And some people stopped off. There was an immediate village, which was a resort place that in better times we would go, all the family and us, we would go out there for the summer, just the children and my mother. And my father and brother were staying in the city taking care of the business. And we continued on for another seven, eight miles to another larger village that we-- my father had some people, business people, that he was doing business with. And we came in there. And of course, those people were shocked. They were also Jewish people. There was a lot of Polish people there living. And they offered us their homes to stay there overnight. We checked in, and they gave us some food and all this here. All this, mind you, we were practically breathless because we were not given one minute of free to-- to rest. We-- we stayed overnight there. And we thought ourselves, oh gosh, maybe everything will blow over. Maybe we'll just stay here another day or two days. Things will calm down. Well, it did not calm down. In the morning, the first thing in the morning, the Germans were out in full force, forcing and urging all the Jews from Pultusk-- not the native Jews, not the ones that lived there-- only the ones that were expelled from Pultusk-- to-- back onto the road. And now, again, didn't say where and what, just go. And so we were marching like this again all day long, until we came into an abandoned village. The village had still some live chickens running around. So it apparently was emptied in a hurry. And we had seen, as we were going eastward, there were some people marching westward, but not Jews. These were German nationals. They were Polish citizens, German nationals. And apparently they were forced to take-- to-- to leave their homes and go into the city and settle in our homes. I don't know. I'm just assuming all this kind of thing. We came into that village, and there we stayed overnight. 
INT: Let's go on to this in the next tape. MW: Right.  INT: Tape number three of the interview with Mark Webber. MW: Well it was that night that we settled into that abandoned farm. And there, we even found some fresh bread that was-- the Polish farmers had these huge breads, that here, I would say, that you don't see anything like this. It must have been something like about 18 inches in diameter, big bread. And we ate, and again, like every time, we stopped over at a place for the night-- we were hoping that maybe we can settle-- settle down over there, and live through this whatever war period will be. And we were sort of always hoping that there's something better going to follow this year-- it cannot be all the time the way this is. Once things settle down, then we'll more or less be able to start living a semi-normal way of life. But it never came to be. Again, every time that we stayed overnight, the Germans came in again in the morning, forced us to continue on. And so we were coming through different towns full of Jewish people. The Jewish people all had stories already about the atrocities that have been committed in their town. And all kinds of messages and papers placed in prominent places, instructions and orders, that you must do this, and the Jewish people must do that, and you must come up with so much money to pay for the-- to the German army, all this kind of things. And along the way from walking so much-- because most of all, these wanderings of ours were by foot. There was no horses and buggies-- nobody had anything like this. But there was an avalanche of people going in that same direction. And it wasn't the thousands of people-- during-- you know, every day, the crowd was getting thinner, because some people might have wandered off into side areas, where they had also some connections with some people that lived there and all this. Yeah, but there was always people wandering and walking. The loads that people carried were getting smaller also, because it was too hard to carry and to-- and-- and to-- and to walk with them and all that. So along the way, Leo, my brother, got an infection that was caused by some new boots that he was wearing. And he was running a fever. So Father, in desperation, managed to get a-- a horse and buggy, and the driver, and put Leo on it, and then they put my mother on it, and some of the kids-- the younger ones. And then someone told me, this is not my own recollection, that my grandfather, my father's father, was also caught up on these roads, and that he was asked-- and he was put on the wagon there.
So it must have been him and my grandmother. My-- I, personally, do not remember that. And so we continued on this way, until we-- we came to the Soviet-occupied part of Poland. And the crossing of the border was nothing that we went through that here was a German outpost, and there was standing a Soviet outpost. The roads were not, at that time, they were not full of Germans. We might have seen a German here and there, or they passed us by, and looking at us with hatred in their eyes, and what have you. But we came, and it-- to my mind, from what I remember, we saw, suddenly, these Soviet soldiers. And they came towards us-- not with their guns stretched out, anticipating, I guess. The people were-- it wasn't anything new for them to see people coming over across the border to them. And from what I remember, their remarks was more like welcoming to us-- they says, come to us, we are not the Germans, more or less these words. Fine, so we crossed over. And there, we sort of breathed a sigh of relief. You didn't have this fear of you-- but we came through, you got to understand, without any resources. Most of our money was taken away from us, whatever we had, whatever my father managed to bring along. I had those two rolls of coins in my pockets, and maybe someone else in the family had a similar kind of a thing. So this was basically our-- our-- our wealth and our estate, except for some linens that my father might have put into the sack, and this and that, small, minor things. We had no pots and pans, or anything of that nature. We-- we finally came in to the large city of Bialystok. Bialystok was an industrial center. The city population must have been-- it was-- the Jewish population was quite heavy in there. I don't know exactly percentage wise, but it's not important. But it had a significant Jewish presence in there. And there were refugees coming in from all over. There were many people coming in from other cities as well. And we all compared notes, but for the most part, everybody was just preoccupied with what are we going to do? How are we going to be able to sustain ourselves, and all that. There were no-- to my knowledge, there were no organized Jewish organizations to come out and to help out the refugees. Everything was being done so fast and so quickly, that there probably was not a time for such organized attempt. But soon enough, we managed to get-- rent a building-- not a building, but a-- a home, an apartment, if you will, on the second or the third floor in a-- in a building. And we settled down over there. We started to go out on the bazaar, on the markets over there, and we saw that some people were trading things. And they would going to stores. There were things available in certain stores that were being sold at very reasonable prices, which seemed to be the standard thing under the Soviet system. But it was all hard to get to, because there were a mob of people at each of the stores, to buy something like, say, shoes, or some other ware, or whisky, or drinks of any kinds of nature. And so people were-- were able to get some of this-- these products, not for their own use, so much, as they were going out with them on the open market, and they could get for them maybe two-fold, three-fold of what it cost in the store. So, but how much could you do if you had to stand in line to get into a store for several hours? So obviously, you could not-- you could not develop it into a significant source of income. And we worked out all kinds of systems with other families, that we sort of created a-- a union, that one family, if they stand in one line, that they're selling tobacco products, for instance, and another one is selling food articles, another one is selling clothing or shoes, or other products that had a marketable value. So we divided that each family would let others come in, in front of them-- as the lines were huge lines. And as they made a turn around the corner, nobody in the back would see what happens, and they would let people from other families come in there. And consequently, we were able to increase our purchases, and our merchandise, if you will. And then we would go out on the bazaar and market and sell them. All these things were illegal, mind you-- you could get arrested for that. And you were subject to jail. But you wouldn't be killed and shot for this here, so we took these kind of necessary chances. And-- 
INT: And you were part of this? MW: Yes, I was part of it. And even my sister, [? Ray, ?] my youngest sister was part of all this. Yeah, we all had-- from the onset, we had this instinct that we were all for one, and one for all. You see, we all had to contribute our share towards the maintenance of the-- of the other family. So the-- all-- all this time, the Soviet people were anxious for the refugees to go voluntarily to the Russian territory proper, to Byelorussia, to Ukraine. And there were transports leaving all the time. And one of these transports, my aunt Chaya and her husband and daughter, decided they were sick and tired of traveling, and standing, and walking, and schlepping-- they had no future. They got all disgusted, and they decided to voluntarily go. And they settled in a community called Vitebsk in Byelorussia. And they wrote to us-- to us were coming back other relatives that came-- had gone into Russia, and they came back and they were telling atrocious stories of how awful it is to live there. They were not used to living under oppression, under a system of-- of-- of the Soviet system that was like. And the one cousin, I remember, from Warsaw, he had to smuggle his way across the border. The way it was going that he was under the-- the train car. He came across the border, and he came, he stopped briefly in our house and he told us, he is going back to Warsaw. He doesn't care what the Germans did to him, but he didn't want to be with the Russians. So-- so obviously, most of the people had no willingness to go voluntarily to Russia. The Russian authorities, on the other hand, were determined to see that the problem with the refugees is solved. So they came on this idea of having a general registration-- that everybody had to register. And at the registration, they were asking you, where do you like to go? Tell us where you want to go, and see if they were ready to give you a ticket to go wherever you want to go. If you want to go to Palestine, you want to go to Argentina, or to Australia, or to the United States, that you will be going. We were not so naive, but people-- many people did do exactly that-- they registered to these countries. We decided to register to go to the city of Vilna, which is now the capital of Lithuania. And it belonged to Poland before the war. We heard that Lithuania was, at that time, a free city.
You could actually go from there to other countries. So we figured, well, what have we got to lose? Well, register-- it doesn't make much difference where we-- we-- we were registered to go for. And it didn't make any difference. Sure-- sure enough, this was just a ploy, because this way, they got a hold of all the addresses where all the refugees lived. Sure enough, one day, I don't remember exactly when, but it was in the spring of 1940, there was a knock at midnight on our door. And we opened up the door in the middle of the night, and there was these three soldiers, Russian soldiers, standing and giving us this, you have five minutes to come down. We looked down the window, and we see a truck standing there, on the ground. And there were several other people already gathered up. And we grabbed, again, almost similarly-- but of course, here, we didn't have amassed yet the kind of things that you have when you live a lifetime in a-- in a community, and you establish a life for yourself. So again, we had to grab whatever we had quickly and come down. This time, they went out with guns, and with this terror, and all this here, but it was more organized, and all that. And they put us-- they filled up this truck, and we're going out on the streets. And there, there was this sight of people coming from all corners of the big city. And this was a big city already-- and not just trucks, all means of transport-- horses and buggies, carriages, everything. I don't know if there were buses or not, but trucks mostly. And we wound up at a train station in Bialystok. And they herded us all into these trains that were waiting. These were not passenger trains-- these were just freight trains, freight cars. And they opened up these big doors in the freight car, and forced us to go in there. And we-- there must have been about 50 people in our freight car. These were not any more people from our hometown. These were people from-- from Bialystok. These are people from different areas of Poland that suffered the same fate as we did. There was no conversation or communication, or telling us where we're going, and what we're going. They closed up the cars. And they finally, after several hours, we left. We didn't know in what direction, but the morning came, and we could see through the small little window on the top of the car that we could look out. I managed to, when we stopped, to see the word Minsk-- which was the capital of Byelorussia.
And so that's where we stopped. And they opened up the doors, and they asked a couple of people to come out, to bring a couple of pails of hot water, some soup for us to eat. And so this kind of procedure was going on-- I think there was also some pot or something for people to use, because they're-- for a bathroom. There was no bathroom in there, so imagine 50 people together, and all that, in-- in one car. And-- and so this was repeated for a number of days like this-- I don't remember exactly, maybe a week or more on the train like that. And then they unloaded us all off the train, on trucks, and took us over to the banks of a river in Russia. And we didn't know exactly where and what we were then. And they put us all, the whole transport-- which must have been probably 1,000 people, or whatever-- and they put us all on this river barge. It was a freight barge that you see-- not unlike what you see here on the Detroit River going through, but they were not as large, probably, in size. And the-- the squalor there, these-- filth and dirt, the smell, was just astonishing to us-- even though we were already going through now for a couple of weeks of wonderings and all this here. Still, this was a shocker and a revelation. And people got-- started getting all kinds of illnesses, and lice, and all this kind of thing was common with everybody, because nobody had an opportunity to wash or to take a shower all this kind of time. So you can just imagine what people looked like. Anyhow, after traveling with this-- with this ship, with this here several days, and we were going in a northerly direction, we-- they started to drop off groups of people every day. They were-- they didn't separate families. They would take the families and all, and drop them off. And so it was going on-- like every day, they would drop off another group. And ours was the last one left. And we were taken off in a city there. And there, we were put on-- on trucks. And the trucks drove about an hour or so, estimating. And you didn't see-- we were very isolated. There were no large communities of any size. Every now and then, you would go through a small village of maybe 10 little huts on there-- in there. And they dropped us off in a community which was barren of anything, except there was standing like three log cabin blocks, huge blocks, made out of logs on the trees. Because that's all there was there is just forests. And there was a small little river flowing through the town. And there was another small barrack which the administration was using. And its mission consisted mainly of some of their police, the interior police-- I think it was called NKVD-- which is similar, like what you hear now, the KGB, or whatever. And there were also there quarters for some native Russians, who were also, in a way, in-- arrested for some political sins that the authorities sentenced them to send them into-- into these kind of areas. They became our overseers. And we were not mistreated physically there, as such. We were not beaten. Nobody was laying a finger on us. However, it was made-- made quite clear to us that all of us will have to go to work, and the only work there was cutting down trees. So here, you have all these city dwellers, people, that were artisans. They were shoemakers, and tailors, and watch-makes, and artists, painters. All these kind of people were given an axe and saws and taken into the forests early in the morning. Well, we weren't taken anymore. We knew already our way. So every morning we did it all on our own. It was expected of us, because we were getting paid based on our work, on what we were doing. So in our family, it was five of us which were mandated to go to work. That was my father, and my mother, and the three older siblings. Myself, being of that age, and my youngest sister, [? Ray, ?] according to their law, we could not be compelled to go to work, but to go to school. But the school that they had, whatever they had, I don't even remember that school at all. But it was not-- for my age, my age was already out of school and-- [LAUGHS] and not-- not eligible for work. But I could volunteer-- voluntarily take on work. I could pick and choose whatever work I wanted to do. So I did exactly that. 
INT: Let me interrupt you for a second, just ask a couple of questions. Was there a name for this kind of-- MW: Yeah, the-- the general name for this kind of a place was called [RUSSIAN], which means like a settlement in Russian. But this particular one was called [RUSSIAN]-- it's pretty hard to spell. But it-- it-- it is actually like a-- like an island, is what they would call it. And I-- I remember actually the address, the whole address-- [RUSSIAN] number-- number two. And [RUSSIAN], that means the region is called Oshta. And then [RUSSIAN], which is a bigger city out of the-- that takes in the whole area. And then SSSR, which was the Soviet Union. So that was our address. And we started to get mail there-- we were getting mail from my aunt Chaya, and my uncle [? Itzhak-- ?] that was the only people, actually, that I remember getting mail from, when we were over there.  INT: And where in Russia was this? MW: Yes, this was actually in the-- you would say, in the northern regions of Russia. I would estimate that it must have been about 500 miles east of Leningrad, or Saint Petersburg. There were no large cities anywheres nearby. There were several smaller cities that were around there and some villages. In fact, there were some villages that were within easy walk. And we did some business, I should say, exchanging, trading-- there was no money exchanges-- but there was a little store on our-- in our [RUSSIAN], I would call it, using that term, where you could go in and buy-- we were given rations, bread, but they were adequate. At the beginning, our rations consisted of a kilogram and a half, which is more than three pounds of bread. But the bread is very-- was very heavy, and the three pounds-- three pounds of bread was smaller than you get a pound of bread here today. But it was very heavy and wet kind of bread. So we had actually a surplus of bread. We couldn't eat it all. So we would take some of these loaves of bread over to some of these villages, and the Russian peasants, they didn't have any bread. But they had a cow, and some sheep, and some chickens. So we traded them for some milk, or for some cheese, and some eggs, and we brought that back. Also, we also would buy some potatoes from them. And we would give them bread. That was our only thing. And also, every now and then my mother would take along something that we still had from Pultusk-- a piece of handkerchief, or something, a girl's shawl, or something like that. And they were just overwhelmed-- they had never seen anything like this in their lives, so they were willing to give us whatever. They were very friendly people, the native people there. So all in all, our life there, as far as feeding ourselves, there was no problem. Of course, there was no luxuries-- foods-- there was no desserts to eat, or anything like that. But the worst part of being there was our hopelessness that we didn't know-- we sort of were told, we were kept on being told by the authorities there to forget about ever returning to Poland, that this will be our life. This is where we will be building cities, and this is where we will be dying. Forget about ever leaving this area. So obviously, this settled down on us quite heavily, because we just couldn't see ourself doing this kind of life. We didn't know what else is going on in the world. We only knew that there was a war going on, which probably people in the United States didn't know much about it, between the people in Finland-- it was called the Finland Russian war. We heard about that. There was some-- every now and then, some newspapers that we were able to see from the offices, so that they were-- from the people there that were in charge of our security. We were not fenced in. There was no wire fence that precluded us from running away. But under the Soviet system, you can not just pick yourself up and run away without any documents in your pocket, because if you were apprehended, then you were automatically sent away or sentenced to some severe punishment for it. So nobody has ever attempted, from our groups, there, to-- in the course of being there, we enlarged, we added on additional blocks that we put up and all that. The dwelling that consisted of one large room, and it had a bunk on it. And all seven of us were sleeping on that bunk. And at the end of the barracks, there was some kind of a makeshift bathroom in there. It was not with any running water or anything like that. And I don't know what they used for toilet paper, because they didn't have any toilet paper in the facilities. 
INT: About how many people were in this? MW: I would say in the barracks must have been maybe 30 people. There were different rooms like this here, maybe less. Maybe-- I would say in the whole group, there must have been about 100 people, all together, of the refugees, the Jewish people.  INT: Was there any religious observances? MW: No, no, there were no religious observance as such. Except on Yom Kippur, we decided, unilaterally, that we'll go to work. Because not to go to work, we could have been subject to some punishment. But we will go to work, but we will not do any kind of work there. And so we did. I don't know how we knew the date of what the Jewish holidays were like, because some-- somebody might have had a calendar around. But-- but-- but that's what we did. But we were there only one Yom Kippur. Altogether, we stayed in this place for 14 months.  INT: Before you said that you had the opportunity of volunteering for certain tasks. MW: Yes, this-- this was called [RUSSIAN] which means it's mechanized settlement. The mechanized settlement consisted that they had two tractors there, OK? Two tractors in this-- in our days, you see a tractor, you see farmers have tractors or whatever it is, and they run on gasoline. These were tracks, almost like tanks. And the power to drive them was burning small little wood chopped-- chips. And you-- they had to constantly fuel them, in order to-- to energize them, to be able to operate them. So I was-- my job consisted of using these logs of woods, and with a handsaw, comes-- cut the small-- small parts of the tree, and then using an axe to chop up the-- the chips, which would fit into these particular tractors. In doing this job, I was at a much higher work scale than the workers that worked in the woods. Under the Soviet system-- which I don't want to go into, that's a long system to tell-- somehow, I was able to meet the norm, whereas in the woods, it was impossible to meet the norm. And if you don't meet the norm, then you got hardly any compensation for it. So my-- my payments were almost equal to the total payments of everybody else in my family. So having this extra money enabled us to buy more products in that local store that was on this-- in the premises. 
INT: You said you were there 14 months? MW: Right.  INT: What was winter like there? MW: Winter was always, you might say-- the winters there must be at least eight, nine months long. Because you're sitting in the northern regions of the country, and the summer times, it hardly got dark at all. It-- it was like gray zone. You could see quite vividly. Youngsters, like myself, I'm sure would have no problem reading anything in that light. In the winter time, you'd never saw any light, because when we went to work it was dark. And when they-- we came back, it was dark. So we hardly saw any daylight at all. I saw daylight because where I was working, I was not in the forest, but it was in the open fields. And the work consisted not only of cutting the trees, but we had to take the core off the trees. We had to cut them down to certain sizes. Then we had to get the logs out by horses and buggies. They would take them up to the banks of the river that were over there, piling them up for the spring when the water was rising in the river. Then they would let all those logs go down, roll down into the river. And they-- and they would-- they would float, I guess, further down the stream until they would get to the lumber mills.  INT: OK. 14 months there, you were about how old were you at this point? MW: Well, at that point, and this was 19-- I would say that 1941, so I was 13 years old. 
INT: Any bar mitzvah? MW: Nobody has talked about anything-- any Jewish observances. No, I had no bar mitzvah. I never had a bar mitzvah in my life. There were no observances of any kind there. There was no way of keeping kosher. You were lucky if you could get a piece of meat, and you devoured it. You didn't ask what it was-- if it was a horse meat, or an-- I'm sure we had horse meat, too, over there.  INT: We'll discuss this further in the next tape. MW: OK.  INT: This is tape number four of the interview with Mark Webber. So you were in-- MW: [NON-ENGLISH].  INT: For 14 months. MW: Yes. We were all together there 14 months. But I just wanted to go back a little bit to bring up something which was going on. As I mentioned earlier, the-- the pay for working as a-- a lumberjack was very-- was very small and low. And it was hardly-- they were hardly paying for buying the rationed bread, which was going at something like 70 kopeks-- that's their equivalent of pennies-- a kilo. And once it happened that they were out of the black bread and they only had white bread, which was almost like cake. And it cost two rubles and 80 kopeks a kilo. And it was terrible. We couldn't afford to buy our rations because we didn't have that money for it. Well anyhow, some of the-- of the youngsters, young people, healthy, in their prime life, like my brother, Leo, and they decided let's see if we can make the norm. Because in Russia, if you make-- as I mentioned earlier, if you make that norm, which is a certain amount of production, productivity that you have to have, then after you exceed that, then your pay goes up considerably. So they gave it all, and they decided they're really going to work hard and all this. Yet they were unable to do it. They could never meet that norm. So suddenly, somebody came up and says, a-ha. That's how you do it. So what did they do? All the lumber that was cut, they had to put them all in stacks. And then at the end of the day, there was a-- some-- some manager, the supervisor, would came around. And he was put a seal on the end of each log. He would measure the amount of logs that were produced on that day. And we were-- the pay was based on this here. So somebody came up with that idea, since everybody had saws over there, they went and they sawed off just a thin layer, where that marker was, that they measured it.
And they moved the piles from one place into another. And they came around and measured them again. So consequently, they fictitiously developed a larger production of-- for that-- and they exceeded the norms, OK? So thus, they started to get higher pay. And it became a phenomenon in the community there, that if you've got a family and another two or three other families have-- coming into money because they are able to produce so much. Now, they were writing in the local paper about us and all that. And that came us in to some good service later on, when we-- when we left the-- the [NON-ENGLISH]. The leaving the [NON-ENGLISH] came about as a result of the German attack on the Soviet Union in-- on-- on June the 22nd, 1941. The Germans were winning that war, as in Poland. They were just finding hardly any opposition. They were running like crazy. The Russian government was anxious to stem this onslaught, so they also signed up an agreement with the Polish government in exile in London, England. And as a result of this agreement, the Soviets were to free all the jailed Polish citizens. And ostensibly, these people, they would contribute towards the war effort. Many of them would go, would be taken into the Polish Army. And the Polish Army was going to fight the Germans, so that would help defeat the same enemy that the Poles had as the Russians. So this brought about our eventual liberation. Now, the authorities-- the local authorities felt that we are not Polish citizens. We are Jews, they said. So therefore, we're not going to free you. And we, on the other hand, said, no. We are Polish citizens. We are Jewish, but we are Polish citizens. And it was going on for several days to a point where we decided that we organized a strike. And in Soviet Union, a strike is unheard of. You don't have any strikes in a system like that. We didn't go to work. And as in every society, there are some informers. There was some Jewish informers that informed to the authorities who were the instigators of the strike. And they had a trial. They brought down a mock trial from the large city, the largest city in the area. And we had some-- amongst us, some were people that were lawyers back home. And their-- wanted to defend ourselves, to say that the authorities actually have exceeded-- had disregarded the orders to free us. And they decided not to free us, and that's why we had no choice but to go out this here. Anyhow, for some reason or other, I don't know what and what, nobody was actually arrested.
And instead, they gave us all an opportunity to leave. And they told us, you're free to go. In our case-- first of all, they give you-- you had to register where you're going to go. So they asked you where you want to go. Being that we have lived in such a terrible climate, and with the cold winters, and these long winters in all this here, so we wanted to go where it's warm, and also farther away from the front lines. Because where we were, we were afraid that we might be overrun. We could-- it seemed to me that we could hear in the distance some artillery firings and all that. So it's quite possible that the Germans were not all that far away from us. So naturally, we wanted to go away as far as possible into the interior of the Soviet Union, and where the climate probably would be nicer. So we saw on the map this province of Uzbekistan, which is in Central Asia. And the capital is Tashkent so we wanted to go to Tashkent. So they said, no. Tashkent is a city off limits to non-resident-- non-citizens. So we saw on the map a small town, and it was called Mirzachul. It's spelt M-I-R-Z-A-C-H-U-L. And so we said, OK. We'll-- we pointed at that, and we said, we'll go to this. So because we were, what they call, Stakhanovites, which means that are people that have exceeded the norm, and because the historic man that made the record productivity, his name was called Stakhanov. So they called everybody that exceeded norms, was-- they called Stakhanovites. And so they gave us-- for this, they gave us a cart-- a horse and buggy with a driver to put our belongings on it. Whatever we had to put on, we didn't have to carry it to the town that was on the banks of a river. And that's why we-- I said that took us very well, that we became so renowned and famous. And we parted very amicably. There was no yelling, or punishment, or anything like this. For the most part, actually, we got along well with the authorities while we were there. And we came to this town, and this town was called Oshta, O-S-H-T-A. And there they put us in-- we were already on our own. We were not under anybody's authority. But at that time in the Soviet Union, all the means of transportation were for free. You didn't have to buy tickets, you didn't have to make reservations. If there was a train, you could get on the train. If there was a-- a barge, you would get on this.
In our case, it was a passenger ship, and it was-- it was not a big one. You could get on-- maybe 50, 60 people on it. And we got on this ship. And it was taking us in a southerly direction. We were way up north, and we went on this here. We had provided ourselves with some supplies, and stores there. Bread was available. And we had still brought along with us, since we had the luxury of having a wagon. So we-- we were not hungry, more like thirsty, I don't know, water was available as such. But I don't remember us suffering that much. But there was no sanitary conditions again. They were squeezed in. A lot of people got in on this here. People were evacuating. That was the reason why they had this free system of anything that you wanted to go, and evacuate, and run away from the onslaught of the Germans. So it was provided for you. So we went on this one here until we came to some bigger river. And I think we were already in the River Volga, which is the main river of Russia. And then we had to disembark because this ship was too small to navigate those waters. And we got on another one. And so we did, I think, about two or three times like this, getting off one and getting on another. And we went through some very famous cities in Russia. And then we finally reached a point-- somebody must have been well aware of the geography in Russia because they knew that we had to take a train at that point from the river and continue on going east. And that's what we did. This time we were not on-- on freight trains, but we were on passenger trains. Also very meager sanitary conditions, but they had bathrooms of sorts. I don't remember any of these details at all, how we ate, how we fed ourselves and all that. I really-- it does not stand out. So obviously, it must not have been all that awful. And on the trains, we were going-- also we had to change trains once or twice, I'm not sure, until we came to the destination of this town, of Mirzachul. And they had names-- a different name for-- the railway station had a different name than the town that the railway station was-- was in. For some reason, it was called Golodnaya Steppe, which means the hungry desert, you might say-- whatever. Anyhow, we disembarked from there. And we had to go-- our first object was to go and find a dwelling, where to stay. And all the dwellings there consisted actually of mud.
They were all made out of clay and dried clay. They had a lot of sunshine there. So we managed to get one of those little huts like this here. And we moved in there, and that's where we stayed. To make a living, again, to go and get a job, there weren't any jobs available except very menial jobs, hard labor jobs, and all this here. So we-- we didn't choose to do this here. Instead, we started what we call the black marketeering. That was the communist thing that people-- we didn't have the skills of the language there. Again, it was not Russian. For the most part, the natives did not speak Russian. They were speaking Uzbeki language, which was more like a Turkic language, like from Turkey. And-- but somehow by knowing some Russian and they know some Russian, we managed to communicate. So we decided to go to that city of Tashkent, which was about 120 kilometers away from us. That's about less than 100 miles, maybe 75, 80 miles away from us. And we would get on these trains. And going on these trains at that time required tickets already. This was-- this was-- the period of evacuation had already subsided then, so then you had to buy tickets and go. But to buy tickets-- in order to buy tickets, you had to have a special permit. And permits were unavailable to us because we didn't work for any institutions. And to just to go in and say, I want to go to Tashkent, you wouldn't do it. So we just went in without tickets. And then if an authority would come around and all this here, either you would hide, or managed to bribe him, or something like that. So most of the time, we were going without tickets at all on the train. We went up there and we met up with some Jewish people in Tashkent, and they advised us where we can go and buy and this and that. And we started to buy yard goods, textiles in rolls. There was a market for it. We saw some people in our bazaar were selling it to the natives, and these were very colorful material. So we would bought-- and I was going to on this here. We would smuggle across-- coming to there, we would bring grain. We would have sacks of wheat, or barley, or whatever it is. And I would carry one. I was going with my sisters usually-- I remember with my sister, [? Brunya ?] from Israel and Ann from Baltimore. And we would go through the morning-- the early morning hours of the streets. And I was so fearful.
I remember that I was breathing so loud as I was walking there, that I was afraid that I will attract a lot of attention. And they tried to calm me, my sisters, down and all that, but to no avail until we came-- and we had a designated place that we were coming to. And we sold it to the people there at a certain profit. And so we had some capital. And then with this capital, we were able to buy this yard goods. And we-- again, how did we smuggle this in? So we went into a common bathroom. In that city of Tashkent, they had these things. It's a very crowded city, and we were traveling on street cars there. And the street cars were not that you could sit down. You didn't see the streetcar, all you see was just a mob of people in there. So what we did is we wrapped ourselves around, under our garments, under our clothes, with this roll of-- of yard goods, and then put our clothes on it. And then thus go on the street cars and entered a train and back, and come home. I don't know if we rested up any or not. In the morning, we were out on the market. Other members of the family were selling it. Some people were standing on the marketplace and-- was lookouts, to see if authorities are not coming. And so, we developed this kind of a system to try to survive. After-- after this it was getting to be difficult, more and more crackdown by the authorities, so we got into a business of going to Tashkent and buying pastry. Danish pastry was available there in Tashkent. And we brought the Danish pastry to our city of Mirzachul, where we lived. And we sold it. There was a headquarters of some thieves from Warsaw, Poland, Jewish people who were thieves. And my sister, [? Ray, ?] and I were the main interlocutors for them. We were the main merchants. We brought the merchants into-- the merchandise into them. Whatever we could bring, the whole inventory, we brought over to them. And I remember in this house they must have had 1,000 suitcases there that they had stolen from people in cities and all that. One man was standing with a knife and just carving them into pieces, and they had a fire in their stove going, and they were burning them. There were several people always sitting and playing cards with a big pile of Russian currency on the table. I just remember that. And they paid us cash right away. Whatever we asked them, they paid us for this here.
Well, one day it happened that we were coming back with a load of this pastry on this train. And my father offered to stay on guard. Everybody was tired, and they were going to catch a nap and sleep. And sure enough, my father caught a nap too and he slept. We woke up in the morning and the whole inventory, everything, was gone. There wasn't anything left. So what do we do? We're going to be starving now. All our capital vanished. So my father went to work. He was working for some government agency for-- in a way, it was almost like a mandatory work that he was doing. And my brother and him got a job also, and they worked in another city in a warehouse of rice, where they were-- they were storing rice over there. So they managed to steal out some rice in their pockets, and they were putting on these long-johns. And they had holes in their pockets, so they were filling up their legs full of rice. And they came home for the weekend or whatever it was. So we had some supply of rice. Their food consisted of rice while they were living there. So that's all they ate, is just rice, without any salt or anything. They were just boiling the rice and eating that. We saw that it was not leading us anywhere. We cannot go on like this. So we heard that on the farms in Russia, which are called kolkhoz, that's a collective village, on a particular one they're paying people not with money, but they're paying them 1 and 1/2 kilograms of flour for a day's work. Oh gosh. So we quickly used our arithmetic and we came up that we would have at least about eight or more pounds of flour. Gosh. To us it sounded like we would be living like kings over there. So we came. And the work consisted there of growing and planting cotton. That was the main industry, the main product was planting cotton. So we started to work on this-- on these fields. And it was hard work. The only food we had was this daily noontime soup that they were giving us, pumpkin soup. Just full of pumpkins boiled, without any taste, flavor, without anything else. And we had these big bowls. It looked like, to me now, like it was, like, two gallons in capacity. And this is what you subsisted on. Ever since then, I cannot look at anything pumpkin. [LAUGHS] But anyhow, we became more involved. We would also have a small little garden by our house where we lived over there. They were not-- they weren't paying us with anything.
This is what I forgot to mention. When the payday came around, they says, I'm sorry. We don't have any flour. So what are we going to eat? They said, I don't know. Go and fetch for yourself. Then a week later they said, we're not going to pay with flour. We'll pay you with wheat. They never had any wheat. All this time that we were out there, they never paid us anything at all-- nothing. So we subsisted, basically, on what we had from our garden. Or there were some fields also that were growing corn or other grain. So we decided, when they were getting ripe, when they were ripening, we took some pillow sheet, or something-- anything, a sack of any kind that we have. We took it along to work. On the way from work, as it was getting dark, we would sort of steel ourselves into the fields of that and pick up the sheet from there, fill it up. And sneak it into our house. We were not under guard, mind you. There, it was all open and all that. Of course, it was an illegal thing to do, but when we brought it home, mother was able to drive them. And she would make flour out of it, and she was baking something. She was so inventive that she could almost survive anywhere. And-- and thus, we were able to, more or less, exist a little bit better and sustain ourselves. But we were always hungry, really. We hadn't seen a piece of bread all the time that we stayed there, until just before our departure from there. There was some Polish institution had distributed some pieces of bread once a week to only the Polish people. We were considered the Polacks, the Polish people on the kolkhoz over there. I don't know how the natives subsided. Maybe their-- their-- their gardens were much more productive than ours. And we were mostly sick there. Most of all of us had malaria because there was a lot of mosquitoes over there. And the climate was such that it was very conducive to this. And there was no medical help for it. There was no pills. They were giving some pills which are totally ineffective. I developed a very unique kind of malaria, that it was mostly dysentery, that I couldn't eat anything. Everything was just running for me all the time. And I was so weakened that I couldn't get off and up altogether. I was just lying on a cot over there. And I had this feeling that nobody is even paying any attention to me, as if I was already dead. And I felt like I was dead.
Until one day I just uttered out a word that I would like some wine, OK? Just out of the blue it came to me that I would like some wine. There was no wine anywheres there, although that's an area where they're growing grapes. Not in our kolkhoz, but it was. My sister from-- the one who is in Israel, [? Brunya ?] decided and she went to town, which was about eight miles away-- no roads, just sand-- sand roads. She walked the whole distance, and she came back with a glass of wine, not a bottle of wine, but with a glass of wine. I had that glass of wine. And I believed this-- if not for that glass of wine, I wouldn't be here today. I was that close to really being a dead person. And it brought me back that I regained my full strength. And a couple of weeks later, I was up and around and being even able to work. Anyhow, we decided that if we stay on this-- in this kolkhoz, that that will be our end. It was not leading us anywhere. There was no way that we could really sustain ourselves any further. So we decided that we have to go back into the town. And to go back into town, we didn't have a place where to go. We didn't have any money, where to pay, even for rent. So my brother, Leo, and-- I don't know, one of my sisters or maybe my mother was involved in it too, they went and they found a house that was empty, vacant, because it needed some repairs. The roof was broken. It was open, and it was leaking water. There was no stove in there. So they talked to the landlady, the owner, a Russian woman, not a native Uzbeki woman. And she offered to let us have two months free rent if we will fix up that house and move it in-- and move in. So that's what we did. My sister, Ann, from Baltimore, and I were the main people working on this building of this-- we would work out clay with water together, pulled up buckets off it on the roof of that house, and patch up all the holes that were over there. My brother and others in the family were building the stove over there to do this. Then we still had some things, believe it or not, still from our-- back home, from Pultusk, some knickknacks. And we took them out on the market, and we sold them. And we decided, what are we going to do. So we decided-- we saw on the market, we saw there was a native person, and Uzbek, sitting with a box, a glass box, like you see in the jewelry stores, where they display the jewelry.
And he had candy in there. He was selling candy on the market, open. And we said, by golly, a man is making candy here. We were candy makers from home. But we didn't have-- we didn't know of any of these ingredients that-- I know sugar was the basic ingredient, which was available. But there are other ingredients available that we used in Poland, which were not available here. So we had no knowledge how to make candy. So we decided, OK. We'll go to Tashkent, which is the capital of Uzbekistan, and there we found somebody that was making candy. So we bought him a bunch of made candy and we brought it back to our town. And we put it into little jars, like coffee jars here. And it was my sister, Ray, again, my youngest sister, and I were the merchants. And the candy was dispensed with a teaspoon. You know, it had a top on it. We had the top off, actually. We were standing there and selling, like, each candy for a ruble. Maybe if you paid for it, two for a ruble and all this here. So thus, we were able to increase, a little bit, our income. And we had all these lookouts, again, on each corner of the bazaar to make sure that nobody-- we knew by then already who these people-- and we had names for each one of them-- that were chasing off all these illegal merchants. You see, in the Soviet system, you're not allowed to employ anybody. You could-- that man could produce candy legally because he was the sole manufacturer of it. There was nobody else working for him. And you had to get a government permit to do that. But in our case, we were not manufacturing any candy. We were just buying and selling. And so this was going on for several weeks, probably, maybe a month or maybe two, longer. And obviously, we were going back and forth. And we were doing OK, but not very well. Well, until one day, that batch of candy that we bought got spoiled on us. It all got gooey and stuck together, and we couldn't separate any of them. So what did we do? So then we knew from our experience, my father knew that that's an indication that it has too much acidity in it, too much acid in the candy. So we bought some extra sugar on the market and we remelted it. We melted this mass of candy down together with a proportionate amount of sugar in it and reworked it. And we made new candy that were-- we were able to sort of-- we handmade them. There was no machinery, we hadn't used any machinery at all. So we handmade it. I don't know if they used scissors to cut the candy or how it was made, but we made hard candy, unwrapped or anything like this. And in no time at all, we sold it all. And it became a tremendous success. Well, my brother set himself out as a goal that we have to find a way of-- to do it the so-called legal way. This was not because-- I had once this experience, that one of these police officers managed to come very close to me and arrest me, but I was very fast on my-- on my feet. And I could outrun anybody then. And I was-- I took off, and he was in hot pursuit after me. He was an adult, must have been 30 or 35 years old. And we were running out of the town through fields and everything for miles, and miles, and miles. And finally, I lost him. And I came in home, and nobody knew what happened to me. They thought that I was arrested or anything like this. And here I show up, and telling them the story while I was breathless, telling them the story of what happened to me and how I outran them. And we decided that we have to do something. Leo was very, very good business sense. He had a very good common business sense. And he decided that he has to go and find out the secrets of making candy in Uzbekistan. And that's what he did. 
INT: --with Mark Webber. And you were saying that Leo decided-- MW: Yes, Leo undertook to find out how candy was made in Uzbekistan. What is it that they use that we didn't know and that exists in this area? So he took off for Tashkent again, to that capital city. And he inquired there. And he somehow managed to come back with an idea. And he had a complete knowledge of how candy is made. What is used to substitute this potato syrup that we called-- that we used at home in Pultusk? And he brought with him some of these ingredients. And-- and we started to make some-- we-- we experimented. And, sure enough, it came out nice. So then it was the matter of how do we go obtaining what they called-- they call it patent? But actually, what it amounted to was, from the Department of Treasury, you had to get a permit. They call it a 'pa-tent,' patent. Had nothing to do with the patent laws and all this kind of a thing. You had to submit to the authorities a detailed plan of how many kilograms of candies you are going to produce a day, what your cost of every ingredient going into that-- in other words, what your total cost of manufacturing a kilogram of candy-- and what will it bring in on the market when you're selling it. And let's say, if the cost was-- if the profit on it would be, let's say, 40%. Of the 40% profit, the government would take away about 90% of that. And you will be left with just a bare little bit of profit at the end of the day. But at least that would give you the permission to sit openly, without the fear of being terrorized by the police. You see? So we know that the Soviet system operates on bribery. And-- operated, I should say, on bribery. And the common slogan, a saying there was that the bribe reaches-- bribery reaches all the way up to the ministers' level in the government. [RUSSIAN]. That's the Soviet-- that's the Russian expression for it. And everybody was on the take, OK? So Leo decided we knew the people, the principals in the department there that needed to be bribed to give us a peace of mind and to obtain the necessary permit to stay in the business. So he made an appointment. He took out-- there was a woman there. We had her name. We called her [? Kyla, ?] which was just a signal for us to know who is coming out on the bazaar looking for people like us and all that. So he got together with her.
And he told her, in no uncertain terms, what we planned to do. He's going to give her a certain amount of money, I don't remember, 500 ruble, 1,000 rubles a month. And-- and-- and he'll give her a box of candy every month. And in return, they should notify us every time there's a high commission coming down from the headquarters to inspect things and all. See, if some inspector is coming down, that they should notify us so that we could go legit and all this here. All this was done mainly that we could produce more, than what we have declared, at a much bigger profit than what we declared, so that we would be left with a sizable and very satisfying profit. And so we did also with the chairman, the president of the office there. And he was the superior, above all. So he did the same thing with him, only he paid him a little bit more. The only person that we decided not to pay was that man that did this to me, that was running around and chasing me through all those fields earlier. So, I bring this up, because I'll come back to him later on. In no time at all, we got this permit. And we made up a box. And the box was maybe about four feet long by about 30 inches and all that. And it had a flap on it, that you could open it, keep it open and closed completely and all that. To carry it, I remember, my mother made like a cylinder hat, like some of the shtreimels that the real Orthodox Jews wear on Sabbath. I don't know if you've seen them or not. And I put it on my head. I remember carrying that basket, that box full with the merchandise from our home, which wasn't such a long distance. Maybe it was a quarter of a mile or less-- I'm sure less than that-- to the market. And that we put it on a chair or some other bench or whatever it was. And the chair was standing right-- and that's all. And then you were in business. And some kind of a spoon or whatever to take the candies instead of touching it by your hand, so we take it. And I-- I'm sure there were other people in the family that were also doing the same thing. I cannot claim the only credit of doing this. This was not just my job. Father was mainly in charge, of course, of the production, of making the candy. And I'm sure Leo must have been contributing to it. Now we had primitive equipment.
We didn't have anything yet bought, things that we were accustomed to. But we knew that it would suffice. And sure enough, we started to produce. And it became an instant success. We were able to outdo-- as far as quality-wise, we were able to outdo our competitor over there. And we went-- once we-- we were generating already enough capital, so we went back to Tashkent, and we were beginning to buy some equipment that would enable us to make all kinds of figurines of candy and all these kind of things. So we had quite a choice and a variety of different kind of things. And we started-- we're making so much money, that we really didn't know literally what we're going to do with it, because in-- under the Soviet system, you could not go out and buy yourself, say, $1,000 suit and put it on, on Sunday, which was the equivalent of Saturday, and going out on the street. No, because it would, right away, awaken suspicions. How did they ever get to have this kind of money. So we would go-- we would buy-- you could buy dollars, beleek it-- believe it or not. Dollar bills, you could convert rubles into dollar bills. You could buy yourself expensive clothing, coats. You could buy jewelry and watches and all that and spend a lot of money, and you didn't have to wear it. We figured someday we will be able to use it. We didn't know when this will happen. But I remember, we were generating-- we had dollars. And we didn't know what are we going to do with the dollars. So we put them into cans. We didn't have any glass jars so much. And we didn't have the idea that it's safer to put it into glass jars. Because what did we do? We put in dollars into a metal can, like, say, from canned fruit. And you put that can into the ground. We buried it in our backyard. We didn't make a map of where all these things were put in. The cash was so enormous that we had bags of if, large burlap bags of Russian rubles. And we were afraid to have it at home, that we would be robbed and all this here. We had a pile of the heating fuel, which I have to tell you what that consisted of. It consisted actually of the plants from cotton, that the cotton grows on. That was our fuel, because it's a little longer lasting than straw and all that. So we would buy a camel load of this-- of this fuel. And we had a big pile lying in our backyard.
So we would hide the sacks of cash in there that was not converted into other currency. OK? Anyhow, we came-- we became the talk of the town and the envy of everybody, because we were so affluent. But we couldn't live it, as you know, to enjoy it. All right, whatever-- on the bazaar in Russia, we could buy things. You could buy cheeses. You could buy-- as I mentioned earlier, you could buy pastries and everything that, beforehand, it was off limits to us, because we couldn't afford it. But now we had all these things. Mother was able to buy meat and cook and make whatever she was accustomed to making in Poland. There were no kosher butchers or anything like that. There was no organization there, nothing-- no organized community, no Jewish community organized there, except that there was the school that was organized as a Polish school inside of a Russian school. And it consisted of just one class of students. And it took in students of my age, somewhat older, and somewhat younger. And all of us were put in that same class. And we had one teacher. [? Hudas ?] was his name. He was from the city of Lódz. And he was, by profession, an engineer. But he was-- he had excellent knowledge of Polish and Russian and English. He was also teaching us English in Uzbekistan. And he was teaching us all different subjects, like history and geography and mathematics, algebra, the beginnings of algebra, Polish grammar. All-- he used Russian textbooks. He didn't have any Polish textbooks. And thus, we were able to get some sort of an education, which didn't last very long. I think it was only like maybe one term or something like this, we took. And then we started hearing about the war. The war, of course, was taking on a more positive nature. The Russians had gone into an offensive after their victory in Stalingrad. And the Russian papers were not telling any details at all about was going-- what was going on in the occupied territories. There was no word to us given what happened to the Jews that were left in Poland, to the masses of the Jewish people, what was left in Poland and in Russia and all the other Eastern European and Western European countries that were all occupied by the Germans. There was no story of that at all in the newspapers. However, the newspapers were full of the Russian advances, of their victories of the Germans. And we could see the maps, how much territory they have pushed the Germans off and all this here. So we were started to begin-- to begin to think about maybe someday we might be able to get out of here. Because up until that point, we-- while we were not mistreated, we were living there and treated the same way as the rest of the citizenry. They were suffering. We were suffering. They were hungry. We were hungry. They lived in the same kind of dwellings that we did. We were not singled out for any special treatment or mistreatment, as the rest of the population there. But our dreams were still to get out of there. And all while we were there, we were getting letters from my relatives in Israel, from my Aunt Miriam and her husband and from my uncles in Detroit, Phillip and Irving Goldstein, that lived in Detroit. They were sending us parcels. From Israel the parcels were arriving. But from the United States, somehow we weren't getting. But we were getting some money, I remember, sent in from Uncle Irving and from Uncle Phillip. And ironically, when we were getting them in, at that time we did not need it. And no amount of our telling, our begging our relatives not to send it to us, they figured that we are doing this, putting this in deliberately, so that the authorities-- they figured that all the mail there was censored. It was not free mail in the Soviet Union, that everything there was going through some censors. So they figured that we-- maybe that's a signal for us to-- for them to send us help and everything. So-- 
INT: Let-- let me just ask you something. How, other than the newspapers, were you aware? Was there a radio, or were you aware of what was going on? MW: At homes, I don't know of anybody having had a radio. But in the public institutions, there were radios-- not a radio but just a speaker. And what you listened was just the same demagoguery and propaganda that you had in the newspapers. It all came from that same mouth and the same voice. Whatever the Communist Party in Russia wanted the people to know, this is what you heard. So hardly anybody listened to the radio. If you had a radio, itself, you might have, perhaps, picked up some news from a foreign country, from maybe from the West or whatever. So we only knew that they were angry at the West for not opening up a second front in Europe, that they were promised by the conferences between President Roosevelt and Stalin and Churchill to open up a second front, and that they were stalling. They were accusing the Western powers of stalling the-- the opening up of a second front. We didn't even know about the fightings that were going on by the Western powers in Africa on all this here, that we found out subsequently later on after the war.  INT: And you said that you were not maltreated any more than your neighbor's. Well, did you live among Russians and Uzbekis and-- MW: Yes. These communities consisted of mostly Uzbekis. They were the predominant population. I would say maybe-- I'm guessing-- maybe 20% of the population were Russian. And then the Jewish minority was a very small one. I don't know if there were 200 Jews living in that town. Maybe not, maybe less, I don't know. But it wasn't anything significant. The only thing that we probably excelled more than the others is that, that we did not penetrate the system, the Russian system, as the others. We did not have homes with grandparents and all this kind of a thing, that we could come to them and they could come to us. Everybody sort of lived on his own. And we occasionally mingled with some other friends. We made friends. Some of the friends that we had were also with us on the [NON-ENGLISH], when we were still in the, you know, imprisoned, you might say if you will, up north, in the northern regions before we came to Mirzachul. 
INT: OK. Go on. I'm sorry to interrupt you. MW: Is that the end?  INT: No. Those were the end of my questions. You were-- you were talking about-- oh, just-- MW: Coming to an end?  INT: No. I-- I-- well your time in there. MW: In Uzbekistan?  INT: That you heard what-- what was going on, and you could see that the war was probably coming to-- MW: Yeah, so we started to think more what we're going to do. How do we possibly get out? As they were coming already towards the-- the Russian armies were advancing already to Poland. And they were beginning to-- actually, on Polish soil. And then stories started to appear in the newspapers about the atrocities that the-- that-- that the Germans were taking out on the native population. It was still not called that it was singled out the Jewish population. But it was that the native Polish population was suffering so much, that there were this uncovered-- they had already uncovered some concentration camps, that people were killed en masse, that people were burned, that people were gassed. But to the average person, items like this here do not penetrate, because you could not comprehend such a thing existing. So we didn't know what-- we were worried. Of course, we were worried. We-- we-- we had all our families were left in the other towns all throughout Poland. There's so many Jews. There were three-- over three million Jews in Poland and in Lithuania and Latvia and Estonia and-- and Russia and all this here. What happened to all these people? As closer they came towards the winning of the war, more of it started coming in. There were transport of-- of things that the Russian soldiers were sending back-- pianos, art-- from occupied territories. When they were coming in already to Germany proper, carloads and carloads of materials was going back home to their home destinations. They were coming in. And people were beginning to tell us, gosh, have you heard of a word of Auschwitz? We began to heard-- to hear these kinds of things, which to us were foreign and new. We also wrote away to the authorities in Belorussia to inquire what happened to my Aunt Chaya and uncle. And we were informed by a postcard that they were killed sometime. I think it was in January of 1942 that they were killed. No details given at all, what and how. But we have decided that we have to make an attempt to go back to Poland. And the beginning to heard stories that somebody was able to get-- you had to get a permit.
As I mentioned earlier, in order to get tickets on a train, you had to get a permit from the authorities. So how did we go about getting a permit? So my brother Leo again came to the rescue. And he found out that, in the city of Tashkent, you were able to go in to see a certain officer from the headquarters of the police. And by bribing him, giving him a certain amount of money, he will make you out the necessary passports. Because, in Russia, they used the word 'passport,' like we have here a driver's license as an identification paper, document. So they have-- what they-- what they have is the internal passports. Without that, in Russia, you are an-- an unknown person. You were like a criminal. So we managed to get these passports made. Plus that we got a permit to obtain tickets, on the train, to go from Tashkent, to Poland via the city of Lwów-- Kiev, Lwów, which was part of Poland originally. But after the World War II, it became part of the Ukraine. And our destination was to go back into Poland and to see with our own eyes what it is. We never intended, actually, to stay in Poland, because, after what befell us and what happened in all this here, we-- our destination was to go to Palestine. Only there, we would feel secure and safe. So Leo paid a huge sum of money, which to us was not a-- was-- was not a handicap, because we had a lot of money. But some other families were not quite as affluent as we. But they still decided to go the same route. And they, through Leo, he was able to get for them also similar documents. And then we designated a certain day that we were going to leave. And we sent my sister, [? Brunya, ?] that is in Israel, we sent her first to Tashkent. We had some very dear friends, some Russian-Jewish family by the name of [NON-ENGLISH] living in Tashkent. So this was our headquarters, like our anchor. And we sent her there along with all these documents, these internal passports, with her, and also with all the money that we had, and also some of the equipment that we could lug along with us, take along with us. We were not limited with whatever luggage to carry or send it as a baggage on the train. So we sent all this with her ahead of us. And we and the other three or four families were going to take a truck, rent a truck, and come over. It was not a long trip by truck.
It was only a matter of about two, three hours or less to get there. And there we were to board-- and my sister was to go and obtain for us tickets. She was supposed to get the tickets for us, sitting and waiting for us, and to board the train and start our journey back to Poland. While-- when on the road, we were apprehended by this officer that we did not bribe to obtain our permit to make the candy. He-- somebody must have reported on us to the police, that we are planning to run away from the city. And they arrested my father and whoever. We were waiting on the road, actually, to find a truck going by, to stop the truck, and to pay them to give us a ride or a lift to go to Tashkent. And they found, on the other peoples, they found the documents. They had the permits from that police department in Tashkent and all that. On us, they couldn't find anything, because we didn't have any of that. But my mother and the other two sisters and our hand luggage were together with the other families in a house, right off the road, not far from there. And the police came in there, and they arrested all of us together, all of-- all of us and them. And they put us all on, like on a flatbed truck to take us to the police station. And on the way to the police station, since we-- and they didn't have any men with arms guarding us in all this here. Since there was an opportunity for me to run off the-- the-- there. So I jumped off that truck, and I escaped. And nobody ran after me. They had all the people. They probably didn't even notice me running off. And I went immediately to the landlady, that Russian lady who owned our house that we rented from her. And I told her what happened. She knew that we were leaving. So she immediately went with me, together, over to the police headquarters. And we found that all the people, they were not in prison, put into cells and all this here. There was only may be about, I don't know, 15 of us people. We are the largest family, of seven. The others were a family of three or four or something like this. So all of them were standing, in the hallways, by a window there in-- in the police headquarters. And it was all like a one-- one-story building. So they opened up the window. And she was able to take the luggage out, the hand luggage out from us and from the other families.
And we carried it over to the house that we lived in. And so the people were left there without any luggage at all. And also, I went to inform another very influential family, Jewish family, that were very close friends of ours, in the town, where we lived, in this Mirzachul. And they were connected to the Party. In fact, he was an owner of the Communist Party in Russia. And if you are a member of the Communist Party in Russia, then you were-- you-- you had access to an awful lot of authorities, and you knew a lot of people in the system. And you could get all kinds of favors for people done. So I went and told him about this here. And they, of course, were appalled to hear that everybody was arrested. They knew that we were going away. So I alerted him so that he could go and initiate some negotiations with the authorities and all that. In the meantime, they went and they freed the children and the women from this group. So they only kept the man. And then a day later, they freed everybody, except that they retained the documents from the people. They took away the people's documents. In the meantime, I went to my sister in Tashkent, because she was there. There were no telephones to communicate, to let her know what happened to us. We were supposed to have been there a week earlier, and, here, we didn't show up. She was sitting with tickets for us to board a train. And she had already gone once to extend the tickets. So I was sent over to her. And I also had another mission. While my father was together with the other families, so he volunteered that whatever it will cost us to bribe the authorities to let us leave, that our family would pay for a half of all of it. So we needed to have some money, and we didn't have any money. So I went to bring money back. And I brought the money back. And the people that were going to negotiate found out some news, that the chief of the police, whom he banked all his hopes on, was away on vacation hunting. So what are we going to do? There was nothing to do but to wait for him. Without him, nobody could do anything. So by the-- this took another week or so. By the time he came back, he went over, and we gave him the designated amount. I don't know if it was 50,000 or 60,000 rubles, which was an awful lot of money in there. And this Jewish friend of ours took the money over to that police chief, and he told him about it. And the police chief said he'll see what he can do. He found out that the case had already gone away from this home town into the headquarters. It had gone away from here, and it's now in the hands of the higher ups. So he says, unless I can come to the higher ups and to tell them something specific, what and where and how these documents were obtained, there's nothing that he could do. And he brought back the money. So we were in this dilemma. What do we do? So Leo, again, came up with this idea of-- of creating, making up a story of a certain individual by the name so-and-so in Tashkent, that he was told to contact him on a certain street. And he gave him the name of the street and all this here. And he is the one that obtained these documents for us. And he brought it back to this Jewish family, and he says maybe this will work. So they went, and sure enough, it worked. And we got all our documents back. And he told us yet, this officer told us not to wait, not to procrastinate, but to leave immediately. That night we must get out. So I just got to go back a little bit now, if you have another minute here on this tape. That the families, the friends of ours, were beginning to have doubts in our sincerity and honesty, whether we're negotiating just for ourselves or also for them. So they, although we were very good friends, they didn't trust us. And they came over, and they stayed watch over us that night, so we don't leave that night by themselves-- by ourselves. So this was very painful for my parents to see this happen and all this here. But at any rate, we gave them-- when we got the documents back for all, they gave it to them. And we told them that we were told to go and leave as soon as possible. And we made our own arrangements this time. And we left. 
INT: This is tape number six of the interview with Mark Webber. [INAUDIBLE] MW: I would like to go back a little bit in the history, back to Mirzachul. That's in Uzbekistan. What life was like there during the thick of the war, when the Russian armies were still retreating, and when these big huge battles around Stalingrad were going on, where thousands and tens of thousands of people were killed in battles. There was all-- all around, all over the-- that city where we lived, there was hunger. A lot of people were hungry. They didn't have enough to eat, including ourselves. People would find, in the morning-- it was not uncommon, when you would go out in the morning on the streets, to find uncounted corpses-- not huge amounts, not hundreds of them, but one here, one 20 feet away, 30 feet away-- people that finally succumbed to this hunger. They were swelled up. They were lying dead on the streets. The next day you would come out, you'd just have the same kind of picture. I don't remember any Jewish people, specifically, that this happened to. But this happened to, generally, to the general population, where people didn't have any means of-- of buying. Things were available to-- to people that had money they were available, but there were no government stores, aside from the ration that a working person was able to get a certain amount of bread from the government. Also, I would like to go back a little bit later on, when we were already thinking about going away. The reason we thought about making ourselves documents to leave is because money, to us, was not an object. And we-- while we were told by authorities that once the war will be ended, the Polish people will be able to return back to Poland, we did not trust the authorities. So since we had the money, so we resorted to take that route of procuring these false documents, even though it meant paying off substantial amounts of money, and doing something which was actually illegal. And it almost did us in, which it did. We-- most of all the moneys that we had managed to pile up in Russia when we became prosperous was actually left behind. One was with at the time when we were arrested, and we had to pay off the authorities. And the other was when we were gathering up all our valuables that we had hidden, all the dollars that we had-- [? they ?] had bought with the money, that we converted from rubles to dollars, or other valuables that we had buried throughout our backyard, we tried to dig them up and to take him with us.
And to, sure enough, we discovered that a good part of them were all rusted out, corroded away from moisture on the ground. And the dollars, we spread them all out on tables or on the floor to dry. And some of them had half of the-- of the piece of paper missing, others quarters, you know. All kinds of things. All total, I don't think it amounted to maybe more than $200 or $100. But over there it was actually a fortune, when you consider how many dollars-- how many rubles it cost to acquire all this here. And that's how we actually managed to get up on the trains in Tashkent, once we came in with that truck that we rented and we teamed up with my sister. And the-- it was just a day or two before the final expiration of our tickets to board the train. And we said goodbye to our friends the [NON-ENGLISH] family. And we boarded the train, just our family. We don't know what happened to the other three families that also had the papers, and made at the same time that we did. We got on the train. And the train took off. And one day into the train voyage-- the Russians always had controls coming through, the secret police coming through the trains, checking if people are traveling legitimately, or maybe to check they had tickets. I'm not sure if this was their intention [INAUDIBLE] to do. But I think mainly it was to check to see if there are any criminals or people that were wanted, runaways from the army or anything like that. But they were going through from-- from one part of the-- of the car to another. These were regular passenger trains. And here they came on. And they-- we took out the papers. And again they looked at us, and they saw that the papers were already a month old. So it sort of-- they were questioning it. It looked suspicious to them, because we didn't, of course, intend to stay that long. But because due to our arrest and the-- the-- the buy-out, and the getting out of there, and the final coming to Tashkent so late, so it aroused some questions in their minds. There were no computers that they could put our name in there and to check and all this here. But they somehow felt that-- that this could be something which was illegal and all that. And so they were questioning us a lot. And again, my brother Leo was the main representative of our family because all through the years in Russia, my father had sort of-- well, in Poland, my father was the head of the family.
In Russia, he sort of lowered himself. He didn't feel in authority. He did not know the Russian language as well maybe as somebody like Leo did. So Leo assumed more and more of the family responsibilities in Russia. Also, coming back again to things in-- in Russia, I have to remember, in Uzbekistan, this episode. This was soon after we came back from the kolkhoz. We had not managed to do much of any business, if you will. All of us got sick in the family. Leo and [? Ray ?] were at home recuperating from pneumonia. And I, my father, and my sisters Ann and [? Brunya ?] came down with some typhoid fever. And my mother was the only healthy one around us. And maybe she was sick too, but she acted as if she was full of energy and all this. She took us all to the hospital on that one day, and going back and forth constantly between the hospital and home, taking care of. And gradually-- The hospitals in Russia are nothing like the worst hospital in the United States. There's just no comparison. There's like just one big hall, where they had some cots standing. And there must have been separation, maybe men and women, because I don't remember Ann and-- and [? Brunya, ?] my sisters, being together with us. My father I remember and myself. And we licked our-- each other's wounds all the time. We were sort of coming back to ourselves there, sort of gaining a little bit. Mother was bringing us some cooked foods and all this here, which was nourishing food. And eventually-- we didn't have any shoes for all of us to go home. So she would use the same pair of shoes for one, take it-- take it home, come back with the shoes, and somebody else would put it on. And thus, we were able-- we were just down to, really to bareness. We were completely without anything to speak of. Anyhow, coming back to the train, Leo managed to persuade the officers that these documents, while they-- they intimated that there were some documents that were forged. The officers were intimating. And Leo argued the case that ours couldn't be that way because they already are a month old. So how could they be? If you had information, that must be of what it is right now, that ours were taken out four or five weeks earlier. So obviously, they had to be right. And I think he didn't have to bribe them or anything. And they just let us go. And so we continued on on our train. Constantly trains-- there was no other means of transportation available for us because it was like a direct west-- east-west movement.
We didn't have to go north and south and-- and-- and get on the rivers again. It took us into different cities, where we had to disembark, stay over several hours at the train station, and go out. At every train station they have this hot water in Russia, like-- they call it [RUSSIAN] which was free, available to everybody. There was no stands with anything to buy or whatever at the train stations. We-- we had, apparently, enough food that taken along with us to-- to last us for a certain period of time, because we were not suffering of any hunger or anything like that. It wasn't until we came to the city of Kiev, where we were able to get off and to go in, and we were able to buy some things that were available in the city. And that was-- Kiev, of course, is the eternal capital of-- of the Ukraine. From Kiev we went to the Lwów, which is also a large city. And there we spent some time. So we must have also gotten off the train and gotten in a train because the train that we would be taking in Lwów would be already going into Poland. So it was a separate kind of a train. And we had to get, I think, tickets because our tickets were only from Tashkent to Lwów. So in Lwów, we had to go and obtain new tickets. I don't remember any problem in obtaining those tickets. And the train, within a day or two, came into Poland-- less than that. It wasn't such a long distance at all. But we came into Poland. And we came into Poland with a heavy heart, because by then, a lot of the atrocities had come very much to our attention of what took place. We were told also that there was nobody left, that all the Jews were killed, that all the Jews were taken into concentration camps and killed by gas or by other mass-killing methods and not to expect anybody alive, which was hard for us to comprehend and to really believe it. But our attention was such that we were going into like an-- a no-man's land. We don't know what is going to happen when we come into Poland. And when we first stopped in Poland, and some of the people got off, not to disembark, but just to get some fresh air, whatever it is, we saw this Polish population looking at a train. And-- and many of them would make this remark, that there were still-- I can't-- they can't believe, they said, that there's still so many Jews left alive. And these kind of things kept on adding on to our own apprehension on the things that what we heard.
And we thought a lot of this thing was just made up or just innuendos, or just people's imagination and all that. It was beginning to become clearer and clearer, the antisemitism, that it was still prevailing in Poland even after the end of the war and after the liberation of Poland. Well, the Polish did not have any real authority in the country, it was governed by the Russian military government, because the military-- the Russian military were all over. They were still all over in-- in Germany, and in Poland, which was right between Germany and-- and Russia. So Poland was just full of the Russian soldiers and Russian bureaucrats. And there was a makeshift government, which was semi-democratic still at that time, between communists and-- and non-communist Poles in the government. I imagine there must have been some Jewish people in the government too of Poland. Our destination in Poland was the city of Lódz, because we felt that that-- that was actually the center of-- of the Jewish people, of survivors that survived the war. The center of them was in the city of Lódz. Once we came into Lódz, we came in contact with a lot of people. There were actually literally several thousand people there, all of them with stories of their own. And they were telling us what they went through. What they went through made us, our experiences, so pale in comparison. It was just unbelievable to hear that they-- one person of a family survived, or one person of a whole city survived, that the terrorism is still prevalent right now in the communities, in the small towns that we should not try, even attempt to go back to our homes and to see if there is anybody left, if there is anything left there. It began to crystallize in our minds that it's really true, that nobody's really survived, or the few that did survive are few and far in between. A good number of these survivors were not really survivors of the concentration camps. Many of them-- most of them were survivors of the Partisans that had joined the armed forces of Russia or Poland, and the Partisans in the woods, in the forests. So they were-- they were fighting in the rear of the German army. So, many of them were walking around still in the uniforms that they were wearing while they were in the army. Some trickle of the people that we-- when we came into Poland were people that had come back from Russia the same way as we did-- the illegal way, if you will. But life was beginning to take on an organizing way.
And they were being organized. The Jewish community was being organized-- not organized in the fact that we had our own governing authority. They did not have this yet. But we came in contact-- There were people, representatives of the Jewish Agency. There were some individual Jewish soldiers from the Jewish Brigade that were fighting on the Allied side of the war. There were people, representatives of the Jewish philanthropic institutions, like the Joint Distribution Committee. There were people from-- there was no UNRRA yet. There was no United Nations yet at that time to-- to offer aid. But offer aid was distributed by these institutions. And the representatives of the Israeli community tried to form-- each-- each party in Israel, each political party, tried to form units of their own philosophical structure. And we joined up one of those groups, which was called Gordonia. And Gordonia had-- had its history, the name, from a person, of course, by the name of Gordon, who was one of the pioneers that came from Russia to Palestine at the turn of the century. And his main notion was that the Jewish people have to retrain themselves to become people of the land. They have to learn how to work the land and build up an economy of the land, to sustain themselves, not to be just city dwellers, but to be-- you have to occupy the land in order to-- to have roots in a country. So this was sort of appealing to us. We wanted to have roots. We didn't have any roots. We were uprooted completely from our community, from our way of life. So we joined. When I say 'we,' it does not mean that my parents, my whole family joined. They were mainly interested in the youth, in the young people, to sign them up. We didn't have to sign up any papers. You just came in there, and you sat around. You're listening to their hearings and meetings. And they were teaching us Hebrew, Hebrew songs, an awful lot of Hebrew songs; and dancing Horas. This was a common entertainment, as everybody was trying to get their minds from the tragedy that befell everybody there. So this was sort of good medicine for all of us. My life and my sister [? Ray's ?] life, and [? Brunya's ?] and Ann's, and Leo's too, I guess, centered around this here. My parents were, in a way, isolated from us. They were not with us all day. We were going there to stay with them, like overnight. We were eating there. And eating was not a matter that you had to-- you know, if it was 8 o'clock in the morning, you had breakfast, and then at noon you'd have lunch, and then dinner at 5:00, 6 o'clock.
Life was not like this here. You ate when you were hungry. So you were looking at something to eat. You didn't look at the watch to see that it is time now to go and have a meal to eat. We did not have any 'meals.' We ceased having this in Poland when we left our home. That was the last time when we had an-- a sit-down meal like we used to have on Friday nights and on Saturday and on the Jewish holidays. We would eat always-- when you were home, I come into the home, I would look to see what-- and everything was home, you know. Wherever we came in, this became home-- what was available there. Mother was doing the best that she could in providing for all of us to have our foods that we were accustomed to eat, and what was available. It wasn't that she could go and pre-plan-- today is Monday or Tuesday; she is going to cook this and cook that. Whatever was available, she would go out and buy some vegetables on the market, or whatever we could afford. We still had some money with us. It wasn't any big fortune. But we had some of all this here with us. Also, there was an awful lot of political life there. We were constantly urged to go out on-- on mass demonstrations, that the-- the various Jewish organizations tried to get as big a demonstration as possible to impress either the news media or, whenever there was a certain commission coming down to investigate the needs of these Jewish refugees-- they didn't call us survivors-- refugees, whether to bring up the matter of the British-- forcing the British to let more Jews to come into Palestine or not. But the whole idea was to get all these people-- most of them, I would say the 80%, 90% of them had actually an inclination to go only one way, and that was to Palestine, not to go and settle anywhere else in the western countries. So the main effort was made to acclimate us to the way life would be in Palestine. For this end, they would bring down speakers to us. And most of the speakers were speaking to us in Yiddish, not in any Hebrew, because, well, Hebrew, we had knowledge of Hebrew, but it was not fluent enough. We knew how to daven and pray and understand the prayers. But the Hebrew language of-- of Israel, already then, was modernized. So the average Polish Jew could not quite freely speak it well. And they didn't speak to us in Polish, because the masses of the Jewish people in Poland spoke Yiddish. And the ones that spoke only Polish learned during the war, where they were in the concentration camps and everywhere else, they learned Yiddish. So we spent a great deal of time in these demonstrations. And in a way it was also brainwashing. We were being brainwashed to a certain ideology, to go towards Palestine. The object of all this here was-- the aim of all these institutions and the Jewish parties was that we'd come over to Palestine, that we should go and develop their units instead of just coming into cities and living there and try to get jobs. And we were told that jobs were not such a common thing over there. So that what is available is the things that the kibbutz has to offer. And kibbutzim were similar, in a way, the structure of the kolkhoz that we had lived in Russia in. Except, of course, this was Jewish, and it was not-- it did not have this rigid structure of the Soviet system of corruption. And that was the only system, as a socialist system, that actually worked. But the others was decayed. And this one really was progressive. And it was productive. They were supporting themselves. And so everything from that point was-- was directed only towards coming to Palestine. 
INT: How long were you in Lódz for? MW: In Lódz, in Lódz itself, which is the only place we were actually in Poland other than, once we were determined already to move our group, to move us out of Poland, we stayed in Lódz. And I'm estimating that we stayed there several months. I would say maybe four months. I'm guessing. We came at the beginning of-- of the year to Poland, and-- of 1946. And I would say that sometime in April we left Lódz. And from Lódz, they took our group-- when our group, I would say, I would call it kibbutz, because that's what they called that, the kibbutz. There were many of them. There were maybe half a dozen or a dozen of different names, you know, different cultures and philosophy. And ours was leaning towards socialism, our group. So they took us over to a city more to the south in Poland from Lódz. And it was called Bielsko. Bielsko. And there they put us up in a building. And we were, again, all on our own. And we were all together. My whole family and everybody was with us. But again, our main days and everything was spent together with the youth and with the leadership and with the lectures. The parents were also permitted to come to the lectures, but the parents did not find any interest in listening to all this jargon that was going on and telling us details. Although a lot of them were very interesting, that my parents, having been Zionists all their lives, were eager to find out what was the latest in going on in Palestine. So they likewise-- and they were there, of course, did not participate in this dancing and singing Hebrew patriotic songs and all that. After we were there for another very long time, maybe a couple of weeks, the order came to move us down again to the city of Cracow. Cracow was the largest city of Poland, of course, in southern Poland. And that was going to be like the last place of ours in Poland. Now there we did not have much time to ourselves. We were there a very short, brief period of time in-- in there, because, well, it's a matter of waiting only for the transportation, of a word that it's time for us to pick ourselves up and to go to cross the actual border. And the border was being the one to Czechoslovakia from Poland. And that was actually the mountains, the Carpathian mountains. And we were going to go through these mountains, over to the other side of Czechoslovakia. And from there the plans were to advance us further into Western Europe and consequently over to the banks of the Mediterranean, and from there, to bring us into Palestine. That was the objective, aim. That was the object. But of course, to do all this here we had to go through an awful lot of trials and tribulations. And that's when they-- they decided they didn't want to take this whole group, this whole so-called, this entire kibbutz, and send us together across. And they, for the first time, and since the outbreak of the war, our family became separated. They separated us, and they were going to make three groups out of our family. And for the first group, they picked me and my sister [? Brunya, ?] my oldest sister, and joined another 18 or 20 other people, mostly young, of my age, a little older, of course. Not many were younger than I. And they put us on a truck. And it was one of those closed trucks that you couldn't see out. And we took off, for our destination was to go to the border. After driving for about an hour or maybe a little bit more, they dropped us off. And we are just in the foothills of the mountains. And it was pitch dark. And we told us we had-- one of our leaders from the kibbutz was with us. And-- and we had also some Polish instructor or somebody that could direct us how to find the proper paths in the mountain, because what we were going to do is we were going to climb the mountain at night. And then when we would be reaching like the peak of the mountain, we would be staying over in a peasant's place. And that's exactly what we were doing. So all night long we were just climbing on all four. We had very light hand luggage, just a carry-on on the back. And we were climbing up. And there we were gathered all up together and put up. And we were there, I remember, on the 1st of May. The day of the 1st of May of 1946, we were on top of the Carpathian mountains. 
INT: And then you-- MW: Well, we spent all day there and talking about us, what we're going to be doing, and telling each others' experiences as much as one would want to listen, because none of us were really too anxious to listen to somebody that's going through similar experiences that we did. We found survivors-- not too many of them from the Holocaust survivors, from the concentration camps-- that were in our group. Our group consisted mostly of people that survived like ourselves, from the-- being, during the war, in the Soviet Union. And once the night came, the night of the-- of the 1st of May, we were descending the mountain. And we came down the mountain. It was almost dawn. It was just gray and all this here. And soon after we got off, there was a road, and there was a truck there standing and waiting for us.  INT: We'll go on to the next tape now.  INT: This is-- MW: Excuse me a second. CREW: [INAUDIBLE].  INT: This is tape number seven of the interview with Mr. Webber. MW: Yes, we descended on the day of the 2nd of May. We came down in the-- early in the morning hours, Sunday, Czechoslovakian side. And there was a train-- a-- a truck waiting there with a driver. We boarded the train, and the train drove us to the city of Bratislava, which is in the Slovakian part of Czechoslovakia, the northern part. Took us into the city of-- of Bratislava. And there, they put us in a house, a large house that could accommodate the 20-some people that we were in. Food was provided for us. None of us came with money-- we didn't go out and buy anything there. There must have been kitchens there, because we had some regular meals, and-- and all that. There were some Jewish people living in the city at that time, some apparently native Jews that had survived the war. And they came back after the war. And being that they were not from Poland, they were still able to retrieve the-- their-- their original home that they lived in. I really don't know if they were like this as I am describing, but I'm just assuming [INAUDIBLE]. They were very religious people. I could see the way they were wearing the beards and the payots and all that. And we were all secular, I would say. We were walking around. All of us were smoking, and we were smoking on-- on a Saturday. And they were yelling at us and-- you know, insulting us, cursing us, that we are desecrating the Shabbos, I remember. They were high up on the second floor and the third floor of the buildings.
So-- but anyhow, our life there was otherwise nothing special. My sister and I were very depressed. A day went by, and two days went by, and nobody joined us. We were of the opinion that the second group of the-- of our family, which would be my parents and my brother, that they would come subsequently like a day after us. And then the third group, with my other two sisters. So we became very unruly and all this. We asked people around that they had heard anything, and they says, no. You know, we don't have any telephones and all that, and no means of communication. Anyhow, they tried to be-- but I sensed sort of-- you know, the people were very sensitive towards us, very polite and friendly a different sort of than they were before that. But still, we didn't have anything substantive to think otherwise. So we had to just go by what we were told. And then an order came, after being there for several days, that we should march on-- go on to-- towards the city of Vienna. And there, the rest of the people will join us. So again, we were put on a truck and bused over to the border, to the Czech and Austrian border. And we were left off there. And they told us, if we are stopped and somebody is questioning us, to start speaking to them in Yiddish, and tell them that we are Greek-- that they would let us go. And all this time we were under the auspices of the so-called Bricha-- which is a branch of-- what was a branch of the Jewish Agency for Palestine. And they were-- their-- their responsibility was to get as many survivors of the-- of a war, and of Poland, to bring them to land in Palestine. So they were making and charting all these routes that opened up. They were bribing border officials to let us go through. They would procure tickets if they were needed to get on the train. This was not our responsibility. All this was done for us by these people. So when we came to the-- to the Austrian side, we-- there was nobody there questioning us of sorts, anyhow. But we were-- boarded a train. A train was standing not far away from the border crossing. And that train took us to Vienna. It was not a long journey. We came into Vienna. And again, we were taken by truck over to a hospital there. And that hospital was the center of all the survivors that were coming in from all the corners of Europe-- not from Western Europe, mostly from Eastern Europe-- was coming into Vienna.
And we were sitting there on the floor-- there was no rooms given to us, or anything like that. We were sitting on our belongings, whatever it was. And we were given food at certain intervals, distributed. And that's what we were eating. That place was called the Rothschild Hospital-- the famous Rothschild people. And after a period of time-- not even a day-- we were put again on a truck and taken over into the city of Vienna, into a school. And the school was empty. Now, there were no students in there. And that became our home for about two weeks that we spent in Vienna. All through that period of time, I was wondering and asking the people again, what happened? Where are the others? How come they're not joining us? They says, well, we're waiting, we're waiting, we're waiting. It turned out that they had known about it, but they didn't want to tell us. They didn't want to tell us was a tragedy that happened when the second group was actually destined to go, and they left on the day-- on the eve of the 1st of May, the day that we spent on top of the-- of the Carpathian Mountains. They were put on a-- on-- on a-- on-- on a truck. And they were taken similarly to the Czech border. And this time, they were stopped on the road-- they were stopped on the road, and they were identified by some uniformed Polish underground soldiers. They were not soldiers of the Polish army. They were just a-- belonged to an antisemitic-- a staunchly antisemitic group. They were-- they had the acronyms of NSZ-- OK, like it's the national military service. And they identified the people as being Jewish, so they forced them off the truck in the middle of the night, and they took away all their valuables, whatever they had-- a watch, or a ring, or anything like this. And then they gave an order to open fire. And they opened up machine fire on the people. And the end result was that my parents, and I think, another 60 people-- 16 people were killed. A handful were buried under the-- under the dead. They were not dead, they were struggling-- they were not killed instantly. And the Polish underground took off after this. And the few survivors crawled out from under the dead. Among them was my brother, Leo. And [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] [SIGHS] he-- when he looked at my parents, they were still alive, barely-- couldn't talk to them. And the other survivors, too, they were afraid. They didn't know that the area was without any danger anymore, so they were afraid actually to move out.
Finally, a few hours later, they-- it was quiet, so they got out. And each of them was going in their own direction. They didn't know what to do. Here, all their relatives and friends were lying dead, and the handful-- they didn't-- they-- they were-- they were disoriented. They hit the-- the-- the road. They were hoping to find somebody passing by-- and there was nobody passing by. So they were heading in a direction, they thought it would be a town, or some community that they could notify the authorities about what happened. And they finally managed-- not all of them. They were not going together, from what I understand. Everybody was on his own. And Leo, I-- I think went to-- and notified some police station in one of the nearby towns about what happened. And they-- they drove out, and they saw this here. Another survivor, which I read in subsequent accounts of this here, made it all the way back to Cracow, and with a driver that he'd found a Pole on the road that took him in. And he notified the community there what happened. And they all came out, and they picked up the dead, and they brought them in for burial into the city of Cracow. I've jumped, actually, ahead of-- of what my life was going on, because I did not know about all this here until at least two months later. We stayed in Vienna, my sister and I, and-- while the others in the group were going in, there was a Vienna Opera performing, all that. There were some concerts. The Austrians were very much into culture, even so soon right after the-- the war. And everything was, I think, open and free, or hardly at any price. So people availed themselves-- they went to concerts, and all this here. Ruth and-- not Ruth and I-- or say, my-- my sister and I hung around mostly in that school over there. And there wasn't that much going on of this lecturing, and all this here-- it was more of an somber mood, I guess. People, all in all, felt they knew, it turned out, that everybody around us, actually, had known about what happened. When we were still in Bratislava, they had known about this. But they held it back from [? Rynya ?] and myself. And my brother-in-law, who was here last year, I asked them, I says, how come you didn't tell me about it? You knew that I was supposed to be saying Kaddish. So he told me that they had actually contacted a rabbi and asked him what they should do. And since the rabbi found that-- I was told that there was another brother who survived, and he knows about it, so they-- so the rabbi advised them that they don't have to tell me that.
So they didn't tell me. And after being two weeks or more in Vienna, we were taken again into Germany, to a DP camp-- for the first time, we came into what they called a transit DP camp. It's not a DP camp that people settled down there to sit, and to live. People were there a short period of time only, like several days. And we were designated a certain dwelling to live in there. And again, all was provided by the numerous charitable institutions. They provided clothing, and they provided food, and everything else. But there was already some cultural life developing in the DP communities, in the DP camps, that there was already some Jewish newspapers published and printed. And one day, I was sitting at some friend's place, or someplace, I don't even remember exactly, and there was one of these papers lying there. And I was reading the paper. And in it was an account of a tragedy, a murder, that was taken place in Poland on the 2nd of May. And the whole account of what took place, and the names of all the people that died, included the names of my parents. And I was all alone at that time. And what hit me then, that I became completely motionless, and I could not pick myself really up. I was almost, I would say-- I don't think there's any people around me when this happened-- and I must have been-- I must have lost my mind or something for a short time, because I was able to pick myself up, what I remember, and to get to my sister and for both of us to try to-- to tell her what I read-- and I brought along the paper with me. By then, it became apparent that everybody knows-- knew about it around us. And our life was kept busy. There was no details given to us as to where my siblings are, what happened to my brother. They're going to come, they're going to come. I was getting sort of disgusted, in a way, building up a certain resentment and dislike towards the leadership of this entire Bricha movement. I felt a certain kind of deception, in a way, or I think that-- I blamed them-- I blamed them, actually, for the tragedy. I was more angry at them than at the Poles, if you will, that actually committed the murder. To me, it was sort of painful that Jewish people, even though they were not survivors themselves, or some of them were survivors-- because our immediate leaders were, themselves, survivors, but the leadership itself came from the top. It came from the Palestine-- from the Palestinian Jews over to us that they would take such risks of people that survived already the war, first of all, to go and break up families, and then to go and to put us into dangerous paths.
These roads were not tried to see that they were so safe, at least they had a strong percentile of-- of success. They were trying new ways to get the Jews out. Their motivation was to get as many Jews out as possible. They were not looking to kill Jews-- obviously, not. This was far from their mind and intention. But I was reading-- reading papers, and I read about the-- the pogrom in Kielce, which took place in-- in-- in June or July of 1946-- atrocities were taking place in Poland all along. But there was nobody to sit down from authority to console me or anything like this. When I was in-- when I was in-- in Vienna, staying around-- most of the people were gone, and I was-- I was write-- I took out a pencil and paper. And I-- I was writing some poems, you know, as-- as a youth, and romanticism comes into your mind, and all this here. And I was worried what happened a lot to my parents. And one of the poems I wrote, actually, which I directed mostly at-- was mostly about my parents. But a lot of poems were just about birds, and about other experiences at all. And I would like to take a minute or two, to actually try to read-- which I wrote-- I wrote the poems in Yiddish, but I will try to give it its English translation, which I just did this week, for this particular purpose. I called the poem, in Yiddish, [YIDDISH], Where Are You? [YIDDISH] Where are you, my beloved, my blood-related precious, who live in this turmoiled world, amid this anguish and sorrow? [YIDDISH] Had something befallen you? My heart-- my heart keeps warning me so much-- as the dreadful things happened yesterday, or some days before. [YIDDISH] In the dark of nights, I am drawn to you, as if something tragic wiped all out. But what am I saying? It must all be wrong. My love, so deep, tainted my thoughts. [YIDDISH] Why all this long silence, then? Be resolute, procrastinate no more. Don't let high-ups mislead you. Here is my arm, I reach out. [YIDDISH] Where are you, my beloved? I can see you are here, by my side. Pay no attention to kibbutz leaders, whose aims are with lies and falsehoods tainted. So [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] the period was very, very painful, although, by then, our feelings were so hardened that I don't believe that normal people could probably approach it-- I will call them normal in parentheses-- people that had not gone through, and been conditioned to atrocities, and to stories that we have heard and seen what has happened to our people, in general, and to our family, in particular-- that we managed to somehow go on with our lives as it was.
We were taken out of this temporary DP camp, and we didn't go to another DP camp. But because we were in a kibbutz, so they were taking us to a farm in Germany-- in Germany, actually, back near the Czechoslovakian border. But this was near the southern Czechoslovak side. And there, we settled. And we didn't work actually the fields, but they wanted us, I guess, to get the field to live-- to live near the side and all this here. There was no schools over there. We were isolated from any other Jewish people. We were the only group there. And by then, our group must have swollen to about 50 people or so, in number, from other groups that have come in. But everybody, up until that moment that I have discovered this myself, the tragedy, nobody had uttered a single word to us, how we're feeling towards going to Palestine-- the-- the-- the risky way, which they had a special name for it. Going to Israel is known, of course, by everybody's name-- everybody knows aliyah. But this was called Aliyah Bet, which is mean Aliyah [? to. ?] This was the clandestine way of going to Palestine. It was the one that was going to go and force your way through to Palestine by trying to avoid the patrols of the British ships that were not letting more than 1,000 Jews come in legitimately to Palestine. They had issued a white paper, the British, just before the outbreak of the war, to appease the Arabs and-- that lived in Palestine, that they would not let-- let indiscriminately, Jewish people come into Palestine. So they came out with a figure of only 1,000 of these certificates would be issued to Jewish people in a month. Every month, they would only let 1,000 in. So we sort of were leaning in that direction, that we were not going to continue anymore. But then came word to us that my brother, Leo, and my other two sisters, had arrived from Poland with another group of that same Gordonia kibbutz group, and they were taken into a DP camp in the part of-- in the part of Germany near the city of Ulm. And that camp was called Hindenburg Kaserne-- that was the DP camp called. It was an old abandoned German military camp. And there were-- we went over to visit, to get together with them. So you can imagine the emotional get-together that this must have been. For hours, we were just speechless, and just trying to get the actual accounting from Leo what took place. And it wasn't really an awful lot of details, because Leo could not get himself to talk that much about it, and neither did my other two sisters, who had been with Leo all this time in Poland.
But it sunk into us. We continued staying, though, in this kibbutz over there. But it bothered Leo that I and my sister, [? Ray, ?] being the youngest in the family, should stay in this DP camp, where there was no school for us, where he heard in other DP camps that they were much better established older ones, that they had organized school. They had Hebrew-- a Hebrew so-called high school in some of these camps. So he found out that there was one DP camp by the name of Feldafing. And that one was just about 20-some kilometers or 30 kilometers from Munich. They had a school. But to get us into that community was very difficult, and Leo had to use a lot of help that we had from a relative of my uncle's in Israel, who lived-- and he was one of the founders of this DP camp. So through his intervention, they managed to get [? Ray ?] and myself to live in what they called a jugendheim, which is a home for youth, all orphans, in that DP camp in Feldafing. So we left Leo, Ann, and [? Brunia, ?] in-- in Hindenburg Kaserne in autumn, and we went to Feldafing. And we started going to school. And that school had several classes in there, and it was all in Hebrew, not in Yiddish, and not in English, not in Polish-- only in Hebrew. All the teachers spoke to us in Hebrew. All the subjects, everything was taught to us in Hebrew, and because, again, most of the people were still thinking in their minds that their main destination was Palestine. And we, too, were still hopeful that sooner or later, we will be able to go to Palestine in a legitimate way. And while we were in this-- in this DP camp there, we were going to that school, [? Ray ?] and I, Leo and Ann and [? Ray ?] and-- and [? Brunia, ?] they came to-- and [? Brunia ?] was staying on the kibbutz. She did not move from that kibbutz, but I lived with her. She stayed on there, and she fell in love with the leader of the kibbutz, and they got married while they were on that kibbutz. So we all came to the kibbutz while I was already then with my brother and sisters in the-- in the DP camp in Ulm. So we drove to the wedding at the kibbutz. And right after the wedding, we went back, and they stayed on the kibbutz and [? Brunia ?] became pregnant. So she was given a certificate-- one of those certificates that I mentioned earlier. And she managed to go away to Palestine in the legal way. And there, she went, and-- and-- and stayed with my aunt, my mother's sister, Miriam, in Haifa. While Leo in the meantime, decided to take up all these urgings from my two uncles that lived in Detroit-- they were sending us all kinds of affidavits all these years-- not years, but these months of struggle there, that we must-- we-- we just set aside all those documents, because we didn't want to go to the United States. We want only to go to Palestine. But they decided to register for the-- to go to the United States. And we all went to the American consulate in the Stuttgart, Germany, which was the district where we what-- that took in-- the Ulm. And we all passed the American authorities over there, and we were waiting to be approved of a visa to get visas to come to the United States. In the meantime, we graduated from our high school over there, and Ray continued on with her studies in Munich. And I took up some studies of the ORT schools, which they train you different skills, professions that you wanted to pursue in your life. So I was attending those schools. And then, while we were at this here, there was-- there was some news came to us that there is a camp, a special camp, and it was to Prien, P-R-I-N-- in-- in Germany, that is for youth only under the age of 16, or 18, whatever it was, that these people did-- they-- you can go to Canada in very short order. So since we were afraid that our visas for America may not come through for a-- for a long time, so Leo, together with all of us together, decided that Ray and I should go to that camp over, register there, and pursue our trip to go to Canada. 
INT: Let's hear the rest of the journey on the next tape. CREW: OK.  INT: This is tape eight of interview with Mark Webber. MW: Well, we had come-- my sister, my younger sister Rae and I came in to this Camp Prien. We registered there, and in order to qualify there, we had to be orphans. And so we, of course, were orphans, but we denied that we had other members of the family because the others didn't qualify for this program. So I didn't know if it would affect our chances of going there or not. But we said that we're the only survivors of the family. And was applied, and there were survivors of all kinds. Mostly the survivors were all of-- of-- all kinds of camps and ghettos, the partisans from Russia, from all-- from all kinds of ways that people survived. Many of them were in hiding, whether it was in Poland. But mostly all of them were East European Jews, of course. We didn't come in contact with any Western European Jews for one reason or another. We were a short time and our Canadian visas were approved. And we were happy that we were finally going to go. On the one hand, we were very sad that, again, we're going to be leaving half of our family, Leo and Ann in Germany without knowing what is going to happen to them. When are we going to be together? So [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] we were delighted when-- after we-- we heard that our visas were approved the Canadians, and we were delayed immediate departure because of an maritime strike, and there were no ships going between Europe and the United-- the United States or Canada. Within several days after that, we got a call, a telephone call came in to the office from Leo that all of our visas were approved to go to the United States. And so naturally there was no hesitation in our minds to go to-- to the United States. On the other hand, we felt guilty. Here there was a lot of people waiting. A lot of people were waiting for getting their certificates to go, visas to go to Canada, that we didn't want them to go to waste. So we decided that we're going to go and tell the authorities, which was run by about three or four elderly American women of this camp, to tell them, hey, we had a brother and a sister. And we have visas now that we're going over to be reunited with our families. I had two uncles in Detroit, my uncle Irving and my uncle Philip, who had come over after the First World War to-- to the United States, [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] that we want to go together.
And we don't want these two Canadian visas to go to waste. So that's why we would like to turn them in, and maybe you could hand them out to some others. Well, these ladies were so offended that we were such liars, that we had concealed that we had some other siblings in the family, that they swore that they were not let us go into the United States or to Canada. They were going to blackmail us, to put us on the blacklist that we cannot go to the United States because we don't need to have any liars coming into the United States. Well, Rae and I were so down, we were crying. Well, we decided with our-- we had a little bit of knowledge of English from our studies in Uzbekistan. With our broken English, we decided to go and throw ourselves literally on the knees before these women, and begging them not to do this to us. Well, I don't know if there was some other intervention, but they completely forgot about this here. They didn't do anything. We left. We rejoined together, joined up with Leo and with Ann. And we made our way over to Bremerhaven, which is the port where we were supposed to be leaving from Germany toward-- for the United States. Down-- down there-- this must have been exactly the date. I cannot tell, but it must have been sometimes at the beginning of the month of May or so, or just as-- the middle of the May because I believe that Israel was proclaimed independent state about that time that we were sitting in wait for the strike to be over, and for us to be able to board the-- the ship. It was almost like a semi-imprisonment. We felt like we were in prison. We couldn't go out into the city and to see the daylight. We were cut off from-- from newspaper, from the news. We didn't know what was going on. Finally we boarded the ship. And this used to be an old ship from World War II that was transporting soldiers to the war and bringing back wounded or others. It was this kind of a ship. I'd never been on a ship like this. It was much more advanced to me than from those ships that we had in Russia. Well, they were not ocean-going ships in Russia, but this was a big ship. And we all got sick the first day after we left Bremerhaven. The journey was insignificant. We were sticking together and talking about what we can expect over there in the United States, coming into such a big country. Of course, we hadn't seen our relative-- relative for so long because in all our travels in the after-the-war period, we didn't come across a single relative that survived the war. We were the only ones, we thought, except my uncle, my father's brother from Pultusk, his wife and son, and also my grandmother survived. But they were estranged. I met them for just a brief period at a time. I met them in that-- the temporary camp, that first DP camp when we came into Germany. While they had known about my parents' death, they, too, did not mention a word of it to us. And I cannot forgive them for this. But anyway, we came to the United States after having stopped over on the-- the 12th of June. We stopped off in Halifax, Nova Scotia, so that was our first stop in the so-called new world. And then the next day, on June the 13th, we saw the Statue of Liberty. And naturally, tears came everybody's eyes to see the promised land on the other side of the ocean. And-- and sure enough, there was Uncle Irving, our uncle who left Poland in 1938 and left his wife and child. Never managed to bring her up to the United States before the war broke out. And they perished, along with the rest of her family, in Poland. We were overjoyed to find him and a cousin of his who was from another-- from the same branch of the family, but they were the New York branch. We had branches like this in several cities in the United States, in Pittsburgh and Buffalo and Los Angeles. And this was actually the same relative as some of my cousins. She was a first cousin to my mother and to my uncles here in the United States. And she spoke Yiddish, sure enough, and, of course, English. And I was overwhelmed with how my uncle Irving, who never learned any English before he came to the United States just eight years earlier, and here he spoke, which to me was the most fluent, flawless English. And we could not-- barely-- could barely communicate with him. But in Yiddish, of course, we did. So we spent-- he took us over to the immediate family in Brooklyn, and we spent the day before boarding the next day. We boarded the train at the Grand Central Station in Manhattan, and we arrived the next morning in Detroit, and we met up with the rest of our Detroit family. 
INT: What is Irving's last name, and what was your-- the woman's-- MW: Irving's name was Goldstein. Goldstein was the name also of my mother's stepfather, who bore all the children which I mentioned. I don't know if I mentioned that. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] My mother's mother died after her-- the last child was born, which was Miriam, and that went-- went to Palestine before the war. And my uncle Phillip served some time in the Polish army. And at the end of the First World War, he left the family and he went to the United States. And in the war perished, of course, most of my closest relatives, my grandfather Joseph Goldstein and his son [NON-ENGLISH] Goldstein and his wife and child. My aunt [? Chaya, ?] who went to Russia and-- voluntarily-- also perished, along with her family, another aunt, Ryvka, and her family. So all of our close relatives that were left in Poland all perished in the war. Nobody survived.  INT: So you took the train with-- everybody took the train with Irving out to Detroit? MW: Well, there was--yeah, just-- just my uncle Irving took the train. My cousin from New York stayed on in New York. We met the New York family that we stayed overnight in their house. And just the four of us, that we came to the States together. And my uncle boarded the train overnight, and through Canada we arrived in the morning of the 14th of June, 1996 to Detroit. And here at the train, they met-- my uncle Philip was not at the train station. But there was a brother-in-law of his that was his wife's brother, David [? Enlger, ?] picked us up with this huge car at the Grand Central Station. We were still able to put our luggage in in that same car. And we met, then, my uncle Philip's family, his wife [? Lottie, ?] and my cousin, his-- their only daughter, Beverly Goldstein. 
INT: What-- what was the date again? MW: June the 14th, 1946. 1948, excuse me.  INT: All right. And-- MW: No, 1948. I'm sorry. Got mixed up.  INT: And you have been in Detroit ever-- MW: Yeah, we have lived in Detroit since then. As a matter of fact, just last June we celebrated in the synagogue our 50th anniversary of coming to the United States. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] Had the whole family together here, all of whom were in the synagogue there, and had all kinds of honors. And the rabbi was saying some nice things. I gave him a little brief chronology of what happened to my parents and all that. And he mentioned it all. My uncles were not present because they died a few years ago. But their daughter, my cousin Beverly-- her name is [? Rosenfeld-- ?] and Bob, her husband, they live on the same street here with us in Detroit. My daughters could not come in, but otherwise my brother Leo and his wife were in a shul, and Rae was there. And that evening, that Saturday, Rae made a dinner and invited all the family again over to her house. And we had a nice time there that evening, and we celebrated our 50th anniversary in the United States, which coincide at the same time with the 50th anniversary of the state of Israel.  INT: And how did you meet your wife? MW: My wife, Ruth? [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] In Detroit, there was a girl who, as being single, we would get together socially, boys and girls and all this here. And on occasion, on-- on-- on longer weekends, we would travel to Toronto to spend a longer weekend there. And I had a lot of friends there who I was supposed to be traveling to Canada together with them, that Camp Prien. So I also looked up some of these friends when we'd come to Canada, so we would see each other. And one time at the-- their Jewish center-- they call it Y-- this girl that-- from Detroit, who happened to have been from the same town as Ruth was, and she survived the concentration camps with Ruth and they were liberated together-- introduced me to Ruth casually. We went to a dance there. So that's when I met Ruth, and it must have been sometime in the middle of-- of 1947 when I met Ruth. And I liked her, so I started writing to her, correspondence. I couldn't afford to call. I don't believe they had a telephone in their house then yet. And we didn't have-- I don't know if we had a telephone in our house here. But I was writing letters, and she wrote letters to me. And I invited her to come over, and she came over to visit her friend here. So we went out together to Greenfield Village with a number of other boys and girls, all single still, spent the day. And I-- I got more and more impressed with her that I sort of fell in love with her, you might say. So I started to call her then and go to visit her. And I met Ruth's family, who was also a survivor of concentration camps. Ruth's father did not survive. And I met Ruth's sister. And we spent some times together over there. 
INT: We will get to meet Ruth in just a few minutes. I-- I want to ask you a different kind of question. Why did you do this interview today? MW: [SIGHS] For me it was very difficult for many years to decide if to go and tell my story because when I came to Poland after the war, after having survived all kinds of trauma and trauma and tragedies and atrocities and all that, having thought that my stories were of such enormity that I have to survive in order to come out and to tell my story to the world so they would know what took place and what people survived. But when I came into the city of Lodz, and I was overwhelmed with what some of these people had gone through, which was unequaled that to anybody to comprehend. And-- and I was afraid that what my story is, that I-- what I have to tell would not measure up in any way to what these people had to tell about themselves. That held me back for the most part-- time. Up until just very recently, I-- I was still not completely sold on it until I saw the invitation of my sister-in-law Zita Weber when she was interviewed also by this foundation a couple of years ago, or last year. And I saw this here, and she urged me strongly to do this. And I also talked to-- locally here-- to Professor Zig Zbiglewski, who interviews a lot of survivors here. And he sort of encouraged me that I should go and tell my story. So that's when I called the foundation and initiated this interview. 
INT: Is there anything you'd like to add before we meet your-- MW: Well, I'm very grateful to Mr. Steven Silberg-- Spielberg-- for his tremendous undertaking, which I think will serve humanity a great deal because through his initiative, while there are many institutions have been doing this for years, these interviews, the scope of that is very limited. This is of such tremendous scale that this-- and after the movie that he made about the that impressed so many millions of people worldwide, and it actually revived a keen interest in the Holocaust-- that it would make it so much more difficult for any of these so-called revisionists that are unfortunately living among us that are trying to deny the existence of the Holocaust. All these testimonies of these thousands and thousands and tens of thousands of interviews that the foundation is-- has completed and done and preserved, that this ought to serve indefinitely in the annals of history as evidence of what took place in this very, very sad period of humanity.  INT: Thank you very, very much. MW: You're welcome.  INT: OK. MW: Hi. I would like to introduce my lovely wife, Ruth. Ruth, her maiden name was Muschkies. I met Ruth in 1955 through a common friend of hers that lived in Detroit, and we casually met in Toronto, Ontario. She's also a survivor of various concentration camps. And she came over with her mother and sister to Toronto also in 1948. After I met Ruth, I right away sort of fell in love with her because I-- I didn't leave her with-- for too long. And within one year, we got married. We got married in Toronto on June the 10th of 1956. And the day-- the day after, we moved to the United States. We managed to work out all the legal papers before our marriage so that the day after our marriage, Ruth was married to an American citizen, and she was allowed to come freely into the United States and to stay and work in the United States. So we have been married now over 42 years. We have three daughters and four grandchildren. And the grandchildren, all of them, fortunately, for us, live in the Detroit area. And they're a great treasure, really, for us to have, and a great pleasure. I would like for Ruth to say a couple of words, if she will. RUTH WEBBER: Well, you've more or less covered everything other than the fact that in my opinion-- and I'm sure that you will agree with me-- our greatest accomplishment since we survived has been our wonderful three children. They are productive and considerate of others and self-sufficient. And we're just tremendously proud of them, and we're thrilled that we were able to contribute to humanity with our three daughters. And they, in turn, seem to be doing the same thing by even choosing the professions that they have picked. One is a physical therapist, a nurse practitioner, both in pediatrics. And our youngest is a human resource management consultant, which also has to do with improving lives for others. So I'm very happy to be married to Mark and to have survived and being here and contributed to Schindler's [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] accomplishment of getting all these [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] interviews together for such a wonderful purpose. Thank you. 
INT: It has just been our privilege to be here today. Thank you very, very much. MW: Thank you. Looking right now at the earliest pictures of my mother, Dvorah Wygoda, and my father, Abraham Wygoda. They were born in 1895, and they got married-- this was just before they got married in the year 1915. This is the only picture that we actually have of my entire immediate family from Pultusk. This was taken-- I don't know exactly the year, but I'll identify everyone in this picture. And the people standing in the back, from left to right, is Braindel, my older sister, that lives in Israel now. And then comes my mother, Dvorah, and my father, Abraham, and Leo standing next to them in the back. And forefront, on the left side, that's myself with the book in hand. And then to my left is Ann, and my youngest sister Rae.  INT: And at the time, they were all Wygodas. MW: They were all Wygodas. This picture here was taken, actually, during the war when we were in Mirzachul, Uzbekistan. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] We don't look like we are people-- we are people that have suffered. This actually was during that period of our prosperity there at the height of our candy manufacturing and selling over there. So we had, as you can see, some pretty good clothing on at that time. And we were well fed, and we led as good a life as it was possible in those-- in those days. This picture was taken, obviously, at our wedding. And you can see now why, of all the girls in the world, I picked Ruth. She obviously is the most beautiful girl in the world, and she seems to be ageless. So I'm very proud of her and I love her. 
INT: And this was in Detroit? MW: This was in Toronto, Canada.  INT: [INAUDIBLE] MW: June the 10th of 1956. Here we have the most of my family here, my treasure in the United States. Three daughters are in this picture. From left, in the back, we have Elaine Webber Chesterman. Shelly, next to her, our oldest daughter, and then Susan, our youngest one. Susan lives in Washington, DC. Shelly is in Brooklyn, New York. And Elaine lives here in Huntington Woods. And at the other end there is Barry Chesterman, her husband, my son-in-law. In his arm he has-- actually, I think-- which babies is this?  INT: [INAUDIBLE] MW: Must be-- must be one of the twins, and it must be Ari, I would imagine, because here, to the-- to the left is Nathan. And is that-- that's-- that's Ari, and that's Miriam that he's holding in his hand is Miriam. We have twins and two-- and-- and of course, I left out in the middle, I left out Benjamin, their oldest son, who is now nine years old already. Nathan is seven, and the twins are just two years old.  INT: When did you go from Wygoda to Webber? MW: Well, our change in names came in when we became citizens. We had some difficulty with the spellings of-- of Wygoda, Wygoda, and everybody had to spell them. So we decided to change our names when became citizens. And we picked the name of Webber. So ever since then we have the name Webber, and everybody else knows us as Webbers. Here we have myself in our backyard here with my two handsome grandsons. On the left side is Benjamin and on the right side is Nathan. 
INT: [INAUDIBLE] MW: This is our pride and joy, the twins that we were blessed of having for the last two years. On the left is Miriam and-- and her younger brother, Ari, who is an hour and five minutes younger than she is.  INT: When were they born? MW: They were born on July the 25th, 1996, in Detroit. And in the year 1996, being the 50th anniversary of the tragedy and of the killing of our parents, I decided together to take my children-- all three of my daughters were supposed to go with us. Elaine became pregnant and she, in the last minute, had to back out. So we took a trip to Poland, and we went to the mass grave of where our parents are buried in the Jewish cemetery of Cracow, Cracow, Poland. It was a very emotional moment for us. And I'm the only one in the family that actually did this here. I know I'm the envy of them all. But they didn't have the courage and-- and strength to go down and to do the same thing. When we were there in 1996, we noticed some-- some serious damage to the entire grave site and to the-- to the markers. So we decided and we hired somebody-- with all of us participating, all the siblings-- and somebody overseed this restructuring of it. So this is the picture taken already after it was rebuilt, and it is the way it is right now. This picture-- this picture here was taken in June the 27th, 1997, when we had one of the most rarest reunions in many, many years, that all of us, including my sister Braindel from Israel and Rae, holding the picture in the center, and my other-- and my sister Ann from Baltimore in the front, and Leo and myself, at a gathering there on a project also trying to film our experiences and-- and give our history to one of the members in the family, Annie Nachbar, who is doing this wonderful job. We're looking at another picture, also taken on June the 27th, 1997, in Baltimore, as we were all gathered there together. In the front, sitting from left to right, according to our age, as you can see, is Leo and Braindel, Ann, myself, and Rae. In the back. Also, behind Leo is Zita, his wife. And behind Braindel is [NON-ENGLISH], her husband. And then behind Ann is Martin, her husband. And then my lovely wife, Ruth. And behind her is our daughter Susan and then to the left of her is Shelly, and then there is Joe Nachbar in the back of my sister Rae.