INT: Hello. My name is Fran Simon. Today I have the pleasure to interview Michael Zelon, on November 27, 1998, in Rancho Palos Verdes, California, United States of America. The interview will be conducted in English. Can you please tell me your name and spell it? MZ: My name is Michael Zelon-- Z-E-L-O-N.  INT: And your name at birth? MZ: Michael Zielonka-- Z-I-E-L-O-N-K-A.  INT: And your date of birth. MZ: I was born in 1922, 6 of April.  INT: And the place of birth? MZ: Plock, Poland. This is about 70 miles north of Warsaw.  INT: And can you spell the name of your town? MZ: P-L-O-C-K.  INT: And your age right now? MZ: 76.  INT: Could you tell us about your father? What was his name? MZ: My father's name was Gitman [? Meier. ?] Zielonka.  INT: Where did he work? MZ: He had a business. He was a businessman. And he worked together with my mother.  INT: Did he belong to any organizations? MZ: Yes. He was active in Zionist-- Zionist organizations. He was active in different social activities. And he was a champion chess player, just to--  INT: Was he a religious man? MZ: He was rather a tradition-- a traditionalist. In other words, he followed the Jewish tradition-- very, very much so. Also, he knew Hebrew. His background was strictly Conservative Jewish. His parents were Hasidim, so he had a lot of Jewishness in him. And he used to attend temple and so on every Saturday. 
INT: Can you tell me what was your fondest memory of him? MZ: It is he was a very loving guy. He-- I liked him to-- I observed him playing chess, and played with him frequently. He was really, this was his life-- and kids-- very dedicated to kids.  INT: Tell us a little bit about your mother. What was her name? MZ: Oh-- what can I say about my mother? A loving woman. Her background was a little different than my father's. She was from a little semi-aristocratic Jewish family, but they were also on the poor side. They got-- they used to be fairly well-off, but my grandma and grandpa on my mother's side weren't too rich. And my mother was very liberal. Whatever she did, as far-- as far as tradition, it was mainly to please my father. And she thought certain items are very important to bring-- raise the kids. There were four of us. And she gave us, she gave us a lot of love, attention, and care.  INT: And what was her name? MZ: Esther. Her maiden name was Hammer.  INT: Did she work? MZ: She worked in the store with my father, very hard. She did-- she raised the kids. She ran a normal family life. After all, she was a mother. And she worked very hard in the store.  INT: Did she belong to any organizations? MZ: I don't remember, except she was active in PTA-- equivalent to PTA-- as long as we were attending school. 
INT: What were your grandparents' names, on your father's side? MZ: Yes. Let me think a little bit. I think that-- yes, my grandpa was Abram Chaskel Zielonka. My grandma was [? Shaina ?] Ruchel. I am not sure. I am a little bit confused, because I didn't use this too often, her name.  INT: Mhm? MZ: But-- very warm people, this my-- and to give you my memory about-- about both of them, Saturday we used to go to-- for dinner. Actually, this was lunchtime-- cholent. We used to go, traditionally-- all the grandchildren, we used to go-- we were invited. We were there, regardless of-- let's say, Saturday I went to school, because it was state gymnasium. And, after school, I went there. About 2 o'clock, I was there for lunch. They weren't too rich-- not at all. I think they was very much supported by my father, financially.  INT: And tell us about your grandparents on your mother's side. MZ: I lost them very early, when I was probably-- when my grandpa passed away, I wasn't probably alive yet. I was still, you know, just in planning, not-- there was no-- no, I wasn't alive. But when my grandma passed away, I knew her. I was-- she passed away about 1926. And I was about four. She was a very progressive lady. Her name was Chana [? Baila ?] Hammer. And she was from the Asch family. So her cousin was Sholem Asch. I don't know if you've heard of him. Sholem Asch was a writer, a Jewish writer. And she was very passive, not controversial. As I remember, she-- I remember her distributing candies always. She had always candies in this-- in her-- she wore a long sweater. It had pockets. And she used to have candies in her pockets. I always get the candy. This I remember vividly. 
INT: What was your grandfather's name? MZ: Bruch-- Bruch Hammer.  INT: Did you have any brothers and sisters? MZ: Yes, I did have two sisters, and I have one brother. The two sisters were older. We had-- every two years we had a baby in our family. So my oldest sister was born in 1918, the second one in 1920. I was third-- was '22. And my brother, William, who lives here in San Fernando Valley-- who survived, of course-- was in 1924, was born 1924.  INT: And what were your sisters' names? MZ: The oldest was Bronia, or Beverly, you can say. And she was-- actually, the Hebrew name was [? Bracha. ?] This was after my grandpa on my mother's side. And the next one was Necha. She was-- Necha was after my grandma's grandmother-- whatever-- maybe one generation before. And then, of course, I was-- I was-- my recorded name was Maurycy. And I was-- Hebrew name is Moshe-- Moses. And my Bill-- my brother Bill-- was, of course, Wladislaw, which is William. And he was-- the Hebrew name was [? Wolf. ?]  INT: Do you have any special stories about growing up with your brothers and sisters? MZ: Yes, because of the age separation. At that time, two years was quite a-- quite a bit, as far as interests and-- and environment and-- and friends. But nevertheless, I vividly remember, as a child, we used to go, all four of us, with parents, we used to go out of town to get some fresh milk, you know, and-- and freshly baked bread. This was quite-- I was holding my brother, by-- by the hand, by my hand-- by his hand. And my sisters were holding hands, and the parents was in the back. And it was fairly semi-official, nice Sunday walk to out-of-town. 
INT: What was your address in Plock? MZ: I was born and raised in [POLISH]. I said it in Polish. I will translate it. Which is Plock, Old Market number 13. I was born there, and I-- this was a property belonged to our aunt, a big property. In the same-- you see, our store was adjacent to our residence. Everything was-- we had the ground floor. So this is where I lived.  INT: Can you describe your town? MZ: Oh, yes. I think that this-- this is-- this, you can't forget. What about my town-- the population was about 36,000. This was a city of retired people-- there were a lot of retired people-- and a lot of schools. And, as I mentioned before, there were about 36,000 people. Out of 36,000 were about 25% Jews. So we had-- we had about 9,000 Jews-- very progressive, very westernized. And Zionists were very, very strong.  INT: Was there a Jewish section of town? MZ: Yes, we had a Jewish section. This was-- this was the old ghetto. Our town, as far as native population, we had about-- the history of Jewish history, it was over 700 years. So this is a community existence. Now, the Jewish town, it was an old ghetto-- was the Jewish section. But a lot of Jews lived, of course, outside the ghetto, outside old ghetto. So--  INT: Did your town have Jewish educational institutions? MZ: Yes, yes. They were Jewish. We had a Jewish high school. And we had a-- was, like, Orthodox-- some kind of a-- for girls, a school. I forgot the name of it. We had some ORT, which was financed by the American Jewry. And life was-- We had libraries. We had Jewish libraries. who were not limited to Jewish books, but strictly serving the Jewish population. 
INT: Did you have a Jewish theatre? MZ: Amateur theatre. And, otherwise, we used to-- we would have people like that Kaminska, Ida Kaminska, [? Schumacher, ?] and some other guys, coming from Warsaw, for performances, which were very popular at that time.  INT: Can you describe your home, in detail? MZ: You mean the actual rooms, and-- and--  INT: Did you live in a house? Did you live in an apartment? MZ: Oh, no, we-- no, this was an apartment. As I mentioned before, this was a fairly-- three-story building, and with quite a few tenants. And we had-- let's say, our apartment consisted of-- consisted of first you walk in, you got into the kitchen, which was fairly large. In the kitchen, our-- we had a help, for-- you. We had a lady who was 24 hours with us, helping my mother keeping the house.  INT: Do you remember her name? MZ: Yes. We had-- the first one was [? Agnieszka. ?] But she retired, it must have have been about '32-- 1932. She was retired. Then we had-- the next one was [? Jasha. ?] But it was [? Janine-- ?] whatever-- however you want to translate it. And they were very helpful, very warm. And then we go from the kitchen. We went into our dining room. And, in the dining room, we had-- matter of fact, we had a bed, where one of the sisters slept. Then, the next room was a bedroom, a big bedroom, big-- very nicely arranged. It was a combination study and bedroom, where my parents used to sleep. And then we had a room-- from the kitchen, going through the store was a fairly large room where my brother and I slept and the other sister slept there. And then we-- this was-- this was the apartment, as you see it. 
INT: Economically, compared to the rest of the people in your town, how would you describe your family's status? MZ: Very well off, very-- very well off, but they used to live rather a conservative life. No, they didn't have any big luxuries, like cars or anything like that. But nobody-- very few people-- in our town had cars. They were frugal to-- to an extent. But they were very well off, financially. But they worked very hard-- very hard.  INT: What language was spoken in your home? MZ: Polish. But my father used to talk to his parents in Jewish.  INT: Let's go on to your education. Tell us about the first school you attended. MZ: Oh, this-- without bragging, I was six years old. And somehow-- this was my-- my mother's influence-- instead of going to first grade, they, they placed me in second grade. This was a public school. It was a Jewish school. Jewish teachers, most of it. And we observed Saturdays. We went to school Sundays. You know, the six days a week. And I-- and this-- this school was a grade school, had seven years of education. And-- now you want me to continue, or-- with schooling-- or you want to--  INT: Well, I wanted to know what your favorite subjects were. MZ: When I was-- the first few years, I think math interested me, to a degree. I didn't have any special favorite subjects. I was just-- everything was-- every subject was interesting, so. 
INT: And in what language did you study? MZ: Everything Polish.  INT: Was there any literature, at the time, that you liked to read? MZ: I'm going to sneeze somehow. No, I didn't. It went away. Yes, very much so. I loved some Polish writers, like Proust. I like, let's say, Orzeszkowa. I like very much-- sometimes, of course-- Mickiewicz. Especially his was-- I knew it by heart, practically. And then I liked, later on, when I got a little mature, when I got into-- let's say I was in gymnasium already, so I liked very much more social type of literature. Like I like very much, let's say-- in Polish, I would say which is by-- who is it? Silone-- very beautiful book that influenced me. Then I liked to read people like, oh, let's say, very popular-- Sinclair was very-- [POLISH]. It was a very popular book. And actually, it means the-- the-- the petrol race the world, something like that-- if you translate it to-- [INAUDIBLE] So I was-- I like to read books, and I was-- I liked it.  INT: So now tell us about the gymnasium. MZ: Oh, this is-- you know, to get to a gymnasium-- I got into gymnasium in 1935. I had to go through a very, I would say, tough examination. And for a Jew to get in into a gymnasium-- this was a state gymnasium. This was not a Jewish gymnasium, it wasn't a Polish, but a state gymnasium-- to get it was rather quite an achievement. So I got into the gymnasium, first class. And I-- I liked it very much. I-- also, I was only one in the class of 45 people, 45 Poles. I-- 
INT: You were the only one what? MZ: The only one Jew. In other words, when-- when they had-- when the class religion, which was a mandatory subject, I was out. I had a free hour. But I did take religion. After classes, we had a PhD historian who taught us Jewish religion.  INT: Did you take any other kinds of classes, there, any preparatory classes? MZ: Yes. OK, my-- I had two foreign languages. One was Latin, and then was German. And I was-- I should say that, when the war broke out, I was four years in-- only in the school. So I had a-- as they call it, [POLISH], which means a small [INAUDIBLE] or whatever you call it, or-- it is something prior to preparatory for any specialty-- general study school. And then this was when the war broke out, in '39, September 1. And this was the end of my education at that time.  INT: Did you belong to any political organizations? MZ: I don't know if you'd call it political or religious. I did belong to [NON-ENGLISH], which was a-- was a Zionist organization. But I don't know if at that age it-- this was definitely political, in the aspect of being Zionistic, but it was more traditionalist, more religious type. And the main reason for it was, of course, not only their ideas but my all peers belonged to the organization. So automatically I was one of the members.  INT: And-- MZ: Which I am very glad that I was, because I learned a lot, and I had fantastic friends there-- very interesting life. 
INT: Did you belong to any sport clubs? MZ: Yes. I belonged to Maccabi. And my, my real strength was in kayaking and bicycling. And, as far as bicycling, I participated in different races, you know, bicycle races.  INT: What other kinds of sports did you enjoy? MZ: Most of it, soccer. I was representing the school the high-- the gymnasium, as one of the players. And I liked very much, let's say, water sports-- swimming, kayaking. So I used to ice skate a lot too, but I wasn't the best at it, so--  INT: Did you have any goals, as a young person looking into the future? MZ: Yes. On my mother's side, we had a lot of doctors in the family. So I was, I would say, brainwashed, but I was influenced by my mother, very much so, to direct my-- all my efforts, education, towards medicine. And, as you will see later, I went to-- after the war, because I didn't have a full high-school diploma at that time. After the war, I went to a lyceum, which-- preparatory lyceum for medicine.  INT: In regard to religion, how would your identify your family? MZ: As-- I don't know if I-- definitely Jewish, definitely Jewish. I would say, also, I-- now, I don't know if I-- I am-- I am not-- I am not ashamed of it, but I-- We didn't have any kosher house, which was very rare, at that time. But everything was-- we didn't-- we didn't have any separate dishes for milchig and 'trifig,' whatever it is, milchig and fleishig. But we have the dishes for both, but we didn't serve, let's say, butter where we ate meat-- never would have done things like that. So, and if it's meat we ate, it was kosher. 
INT: Did you have a bar mitzvah? MZ: Yes, I did. I did have a big birthday party, a bar mitzvah. I had a speech in Hebrew, which I didn't understand. And I got a big gold watch from my father, a pocket watch-- which I lost, running around-- I lost it. But it was quite a party. I got a number of, you know, fancy pants. At that time, they were very, very unique and fairly expensive.  INT: Did your family celebrate Shabbat? MZ: Friday, very much so. Friday dinner was very, very, very traditional-- traditional. We-- everybody had to be at the table. And every-- it was a like a ceremony. And everything was pre-- predicted, what you're going to do, and how we're going to do it, and when we're going to do it. But Friday was absolutely a must. And we didn't-- one Friday didn't differentiate from another Friday. We all were present. And it was a very holiday-type of a supper.  INT: Where did everybody sit, around the table? MZ: Oh, gee, my father was at the head of the table. And my mother was on the other side of the table. And then we had-- I don't exactly remember how-- I was sitting next to my father, I know. And I don't-- I think one sister was on my left. And the other sister was across. And my brother was near my mother. So this was the setup.  INT: What kind of food was served? MZ: OK. First, we had served-- but it was a-- my father had-- we had some wine. And my father had some very strong spirit. And we had-- My father said the blessing. And then we sit down, and we got fish. There were fresh fish. Some-- some of us didn't like fish, per se, as caught as fish, but they had to be fish-- how do you call this-- what we have Manischewitz that's in a jar you buy. I forgot exactly what's it. But it is already the fish is, like, chopped very, very fine. And this was easier-- the easiest thing to eat, to digest, for some people. So this was-- the fish was the first one. Then, after the fish, we had some soup-- was usually chicken soup-- and some farina or some other addition. Then we had chicken-- chicken meat. And then we had some dessert, like prunes, compote or cake. 
INT: We're going to take a break now, and we're going to go on to the next tape. MZ: Very good.  INT: --number two. Did you experience any antisemitism while you were in school? MZ: Let's say in 1935, it wasn't bad, but later on, yes, to a degree, yes, but not too bad, but some.  INT: Were you aware of Hitler's MZ: Oh, yes. Very much so. Also I never read it.  INT: How did you become aware of it? MZ: Oh, through papers, through general discussions.  INT: Did you know about the rise of the Third Reich in Germany? MZ: Yes. We followed it very, very closely. Especially we had some family which were practically thrown out of Germany, were-- in-- this must have been 1937 or so. Where we got some people from Berlin. Well, they were not-- they were Jewish people. They-- they didn't have German citizenship. I don't think so. They were born in Poland. So-- so they were practically just sent back to Poland.  INT: So how did you first learn about the war? MZ: Oh, directly. We-- we were, you know, first of all, we had some airplane attacks on Plock. And we had a-- a lot of Polish Army coming back from the front totally smashed, totally devastated. And the war was very, very-- the front was very close to us. And practically, we were at the front.  INT: Do you remember the Germans coming into town? MZ: Yes. 
INT: What happened? MZ: Well, Germans came to town. There was, I would say, I don't know if the soldiers, per se, were attacking, directly, Jews. But this was the front. Let's say, one side was the Polish Army, of the Vistula. Plock was near Vistula River. On one side were the Polish Army, of the river, and on one side of the-- side of the river, Polish Army; the other, the German Army. So they needed some people to work and build ditch-- when I say they, I mean Germans-- build ditches because they were on our side-- to build ditches and to carry some very heavy equipment also. So they called different Jews and Poles to help them out. But within a few weeks, the whole situation changed. But this still wasn't very directed anti-- it wasn't organized against the Jews. They were [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] OK. I-- I don't believe I answered your question, here. But what happened there is, after a few weeks, in September, end of September beginning of October, they-- the Germans directed everybody to open the stores and make life semi-normal. And we do-- everybody opened the stores. The same-- I didn't mention that my parents had a leather wholesale place, retail and wholesale. And you know that when I say leather, they had-- [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] they had, let's say, [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] soft leather, hard-- hard leather. They had leather for saddles. They had leather for industry. And it was a very prosperous business. So they opened the business, and the people used to come and buy merchandise. And I'm talking during-- just after the war, the beginning after the war. And as a matter of fact, Germans came in, soldiers, used to buy leather. And they paid with marks-- no-- no special treatment, normal prices. But this lasted maybe four or five weeks. And I will say the beginning of November, end of October or something like that, the Germans took over the business. And what that means, there came a special administrator came in, a German, SA man. And he had some semi-legal papers to take over the-- the store. So he took over not only the merchandise, but also he took the keys. He took the-- all the books, all the checks, totally. He just asked my father and mother to get out of the business, and just-- and then he took it over. Without any-- he did give a little note that after the war, that the-- the-- the German government will compensate for the-- for the confiscation of the property. Now, this was beginning, I think, October-- no, the beginning of November, end of October. So then we-- we were living outside. As I mentioned before, this was the old [INAUDIBLE]. We were living outside the ghetto. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] And we-- we was-- we were fairly well off. As a matter of fact, we put away some-- some of the merchandise we stashed away, mainly leather, which was fairly expensive at that time. And we had a very-- I mean, we didn't-- we didn't-- we weren't hungry, plenty of food, good environment, as far as the same apartment that we had before. And we were waiting for the end of the war. This is what it is, I mean, in general. We thought eventually it will quiet down, and we'll go back to normal life. 
INT: Did the Germans take over any other particular buildings or areas? MZ: Oh my gosh. They took over-- first, they-- what they did, they took over the Catholic church property. There was a villa, a palace of our-- of our bishop. And we had a big, big [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] religious school-- priests, for priests, training seminar for-- for priests. They took-- SS took over. High school, some of the high schools, they took over, and they moved in. This is-- this was the Adolf Hitler's Leibstandarten. And [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] as there it was without any excuse. They did it without any compensation. They didn't try to replace it. They just took it over and threw out all the people. And I don't know if I should mention, at that time, that the first prosecutions, the major prosecution, was prosecution of Polish intelligentsia. What they did is they arrested priests, lawyers, teachers. All intelligentsia in Plock was taken away and sent to concentration camps. Some of them were killed on the spot. So the Jews didn't feel the-- the pressure yet. Then the next step, after they attacked-- and it was a very, very [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] unpleasant situation because we knew eventually we will be-- also we didn't believe, you know, that it was a-- the Jews will be next. It-- so at the same time, it must have been sometimes December or so, suddenly they-- we had a number of institutions in Plock. Among other things, we had a-- a house for elderly people supported by the community. And it's just elderly, sick, sick people and so on. So without any excuses, the-- just the whole-- the whole institution, the whole house of the elderly people disappeared. At the same time, old people which were, for example, a little mentally sick or a little disturbed but safe, they disappeared. They just took them to a hospital and gave them some shots or whatever. They were-- I-- I-- I don't know. I haven't seen it. But they disappeared. I know one thing. My next door neighbor, his name was [? Meltzer. ?] He was a-- a very exclusive tailor. He had a daughter, which was in, I would say, state of depression. She was very passive, always standing in front of the house with an overcoat. She was harmless. But nevertheless, she was disturbed. She disappeared. So this was the first of the rulings of the German Reich in our town. 
INT: With the Jews that were left behind, what were their reaction? Then did they try to do anything to help? MZ: The-- not only the Jews, but this-- this did not affect only the Jews. It affected the whole city, the Poles too. Because the Polish, you know, elderly and sick, were taken exactly like the Jews. So everybody tries to find out, tried to find out what's going on. Where did he go? We didn't get an answer. We knew they were killed. But I haven't seen it.  INT: Were there any other anti-Jewish restrictions put upon you at that time? MZ: Yes. This must have been December. All of us had to wear patches, yellow patches, about 10 centimeter in diameter, which is four inches, in front of our-- in front of our clothes and in the back. And this-- we started-- they started forming a ghetto. This was January or something like that. In other words, all Jews outside the ghetto, living outside the ghetto, had to find a spot within the ghetto. So the situation as far as apartments, extremely critical. We were taken in by an elderly couple in the Jewish section. And what we got is a-- one room and a little-- in this-- we shared a kitchen. So you can imagine six people in one room. But we had some outside in the hall. We could-- we could put a bed. So we managed. It was very tough, but we managed. And this was the beginning of ghetto. And at that time, [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] we were-- we-- oh, the Germans formed-- this is interesting, I think. The Germans formed at that time a committee, so which was an interface between the Germans and the Jews. And they were the-- it was a Jewish gemeinde. It was a Jewish committee. And in January, we had a-- a-- a shock treatment. What it was, they took the most prominent people, Jews, in town, they arrest-- arrested them, put them, some kind, in a very, very-- threatened them with death. And they called in the committee representatives. And they say, if we, within 24 hours, don't-- if we don't deliver so much gold and so much jewelry and so much currency, those people will be dead. We tried very hard, and we delivered whatever is asked for, from whatever the Jews-- I don't know. I-- I was not the-- within the-- this decision-making people. I was just a 17-year-old kid. So they let them go, let them free. They didn't kill them. They were so shook up, that they took off, most of them, for Warsaw. They ran away. And this was the beginning. Then we had-- the committee had to deliver every day a number of people for hard work, to work in the Bishop's palace, to work the SS [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] barracks. And most of the young people went there because the work was tough. And the threat-- the threat of life was permanent. It continues. 
INT: Did you work in the ghetto? MZ: Oh, sure, I did. I sure did. So I was-- because everybody had-- let's say I had to work about two or three days a week. Although sometimes I had to work for a month, the whole month at the time, depends what the-- on the job. And the treatment was unbelievable. You-- you didn't have only to work, but you had to run. For example, when I cleaned the rail-- handrails in a building, I was running. And after they-- after my work, the SS man came. It was-- everything had to be spotless, white-glove clean. It-- it was perfection. And for no reason, you got a beating. But this was normal, to go back. I-- I would-- I would like to mention here an event which shook up the whole community. It was some kind of a holiday. It must have been-- of course, this was 1940. It must have been around maybe April, May. I don't know what-- what was going on at that time. They called in for eight workers, the SS. And what they did to them is unheard of. They cut Star of David on their forehead. They cut-- or-- or their chest. They put them in some kind of a-- they beat them to death. They-- they put them then in some boxes, wooden boxes, and they rolled them down the hill. And if they survived, if they weren't crippled, totally crippled, I don't know. But they-- they-- they lost their consciousness, all of them. They-- there was an SS called, a committee, to bring them-- to pick them up. Luckily, we had good doctors there in our-- in the ghetto. They took care of them. And they were young. They were strong. And they survived. None of them died. But I saw the guy with that on the forehead, cut out with a-- with a safety razor, cut out the, you know, the Star of David. So this was a tremendous shock. But I would add here, and-- we never were hungry in the ghetto. Never. We had plenty of food. 
INT: Why was that? MZ: There was no shortage of food. And the ghetto was open. And people were in their hometown, so they had connections. So the food was rather-- [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] maybe some other-- some people, I am sure, who were-- were supported by the committee, Jewish committee. But as far as I, myself, and my friends, there was no shortage of food. There was no--  INT: Let's go back to the beating. How did you handle seeing those people, and how did you handle yourself being beaten? MZ: Oh, this is-- yes. Of course it was shocking. When I was, for example, once I-- once I got a real beating. And I came home, and I told my father that I was very, very tempted to hit back, to-- to just fight it. And I said, next time, I'm sure I'm going to fight him. I'm going to kill him. Do something. Defend myself. My father was a very smart man. And he says, this is what they want. You remember one thing. It's better to be alive as a fly than a dead lion. So just be patient and be strong. Because if you fight back, you show your weaknesses. So this was my father's reaction to it. And I-- I-- I tried very hard, and thinking this way I could accept very-- very severe beatings. So--  INT: In the evening, what was it like in the ghetto? MZ: We had some social life, to a degree. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] My father found a partner, and it was for chess. It was-- this was his obsession. If he couldn't find a partner, I was the one to play with him. If he wanted to play, I played. And I became a very good chess player. As a matter of fact, we have some over there, some trophies of mine from chess, there. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] Yes, we got together. As a matter of fact, [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] on the street, any-- any appearance on the street was threatened with death. So what we did, between houses, we built some openings, and we were going through, from one house to another in evenings. We'd get-- we were very interesting social life, but limited No radios, of course, they took away our radios in the-- with the-- in the first few weeks they came to town. So the only thing was-- even newspapers, we didn't have any newspapers, except some people got some way of finding all the news or listening to the radio, which was definitely forbidden. So we lived. it was bearable. 
INT: Do you remember when the first roundup of people in the ghetto was? MZ: You mean for expulsion?  INT: Yes. MZ: Oh, yes. Oh, I can-- this I won't forget. The first one was there was the first section of the ghetto, they took out some people. This was February 1941, beginning of February. And we heard about eventually they will try to move us out of the ghetto, move us out of the town. So but we expected them to-- to-- maybe we can take some property with us, some on our backs and so on. We found out that it was almost impossible to take. First, well, they-- there were two phases in that expulsion of Jews. They made it-- they call it Judenfrei. It means Jew-free city. And they changed the city from Plock-- they annexed it. It was annexation to the German Reich. And they called it Schroettersburg. Well, it was part of [NON-ENGLISH], which is near-- this is a province of Germany. And going back to that expulsion of the Jews, so we were wearing, at the time, three or four different sets of clothes on us. It was wintertime, so it was fairly easy. So they kicked out the first portion of the Jews from the ghetto. They put them on trucks, and they-- they just took them out. We didn't know exactly where and how, but this-- I was in the second-- second section of expulsion. It was the 28th of-- the 28th of February. And this was a very dramatic situation. Because the middle of the night, suddenly, we hear heavy boots and screaming, Juden raus! Juden raus! And whoever was slow, they were running-- the SS people-- were running up the stairs and just throwing the people down the stairs. And you can imagine the-- some people, elderly people, couldn't get out of bed. So I don't know what happened to them. I-- but we were-- so our family, they grouped together with the rest of the Jews in the ghetto, were a row of eight people, in rows of eight people, in the middle of the street. And then we were waiting a few hours, standing. And then trucks came in. Loaded us on open trucks. And away we go. 
INT: How long were you on the trucks for? MZ: I would say four or five hours on the truck. And we arrived to-- this was a concentration camp. It was-- in Polish, the name was Dzialdowo. In-- in German, it was Soldau. And we went to-- actually, they didn't put us in this concentration camp. It was adjacent-- there were some barracks of Polish Army, the Polish Army. The concentration camp was adjacent, just separated by some fence. And we were on the trucks, and suddenly we get a treatment which is not inhumane, but unheard of. We weren't used to anything-- we never-- we never dreamed of it. With whips, with-- with-- with the sticks, we were on the trucks. They tried to accelerate our, you know, cleaning the trucks, getting out off the trucks. It was a beating-- it was regardless, no sex, no-- no difference in woman, the woman, young, old. So were-- so this was a-- a terrible treatment. They got us together. And they say, now is your last chance to dispose of all your-- of all your jewelry, currency, whatever you have valuable. Put it down. There were containers to put it down. And some people did. And we didn't take too much with us. We were afraid that they were going to kill us. So then we were going through a-- like a-- after we-- this function, disposing of whatever people had. And they took away any package. Any package you had in your hand were-- were-- it was taken away. Whatever you had on your body, we didn't go through any search, also we expected a physical-- I mean, body search. Then we're going through that corridor of SS men, on both sides, SS men. And with no reason, no nothing, they hit us till-- just the people were falling. And they were with the broken-- all open heads and so on. It was a terrifying experience. Then and so we got in there. And we were led to-- [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] there were no barracks. But this was-- particularly this was some horse shelter and so forth. There was Polish artillery there. And they had the stables. And the stables had cement floors. It was a little straw there once in a while. And they herded us into this [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] building. It was cold, wet, stinky. Absolutely not for-- not for human being, beings. And now for-- to give you a-- only a-- a-- a feel of it, we-- we didn't have any restrooms. We had a latrine. What was latrine? Two long ditches, where-- open ditches, with some poles that we could squat on, squat on it.
And release-- release-- release yourself. It was-- women were waiting for the night to go. It was very unpleasant. Then Germans were walking around in this facility and taking away whatever is so valuable. As an example, I'll tell you, I was wearing beautiful boots, riding boots. And they called me over, pulled my boots off. And they gave me a few galoshes as to wear-- to-- to-- to-- I was heartbroken. I was absolutely-- I loved the-- the boots. And bingo. So we was there about-- the food was fairly-- the soup they gave, and bread, was OK. Then, after seven days, they called us. They say, you better clean up, and you get ready for transportation. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] We cleaned up, whatever we could, and we were ready for transportation. They made a row of people standing, formed a row. And they gave us money, Polish money, each one of us. And we had to sign our names, that we received the money. And they put us on passenger trains, very deluxe passenger trains. And we had some guards on them, but we were free to move-- very comfortable. And about 6:30, 7 o'clock, it was dark, the evening, we took off for the-- for the German, they called it a general-- general government. Well, it was a Polish administration with German occupation. In other words, all the police, all the officers, were Polish, but on top, managing the whole structure, we had the German government, the Germans were [INAUDIBLE]. So we're going that we were the train the whole night. And we landed in town by the name of Skarzysko-Kamienna. And we were unloaded. And then we-- the Polish police was there. There was no Germans. And we had a few hundred horse carriages or wagons waiting for us. There was farmers called in to-- to-- to move us. And we were loaded on a-- on a wagon like that, the six of us. And we went to a town in-- Bodzentyn was the name. From Skarzysko to [NON-ENGLISH]-- Bodzentyn. And this was a very poor little town. 90% Jews. Overall population, I would say, I-- I-- I am not sure, but it must have been maybe three and 1/2 thousand-- 3,500 people. They were very primitive people, very religious, very superstitious, and very warm-hearted. They-- very poor. So they loaded us in a big synagogue. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] And-- [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] and we were waiting. Some activities were going on. They-- they prepared some food, some soup. And from the synagogue, they picked up different people for different places. Their-- their houses consisted of one room. Some of them had a-- a room and a kitchen. There were very few rich people, a few families who were very well-off. Like, the only thing I remember is the [? Schechters, ?] their flour mill and their hardware store. There were [? Weintraubs, ?] the good-- what a-- some-- what did they have? They were prominent and fairly well-off. And I think they had some dry goods stores. 
INT: We're going to take a break now, and we're going to continue to the next tape. MZ: Very good.  INT: So can you continue to describe your life in Bodzentyn? MZ: Yes. From I-- OK-- as I said, we were in that synagogue. And we were not too long there, because my father and mother, they rented a small room with the privilege of using the kitchen. My sisters went to a very poor family so they could sleep overnight there. And I went to-- I and my brother went to another very beautiful couple-- a childless couple. They weren't rich, but they-- what they gave us nobody could. I don't believe you could find any people-- what they gave us was warmth and from their heart everything. They gave us their bed for us to sleep. And-- And otherwise we slept where I mentioned. Now we didn't see any Germans there at all. There was no ghetto. There was total free-- freedom of movement. And those people didn't feel the war. They didn't know anything [INAUDIBLE] the war. They thought that because we were not religious, too religious, like they are, we were punished by God. This was their justification of our tragedy. But they were very giving, all of them, whatever they had. They didn't have much. Most of them were tailors, shoemakers, carpenters, and a lot of people with-- with-- with wagons and horses just for rent. They could-- they just served as for transportation, and the general import of goods from other cities. So life in Bodzentyn was tough, as far as living conditions were very tough. But in the beginning, food was not bad. Was not-- was not too bad. They formed a kitchen. And they-- the natives-- and they supported us whoever needed, with soup and some bread. My father was very enterprising, and with his talent for chess, he found a partners-- partners there for his-- for his game. And some of them were had a leather-- leather businesses. And we started smuggling-- smuggling leather from a little town-- Jewish town, Szydlowiec, which is very close to Radom. It, I would guess, about 35, 40 kilometers from Bodzentyn. And so with my father was doing business on a micro scale. But nevertheless, he could make-- he made a living. We had enough food. And we could-- matter of fact, we could buy some clothes. And the best thing of-- of all happened that my father ordered a pair of boots for me. So I was in heaven with it. But times changed slowly. We weren't allowed to live in the city, and in the little town under the death-- threat of death penalty.
So nevertheless, so what we did is, before we used horse and wagon with double deck off the wagon, so we could put in the leather that went in false bottom of the wagon. This was impossible. In other words, we couldn't move with horse and buggy. So my father came up with a bike idea. He bought a bicycle. And I went on the bicycle and to Szydlowiec. And we had the leather under my shirt. And this way we went-- I could go fairly freely, because I, in school, as the one Jew, we had on our report card religion. And by mistake, they put on my report card Catholic, the name of Catholic, you know, religion. So matter of fact, they stopped me once. And I showed the document. It was-- they let me go without any problem as a Catholic. So we-- we were fairly, I would say, well-off. But the bare minimum. We had enough-- bare minimum. Then-- however, other people started to slip down a little bit. They-- they-- clothes were started to be worn. The natives didn't give them any food. And there was no income from-- you couldn't find any work. So either because of it, or coincidentally, at the same time we got sometimes-- this must have been in October, December of '41. This was after-- I should mention that we were fully aware about the war, the German-Russian war, which was the 21st of June, '41. With that time, the total situation changed. They were stricter with us. The Germans came in every few days with some Germans inspecting, and constantly confiscating things. But at the same time, I mean, after the war broke out, maybe three, four, five months later, a epidemic broke out of typhoid. And nobody-- and I got sick. And they converted the synagogue into a hospital. And we had one doctor only, no medication. But nevertheless I was young. I was strong. I survived 105 degrees, whatever I went through. And for the after-- this lasted about two weeks. After two weeks, I went out. I was weak. And it took a little time till I got well-- pretty well. By the way, this happened to my older sister and my brother. They went through the epidemic too. They went to-- they went to typhoid epidemic. So going-- now we are reaching the '42-- 1942. We lost a lot of people. You could see people, well respected from Plock, people with degrees, people very prosperous before the war, totally neglected-- swollen-- swollen feet, swollen faces, torn clothes, and very unfriendly, ready to fight for no reason whatsoever-- disagreeable. It was heartbreaking to see those people so going down so quickly.
And a lot of people died because of that of the [INAUDIBLE], the really painful life. So once upon a time-- must have been in-- this was the middle of May, '42, I came back from the trip from Szydlowiec with leather. And I usually, like, the leather I unloaded in my father's living quarters. And I went back to my sleeping quarters. And at night, there were Germans coming in, and Polish police, front door, back door, and caught us-- myself, and my brother. And they-- after, we tried to struggle with the Polish policemen, pushed him. But there was another one. And they loaded us on trucks. And from there, without saying goodbye to my-- to my people, we just couldn't have a chance even to say-- get a second change. What I had-- whatever I had, this was it. They drove us to Skarzysko-Kamienna. And there we went into the-- there were prepared barracks-- barracks for us. And this was HASAG company, which was Hugo Schneider, ammunition worker. But we didn't start working in the ammunition factory. We were assigned division A there. We were assigned to build a railroad track. I-- I can't even describe the-- the-- the-- the tough life we had. It is uncomprehensible. But even now, I can-- I forgot the-- the really bad things. What it was, 7:00 in the morning, a group of Jews were-- were assembled. And away we go, three kilometers-- three kilometers, which is two miles away from the barrack-- our location. And we started working on the railroad. This was actually, we were putting in the track, everything in, leveling the ground, everything with manual equipment-- shovels, picks, lorries-- pushed. We had to put a-- a rail for the lorries. We had to push the lorries full of earth, or whatever. And we're there, a manager, and a master-- a German master, civilian. That guy was absolutely crazy. He was-- if, no reason whatsoever, he could take a shovel, and hit you over-- over the head, without any-- He was, whatever he had sticks, and whatever he had stones, whatever he had in his hand, he was hitting us. And we couldn't just normally work in a normal pace. We had to run with it. And we couldn't have done it, with-- with no strength. No human being could-- could withstand it. And we knew if we stay here another few weeks, we dead. So we went back to the barracks. And one-- one Sunday morning, an SS man came in. And he needed some 20 mechanics. I volunteered. I raised my hand. And he says, what mechanic-- what kind of mechanic are you? So I say, I was working on bicycles.
I had a bicycle, so I knew a lot about bicycles. So I work on bicycles. I repair them. I put them together. OK. Pulled me aside. He selected me. And I asked my brother to raise a hand. And he did. And he, you know-- and he was selected. And the 20 of us went to another division. They called it Division B of the same company. And there the situation was completely different. There was no rush. There was no beatings. What it is was a small barrack for 20 people. And they started to build a camp. We were supposed to support the-- the-- the work there. So what we did there is we built fences. We supported to build barracks. They built-- finally we built up six huge barracks there. But the conditions were very good, as far-- nobody was after us. And we unloaded coal-- wagons of coal, have moved heavy equipment. And I wanted badly go run away from him and go back home to find out what the parents-- the rumors were that it-- it's a tough time, that eventually they might ship us out or so, the parents, from Bodzentyn. But no way I could go. And there was no way for me to get out. So we were there. We're building-- fairly friendly atmosphere. Not too bad. We got to know the management of the whole SS people. And there were a lot of Ukrainians too, soldiers guarding us. And what we got, we got a daily good soup every day. And we got some-- some bread. It was like clay, but it was bread-- edible. And-- and a spoonful of jam. So it was fairly acceptable. Then, after awhile, they started bringing people from the different towns nearby. First came people from Skarzysko, which is the town where the factory was in. Then we had people from [NON-ENGLISH], which is not far away. Then we had people from [NON-ENGLISH]. And were coming in people, they everyday more people, young people. And then we started working train, being trained, work in ammunition factory. Believe it or not, the first few weeks, we got paid. We got an envelope, money, every Friday. And we had a number. My number was 728. And we was treated as acceptable. But suddenly, after two or three weeks, the situation completely changed. They started treating us-- this must-- this was, I would say, out and-- out towards September of '42. They-- they treated us terribly. Were the master there by the name George [? Herring. ?] This was one of the buildings we had. We had a lot of buildings, and different divisions within the division. And he was my master. He had about, in one shift, about 120 people, Jews. And in two shifts, 250 people or something-- 240. That guy turned into an animal. He was, before, you could talk to him. You couldn't-- he was beating. He fount a music [GERMAN], which was a music room, where he was just-- you had to pull down your pants. You bend over. And he was beating you with a-- giving you a beating with a cable-- telephone cable full of wires. So afterwards you couldn't sit. You couldn't put your pants on. It was swollen. Even cold the water compress didn't help. So it was tough, to say the least. And then they started us giving less-- less food. It was it-- to give you an indication on how bad it was, that before we got-- at noontime we got some soup, which was a dirty water, a little some-- a little bit of a few potatoes floating-- floating. Then we got 125 grams of bread. They cut down everything. And then we got coffee in the morning, which was ersatz coffee. In the evening we had coffee. In the evening, we got the bread too. If somebody wasn't-- couldn't control, didn't-- wasn't-- wasn't of strong will, ate up the-- everyone was hungry. So they-- if they ate it after the soup immediately, then the next morning, you had to wait till 12:00 to get the soup. So I don't know if I mentioned here that before, I-- I was strong enough to hold that bread for next day. But nevertheless, before 12 o'clock, I fainted every day. In other words, I had to sit down. It was very tough. And this was end of '42. 
INT: I want to take you back a minute when you said that George [? Herring ?] was beating people. Do you remember some of the people that he was beating? MZ: Oh, sure. I give you two examples here. One, my brother was whipped to such a degree that no, I don't believe that the strongest man could withstand it. After a beating like that, say, he asks-- he put him on a table with his behind exposed. And he has the whole shift to go by to see how he was punished. And to this expect this-- everybody should expect this kind of beating in the future. That guy was putting ice. It didn't help. He couldn't sleep for weeks. On-- he could sleep only on his-- on his belly. This is one instance. This is my brother. He is here, Bill Zelon. And another incidents-- and, by the way any-- anybody who survives Skarzysko, and was in this division and saw it, won't forget it ever. Then I had a case, which was fantastic. I was so impressed with the guy. It was a guy by the name [? Mansac. ?] He was from Warsaw. And he was just a big guy, strong guy. He was a-- a package handler, whatever. It is a profession. And that guy got a beating, terrible beating. And I remember him going down from that music room, which was on the second floor. And he couldn't pull his pants up. His behind was black and blue and cracked in places, blood showing. And he says in Jewish, he says. [NON-ENGLISH] [SOBBING] He says-- it was tough. What he said is, [SOBBING] this won't touch him. We'll live-- we'll we will outlive them. This was quite a-- I-- was-- I always, when I think about that camp, I see his face-- that giant face. And this was quite a experience for me. There were beating. I wasn't saved. I got it a number of times. But this was quite a strength, to act like he did. It was unique. So this was-- I am giving you a small sample of that life. Life in camp was-- we were separate-- separated. Women were in separate barracks, and men in separate barracks. Interesting enough, that after the winter of '42, must have been a few months in '42, [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] the situation improved. I don't know why. But it improved. We got some more food. And we were treated a little nicer, a little better, not nicer, but a little better. We didn't get a beating every day. And we got used to this. We got to know people. We had a social life to a degree.
We used to go to woman's barracks, and barracks the woman who came to the men's barrack. And we formed some kind of a-- it was a support groups. And it-- or we got used to the terrible situation, or the situation got better, or both. There was a food improvement. We got more-- more bread, and better soups. And then it works there in ammunition. We got-- we got, of course, more proficient. We knew how to operate and set up the-- the-- the machinery. And so, we became of some value to the company. Strictly, of course, monetary staff because they make money on us. Then interesting thing happened. We were told what happened there is in April-- end of April-- we got a shipment from Trawniki, or from Warsaw, Jews which participate-- participated in that uprising. And they started telling us about Treblinka, that they-- that the Jew were gassed. We didn't believe. We didn't know anything like that. And people, whatever they say, they say stories, because they-- some people asked, did you see it? Of course, they said, we didn't see it. But we talked to the people who were-- who ran away from there. And those people were, of course, after ghetto, they were very, very in poor shape. And some of them were in worse shape than we were-- much worse shape. So this was the first time we found out about Treblinka. And we knew we had some rumors that our parents were taken to some east camps-- labor camps. But they said, no, they went to Treblinka to be gassed. This was totally new to us. And we were in that camp already almost a year. So when we look now, and started looking at life completely differently. In that camp, they didn't-- in our camp, they-- that was not a killing camp. They, for example, they could-- once there was an instance where they took every 10th person in a-- in a special group of people, and selected them for killing, because somebody run away. And this was the punishment. And frequently they, when you had some people who stayed in barracks because of sickness, and if they could see a group accumulate there with 20, 30 people, when they came for inspection suddenly from the upper command, they took all the 30 people to the woods and shot them. I never forget-- never-- and I sometimes I dream about it. I rarely dream, but they're there. I saw, a girl, in-- in the factory walking by, beautiful girl. I knew her. With a [NON-ENGLISH], which is a guard-- a Ukrainian guard, one of the sergeant in charge of group of Ukrainians, with a machine gun.
And I looked at her, and she looked at me. And she goes, he took her to the woods to kill her. And she killed him. He killed her. What happened, she was running in the camp. She was very pushy. She was hungry probably or something for soup. And the chief of police-- Jewish police-- a guy by the name [NON-ENGLISH], just to keep order-- I don't know how he did it, but he hit her in a way that he cracked her jaw. And there is no way to do anything to heal her in our facility. The doctor couldn't do anything. And if he could, it would take three or four months for healing, or whatever. She couldn't open her mouth. So they took-- took her out. This was the girl. And they shot her. She was from Chmielnik. I don't know her name. We didn't know names. We know the first name, usually in camp. Some of the names we knew. So this was '43. Then we're going-- [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] it was no big breakthroughs. We knew the news. We had-- we knew that the Germans are getting a beating. But this was that yo-yo, like a yo-yo, forth and back, coming forth and back. They're beating. They win. They lose. This was going through '43. As a matter of fact, it was '44. '44, they started-- we had totally in our Division B, we had 1,500 Jews in that camp-- fairly young people, strong people. And in the beginning of '44, must have been February, something like that, they moved thousands of people, and started liquidating some of the divisions. The-- the Russians were coming. They were closer. And they needed some special ammunition on Division A, in Division A. So they transferred a thousand people to Division A. And they didn't transfer immediately because they didn't have room over there. So they walked the three kilometers to Division A every morning. It was a little state of confusion. It was not [INAUDIBLE]. They were counting the people, but how can they count a thousand people, you know, to us all. And what happened there is my friend Nuchem Zucker, he was-- he was from Skarzysko. They were extremely rich, those people-- dry goods. And he had stashed away a lot of wealth in his hometown, among Poles, and some, I don't know exactly where. But he had-- he was-- oh, he had money in camp-- very independent. So he approached me. He says, Mike. He said he, Nuchem Zucker, and Abraham Belinsky, and his-- and Nuchem's cousin-- he came from [NON-ENGLISH]-- there, they have set up a-- a safe place with a Pole who worked with him, with a Polish fellow, a gentlemen. And he would like-- he would like for me to join them. I said, to be honest with you, I'm scared. I don't know the Pole. And well, this is the end of the war. I don't want to take too big of a chance. So, he said, however, let's go to the Polish fellow and tell him the story, that you will go out with-- with Abraham, and your cousin, to that Pole. If everything is safe, you send me a letter. It can be in Jewish through that Polack. And I will, when I get the letter, I see everything is OK, after you stay of five, six days there, I would do the same. Of course, they run-- and they ran away. They were undetected because of that commotion. So they-- they-- they-- they-- everything was organized. I don't want to go into detail how they run away, how they did it because it-- it was very interesting. And I didn't go. They run it-- they were-- they ran away. It was undetected. 
INT: OK, we're going to take a break right now, and stop the tape. We'll continue in another minute. MZ: Perfectly all right with me.  INT: --four. You had been telling us about your friends who had run away. MZ: Yes. So they ran away. And everything was hunky-dory. I approached then the Polish fellow, as instructed. And I asked him, do you have a letter from them? No. How are they doing? He says, fantastic. They just-- they have a-- a good time. Every-- every day is a-- one day better than the other. They drink, they eat. So I say, how about the letter? Oh my gosh, I forgot. I will bring it next week for sure. OK. Came next week, I approached him. He said, believe it or not, I have forgot the letter. So I became a little suspicious. And at the same time, my brother is working in Division A with the brother-in-law of that Polack-- noticed that the Polack is wearing Nuchem's clothes. So I-- when I found out-- when he told me about it, I didn't approach more the Polish fellow. It was too dangerous. And I found out that those guys were killed by-- by the Polish gentleman. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] So this was a very shocking experience. So luckily for me that I didn't run away. Then by August of-- to make the story short, of course, August of '44, we were transferred to Tschenstochau, where we worked the same-- the same type of factory. We produced the same ammunition. And we had the same-- some of them, the same masters. Not all of them. And they treated us very well as far they didn't beat anybody-- no beatings. Food was good and plentiful, I would say, for me anyhow. But the living conditions were absolutely unheard of. Because we-- I-- we had to sleep on the side. If one turns-- turned over, all eight guys had to turn over at the same time. We didn't have enough sleeping facilities and shelter-- no shelter. So this must have been like that, going on through December. In December, we heard that the Russians are very close. In beginning of January, it must have been the 8th or the 9th, we heard shots, and we said guns. We heard guns. And around the 11th or 10th, I don't remember exact-- 10th of January, Germans started loading people on trains to ship them to Germany. We were-- this was where a state of flux, a lot of-- was a-- a lot of confusion. And we decided, with my brother, to run away. So this was, I think, the 12th on January. And 4:00 in the morning, we took off.
We went to the German offices. We broke in. There just happened to be the post office. We broke some packages. And I took a nice-- I found a perfect suit for me. So I had got a suit without a shirt, but nevertheless, I went without-- we went on-- we went through the gate. Nobody stayed. Nobody was at the main gate. We went through. We went to the street. And on the street, you could see people standing in gates, early in the morning. It must have been 5:00 in the morning or so. And we asked, where the-- where are the Russian coming from? Which direction? So they pointed one direction. And we-- on the street, you could see a lot of German dead people. You see the trucks still running. They're going, revving, all the time. And we went towards-- the snow was on the ground. We're going towards direction that the Russians are supposed to come. And we saw from far away little people with the-- with machine guns. They were wearing fur boots, very quiet, very soft. And from nowhere, we got a-- a Russian on a horse, on a very short horse. And he says to us in Russian, [NON-ENGLISH]. Means lie down. So we lied down in the snow. And he goes, he said, you are-- he says in Russian to us that we are Germanski spy. We are German spies. So we say, no. We are Jews. [NON-ENGLISH]. We were in this camp a few kilometers away from here. And we work in the German labor camp. And we-- there is still a lot of people there. So he says, no. You spies. [NON-ENGLISH], he says. Get up. And let's go. And he-- he's on that little horse. And we're going through-- out of town. And there is a-- a freeway. And we're going towards a group of people. And on the freeway, as you see, on one side we had German POWs. On the other side was little scout planes, couple of planes. And on the side was sitting, on a car, with maps spread out all over, was a guy who looked to me like a giant. And he must-- must have been a general or a colonel. And he reports that he found German spies. So the general addressed us. And he says, you-- that you German spies. Are you German spies? We said, no, we [NON-ENGLISH]. We started talking to him in Jewish. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] What are you doing here? This is the front line. He says, you-- believe it or not, I went from Lemburg to here. This is maybe a thousand miles away. I didn't find one Jew, didn't meet one Jew.
And he says, go home to your mother and father. [SOB] And he gave us an officer, a guard, who lead us out of town, out of that quarter. And we went towards our hometown. We went to Radomsko. We stayed there a few days. And then we went through Piotrkow. We went to Lodz. And we-- part walking, part by train. And then from Lodz, we, with my brother-- I'll never forget the cold was so intense that my ear froze, and some water accumulated in my ear. And he started crying that my ear is falling off. [LAUGHS] And I started rubbing, and the water got out, and I had a frozen ear, whatever. But it was nothing. I didn't feel it too much. And we were going to-- to my hometown. And we arrived. It took a little time-- a few days, and we arrived there. We arrived in Plock around the 23rd of January. And where do we go? We didn't know where to go. So we went to our people, the super who took care of our-- our house, where we lived in. And they received us with open hands. They-- they gave us all the best they had. And it was a beautiful reunion, like to say. Because their kids were about our age, and we were raised together. And as a matter of fact, the first thing, they-- they took some, I think, bedclothes or whatever it was. Some wore it. I-- it could have been a tablecloth. They made a shirt for me. The-- the daughter-in-law made a shirt. And we were in-- in full swing. So we were received beautifully. Then we decided-- you see, before, in the ghetto, before we were expelled from Plock, my father gave me some valuable things for me to hide. He took some, put away. He told me where he put it away, in general terms. I didn't pay attention, probably, or what. Whatever I put away, I found. Because it was in an attic. I found some $1,500. But the $1,500 were wrapped in leather, and the-- and everything was just wet and molded. So I had to dry the-- the dollars, so it was powdery-like. Eventually I sold them, like, for 15%, $0.15 to $1, whatever it was. Then I found a lot of gold pieces. Whatever I put away, I found. I found some leather, as a matter of fact. And I tried to go retrieve anything-- some of the things my father put away, couldn't do it. Couldn't find it. [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] We went then, immediately, maybe before I found-- I retrieved that gold and the-- the valuables, we went to the city hall.
We talked to the mayor. And the mayor was so moved that he says, he promised himself to kiss the first Jew he would meet after the war. His name was [? Komarski. ?] He was a socialist teacher. He did. And we asked for-- we didn't ask for our apartment. People were living in it. So we asked for some facilities and some-- some room to live in. They-- he gave us a very nice apartment, small apartment, but nice, and some furniture. And we started to establish ourselves. So what-- we-- we had some money. So we started making contacts with friends of my father, tanneries, mainly, which were in [NON-ENGLISH], in a big town in Poland. And we start there. We open a semi-legal business. It was legal, because-- And what I did, I went immediately to school. I wanted to get my diploma, get my high school. This was gymnasium, go to-- and here I specialized in medical-- for medical future. Now, this was-- they call it a lyceum of-- they call it [NON-ENGLISH] lyceum, which is nature studies, something like that. And over there, [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] I started school in '45, immediately when I came back. And my-- I met, by some coincidence, my future wife, who was Jewish. I didn't know immediately. I felt she was Jewish. She didn't want to admit. She survived on Polish papers. And she thought she is the last Jewess in-- in Poland. And she didn't want to admit she is Jewish to me. She was going to high school. She was taking Catholic religion. And when we started-- when she told me she is Jewish, and we started, thus, going steady, she was hiding, of course. I had friends from-- from high school. So she used to come to my house. She used to hide in a-- in a closet when they came in, so she-- so she wouldn't be suspicious of being Jewish or something like that. But eventually, we graduated in '46. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] And we wanted to go-- as a matter of fact, I intended to go to a medical school in Poland, and she wanted to go to engineering school in Poland. Because her background, she was a genius in math and physics. She was the best in her class. And [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] I wanted to go to Danzig, which is Gdansk in Polish, to university. I applied. It was accepted. I had to go for a short examination, which was very easy for me at that time. But my best friend, a Polish fellow, approached me. He says, Mike, don't stay here. You-- after you-- you hear what's going on, and you will have a tough life staying here. You better take off. Go. Go out. So this moved me. He's a very sincere fellow. I trusted him. And I decided-- my brother left for Germany. So I decided to do the same. We were interested to go to United-- not that that-- OK. So we got married in Warsaw. 
INT: And what was-- MZ: I will-- yeah.  INT: What was her name? MZ: Her name, [NON-ENGLISH] was the pseudonym, but she was Charlotte-- later on was Charlotte. She was [NON-ENGLISH]. And-- and she-- she was-- she had a very Jewish background. She-- her-- her house was very kosher. But she wasn't very-- she was-- she was, of course, now [NON-ENGLISH]. So we got married in Warsaw. And we had only two witnesses, two friends. We went to a very conservative rabbi, Rabbi [? Shapiro. ?] He was Praga's [NON-ENGLISH]. Therefore-- Praga on-- this was a suburb of Warsaw, Praga. And this was-- the committee, Jewish committee was there. [NON-ENGLISH], I think, the name. The street was [NON-ENGLISH] 44. And there was a rabbi, official Rabbi [? Shapiro. ?] And he gave us-- we had the wedding there. We had to call people off the street to have 10, a minyan. We promised some cake and-- [LAUGHS] and vodka so for them to come in. And we got married. We went to-- we went to Germany. And as a compromise to be together, we selected to go to the Munich Institute of Technology, as long as we wait for the emigration to United States. And slowly but surely, we stayed there, instead of a year or two, we stayed there for six years. We got our degrees, the master's degrees, in Germany. And in February of '52, we came to the United States. And we had-- we had a very dear family. My-- my mother's sister was here. And they helped us out, but not when we arrived, except we were with them for about two weeks. And was the-- 
INT: Where-- where did you first arrive? MZ: We arrived first in New Orleans. And from New Orleans, we came by train to Los Angeles. And here they-- we got a fantastic reception. And they knew us, because they were visiting with us, and they came to Germany a couple of times. So it was-- and my brother was here with them, younger brother. So after a few weeks of looking around and being, you know, acquainted to-- to get acquainted with the situation, we got a job. And I was-- this was [INAUDIBLE] Laboratories. We [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] worked beginning as junior engineers there. After two years, two and a half years, I became the chief engineer of the whole place. This place, [INAUDIBLE] Laboratories, was taken over later on by National Semiconductors. When I quit, they sold the place. Not because I quit. I am not sure. I don't know. We were lucky with that place. It was very nice, interesting work to-- to-- to be in. And after three years, my wife had a-- she not retired, but she took a leave of absence. We expected Helen, you see, my oldest daughter. So we were three years here when she was born. She was born in 1955, July 14. And we-- immediately, we were here maybe 17, 18 months at most. We bought a house on our own, without any help, in Culver City. And things started progressing with nothing but success. And after I worked at [INAUDIBLE] about six years, so over six years. And I had a beautiful position there as chief engineer, nice office and so on, nice title. And my wife, after staying home for about-- she was staying home for about three years, I think. Yeah. And we got the citizenship already. 
INT: When did-- MZ: In '57. In 1957, we got our citizenship, in May. So at that time, once-- once you got the citizenship, and she stayed with Helen for three years, with her, and-- at home. After-- in 1958, she went to an outfit, a defense outfit. She had citizenship. She went to North American Aviation. She started working as a research engineer. And she started making more money than I did. So she influenced me saying, the times are good, but better find a nicer job and a challenging job. So I didn't want to work in the same place she was working. So I went to the sister division in Downey. So she was working on airplanes, I was working on missiles. This was the missile division. In 1958, I started working over there. And I worked there for 33 years. And I am still working. Since '91, when I retired, I'm still working as a consultant to them two days a week. Since I retired, I'm still working. It was very challenging work, very gratifying. A very successful career we had, both of us. She retired a month before I did, and she didn't work. And I'm still working.  INT: What kind of projects did you work on during your-- MZ: Oh, are you talking-- are you asking about the North American Aviation?  INT: At North American Aviation? MZ: Which later became Rockwell-- I worked on the first missile built with Hound Dog for air-to-ground missile, on the proposal and on the work. But this was-- and I worked on satellite programs, but mainly proposal work. And then we got some programs, but I didn't work on production on it. Then we got a big program with Saturn, which is part of Apollo, in Apollo. It was very satisfying. As a matter of fact, I was their supervisor, ready for [INAUDIBLE] supervisor. I had a laboratory under me. I had an antenna branch under me. I had 26 people working, engineers, PhDs, masters degree people working under my direction. Then I worked, of course, some on Apollo. Then I worked on a proposal of space shuttle. Then-- then we got the proposal. We won the proposal. And I designed-- I was instrumental in designing communications system on the orbiter, S-band, this particular type of the system, which is operation, talking to ground or talking to satellite to ground. The satellite is tracking data on relay satellite, going-- So this is my design. And I work a lot on ground-based interceptors, which is-- [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] in other words, what it is, it starts from ground, goes into air by-- propelled by some kind of a rocket, and then it's being released and intercepts by means of optical sensors, infrared sensors. They intercept ballistic missiles-- supposed to-- very close. We are very successful on it now. Now I-- this what I am lately working on. 
INT: Did you ever have to work with any German scientists? MZ: Yes.  INT: Who were brought in after the war? MZ: Yes. Yes. I met von Braun in Huntsville. I worked with his underlings all the time. [PAUSES FOR 4 SECONDS] For example, in charge of the radio frequency of the V-2s, of all the V records was [? Holberg. ?] And I was his counterpart for a while. When I worked on Saturn mainly. This was-- they were the-- they were my-- my interfaces. I worked, of course, with other German people there. They were very nice to work with. They were completely different-- different relationship.  INT: Mhm, mhm. MZ: Professional and-- and business.  INT: All right. Now let's go to your personal life a little bit now. Tell us about your children. MZ: OK. I would-- Helen was born, as I said, 14 of July, '55. She was born in-- we had the first house in Culver City. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] And she was raised, of course, in California. She attended kindergarten here and high school, and then she went to Berkeley. And she majored in English and the drama. So she went-- she was a very capable girl. She went to New York for her career. And she met a very nice-- my son-in-law-- a very nice guy. He's doctor of dentistry. He's a doctor of dentistry. And they got married. And they have now three children. And you probably will meet them in a while, which is [? Anna, ?] she's 11; [? Gaby, ?] eight; and David is three and a half. They live in Brooklyn, New York. They have a beautiful life, very nice life. And they came now-- as a matter of fact, came to see us now. My other daughter is Edie. Edie was born in '61. This was the 18th of February. And she went through the same-- she went through kindergarten. As a matter of fact, she graduated-- both of them graduated here from Rolling Hills High School. And Edith went to-- here to the university in Long Beach, Los Angeles. I mean, Long Beach. She graduated here and got her degree in teaching. As a matter of fact, she got her degree as a California special license to-- to teach. And she's teaching now in-- in a Chabad school, religious school. So she didn't have-- her background was too bad. They didn't-- that I didn't introduce more Jewish upbringing in their life. I regret it seriously. Also Helen picked up a lot in Berkeley. Edie is-- now maybe I hope she will pick it up in-- in Chabad a little bit. They're very, very loving kids. And we were together, with my wife, for about close to 52 years. Our anniversary-- our anniversary was 22nd of August, 19-- we would have-- it was our 50th anniversary was in '96. So it will be 52 years we will be together. She passed away after some sickness in '98, 8th of May. And I can say it's tough to live with a person you were so close together-- [SOB] without a person. And I miss her very much. But life goes on. So this is the-- my family. 
INT: Do you belong to any clubs right now? MZ: Yes. I am on the board of the '39 Club, and I am their recording secretary.  INT: And what does that club do? MZ: The club is a charitable organization of a-- an organization of ex-Holocaust survivors, of Holocaust survivors, who try to educate-- as a matter of fact, we have a chair at UCLA, which-- which is fully approved. I mean the subject is approved, Holocaust studies, it's history, part of history. And we support mainly Zionistic organizations, Israel, charitable organizations in-- in California and in the United States. And we try to educate in general by lecturing and writing about Holocaust to-- in universities, high schools, and wherever we can.  INT: OK. How often do you think about your Holocaust experiences? MZ: The-- I think fairly often. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] But luckily, I don't have too bad-- my dreams are not too bad. So I don't suffer too much.  INT: How do you think your experiences affected your religious identity? MZ: I think that I am very-- I feel more Jewish than ever. And I am closer now to the tradition, very much so. Very. I-- I feel very Jewish. Also I have a lot of-- a lot of very close friends which are not Jewish, from work, Italians and-- and Scots, you know, different people. I am very close with them. I attend social events very frequently. I attend opera, or a theater, we go together. But they know that I am Jewish, and I feel very Jewish. And I'm not ashamed of it. 
INT: How have your experiences affected how you and your wife raised your children? MZ: I think that we were sometimes overprotective. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] We didn't do anything without the kids. Everything always with the kids. I don't know why, but they were very dear to us. And they are dear to us, very close. And I think they feel the same way about us.  INT: Why did you come forward today and share your story? MZ: I-- I felt-- I couldn't do it for years. It will be very difficult. I don't know why. But now, because of my, I would say maturity of-- I got used to the situation, to the truth as it was. And I wanted everybody to know it. It was for my grandchildren, for my future generations, and for everybody.  INT: What message would you like to share with the future generations? MZ: Messages, not-- to be proud of their Jewish heritage. [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] To not tolerate-- be intolerant of-- being tolerant of-- of any hate. Not-- be [PAUSES FOR 3 SECONDS] forgiving. And be good human beings.  INT: Thank you very much. We're going to be ending this tape right now. MZ: [SOB] Very good. You're welcome. CREW: [INAUDIBLE] OK. MZ: What you see here is a receipt from our business, which is a wholesale and retail leather business. We see it was-- it was dated 1927. And I found it here not long ago. And you can see it's a description of type of leathers we had-- imports, locals. We had the hard leather, soft leather. We had the patent leather. And we had leather for accessories for shoemakers, leather for transmission belts. We had leather for saddles. And they-- I think my parents loved the business, and it was very successful. And I-- I am still attracted by any leather products. OK. What you see here is part of a bracelet. This is my grandma's. It must be, oh, minimum-- minimum about 19-- 1850. So it's close to 150 years old. And it's part-- the top part of a bracelet. The other part is a wide band, gold. And this is what I hid during the war. And when I came back from the camp, I retrieved it. And I gave it to my auntie, who then gave it to me-- returned it before she died. What you see here is my sports activities. As you'll notice, the first picture on ice, I wear the full uniform of a gymnasium. In other words, my gymnasium was [NON-ENGLISH] number 23. And you see, here I am ice skating in the first picture. Second picture, I am showing off, jumping on a bike, which I thought was the nicest bike ever. And on the third picture, I-- you see a kayak with my friend. We had a-- together we owned the kayak in secrecy from my parents. My parents didn't know. But we had a-- well, this is a very cheap, wooden, put together boat. What you see here is a group of girls [NON-ENGLISH]. You see two men there. They were the leaders. And my sister is among them. This was 1937 in Plock. And she was just finishing her gymnasium. And my sister is the first one sitting to the right. And her name is-- her name is, as I mentioned before, Beverly Zielonka at that time. This, you see, is a celebrating here a group of youths celebrating. It could be New Year's. Could be some big holiday. And you see my sister in the white blouse to the left, sitting. And she was the only one in the family fairly liberal. She belonged to Hashomer Hatzair. CREW: OK. MZ: OK. This is my younger brother, William Zelon. He lives here in San Fernando Valley. He was very successful in his business. He's retired. He has two beautiful ladies. One is a teacher, and the other works in a hospital, I think in therapy department. They're all-- Esther and [? Tika ?] Zelon-- Esther Taylor Zelon. CREW: OK. MZ: Here, as you see, a happy couple-- very happy couple. We're in Munich, and just ready to graduate from Munich Institute of Technology, where we get our master's degree, second degree. CREW: The names. 
INT: Can you tell us who's in the picture, please? MZ: Oh, this is myself, as you see, and a student in Munich, and my wife-- my dear wife, [? Sasha ?] Zelon, nee [NON-ENGLISH]. CREW: OK. MZ: What you see here, again, a very happy couple-- myself to the left, of course. And this is Michael Zelon, and Charlotte Ziegler, my dear wife. This was 19-- this was 1996. And we were celebrating some event. I don't remember exactly what. And here is one of the happiest moments in our lives. This is-- especially my wife-- you can see here, myself to the left, my wife to the right. And Helen Sasson Zelon and Doctor Sasson Zelon, her husband. This was 1983 in the Sephardic Temple. It was one of the most beautiful events in town, in my eyes, I think. They-- they, of course, married since '83. They have three kids and the most beautiful family I ever know-- knew. My daughter Helen, and my son-in-law Nathaniel Sasson, and my wife, Charlotte Zelon. Here our-- is my pride and-- pride and joy, the two of my-- of our daughters, Helen on the left, Edie on the right. This is Helen's wedding in 1983 in Sephardic Temple. What you can see here is a big-- the biggest reward one can receive from NASA for technical achievement. Here I have big thanks for designing the S-band communication system on the orbiter. The system, of course, functions-- I worked on it-- I started working in '70s. Now it's still flying, as you see, almost 20 years later. And the-- it's very-- this is very successful. This is one of my efforts. I was very proud of that award. With that goes the Snoopy award, which is silver pin. And here I get all the credit I think I deserve. Yes. What you can see here is a picture and work, which I am very proud of. You can see the lift-- liftoff of the space shuttle. The orbiter on top, two boosters on each side-- one booster on each side. And the brown stuff is the external tank. And the this is from Florida. This flight was in 1989. And this was the time you-- what you see around, all the inscriptions are best wishes and credit I got from my peers and management, including the president of the company. So this is a very good, very nice memory for me and my family. 
INT: Mr. Zelon, would you please introduce your family? MZ: Yeah, I'd be very glad to. To my right is Edie-- Edie Zelon. To my left is Helen Sasson Zelon. Here is David, my grandchild. This is Dr. Sasson, my son-in-law. This is Gaby Sasson. This is Anna Sasson. And I am myself, Mike Zelon. [LAUGHTER]  INT: Of course. MZ: [INAUDIBLE].  INT: Can you tell me, when was the first time you heard about your father's wartime experience? EDITH ZELON: Actually, I can't remember, because it's something I just grew up with. It was just so-- it was just like having brown hair or something. I just-- I don't remember a certain time. I just always remember knowing about it.  INT: Did-- did you think that it affected your relationship with your father? HELEN ZELON: It's a very difficult question to answer, because it's a pervasive reality in our family life. So I don't know what my relationship with my father would have been without it. I think that it was a given, like, as Edie said, it's something that was-- in-- knowledge of it was in the family. And yes, I think it affected-- I think it affected my relationship to him as a child. I think it affected how I parent my children. But I can't even begin to tell you what piece of it. Do you know?  INT: Is there anything you would like to say about your father? EDITH ZELON: Just that he's an incredible person, and he's really been a strong influence on myself and everyone in our family. Just a incredible person in almost every way. He's a very strong survivor and really balanced as far as he excelled in engineering and also with his, in our family, and really physically active, and a good sense of humor, and really positive. He's a good role model, I would like to say. 
INT: How about you, Helen? What would you like to say about your father? HELEN ZELON: My dad is a-- is an extraordinary man. He's a very loyal man. In the last years of my mom's life, he supported her, and helped her, and just he held her up in the world. And I think he's always had a tremendously resilient attitude, very self-reliant attitude. You missed him taking the glass door down and putting a screen door back up nearly single-handed-- a very stubborn man, a very charming man, tremendous influence, tremendous influence. And Anna, what do you like most about your grandfather? ANNA SASSON: I like that he's really stubborn, and he'll stick with anything. For instance, a few days ago, we were driving, oh, back from-- we were coming back from some-- from a store. And he said, no, it's this way, and my sister said, no, it's the other way. And he just kept on going and going and going until he figured it was the other way. [LAUGHTER]  INT: And Gaby, what do you like most about your grandfather? GABY SASSON: I like my grandfather because he's really generous inside and outside of the community. One day, my brother comes in saying, Mommy, Grandpa said 'Shit!' [LAUGHTER] MZ: It's OK.  INT: OK. Go on. MZ: This is a big crime, of course.  INT: Of course, of course. And to Michael, Mr. Zelon, what would you like to say to your children and to your grandchildren? MZ: What would I say? That I am very proud of them. I am lucky to have a family like that. And I think my wife very much contributed to the upbringing. And she was a tremendous influence on them. And I hope that I am the good influence too. And I am proud of them, and I hope that we continue-- continue to be proud of them-- nice, good-hearted, warm people. 
INT: Thank you very much. MZ: Did you ask about my son-in-law? [LAUGHTER]  INT: Would you like to say anything about-- NATHANIEL SASSON: Of course I'd like to say something.  INT: OK. NATHANIEL SASSON: This is my 18th Thanksgiving in this household. And from day one, it was a very warm, generous, caring environment. I walked into a different society-- something I didn't know before. There were survivors here. They were-- every Thanksgiving, 40, 50 people here. And they all got together. They weren't blood related, but they all knew each other. It was the [NON-ENGLISH]. And it's a society, as an American Jew, that I always knew existed, but never knew how deeply it existed. So I feel fortunate to have been entered into society here. And the Zelons were hospitality, I mean. It was incredible. I immediately, I was blood. I'm [NON-ENGLISH]. It happened.  INT: Thank you all very much for speaking with me today. EDITH ZELON: Thank you. MZ: Thank you very much. You were very patient, and a very good interviewer. NATHANIEL SASSON: OK, nobody move. I'm taking the picture. [LAUGHTER]